Most banks in the U.S. Midwest are expected to post third quarter earnings gains of 10 percent or more as the strong economy continues to generate loan growth, cost-cutting programs show results and credit quality remains reasonably sound.
"It looks like credit quality trends should hold up very well," said Michael Ancell, banking analyst at Edward D. Jones. He expects the banks he follows to have average earnings gains of 11 percent.  
For most of the year, analysts who follow banks have been waiting to see deterioration in credit quality, especially in credit card loans.
But while some banks, like First Chicago NBD, showed a higher charge-off rate in credit card receivables in the second quarter, a wider wave of loan quality problems has yet to appear, analysts said.
"I don't see large increases in (loan loss) provision," said James Schutz, banking analyst at Chicago Corp.  
Many banks have also been aggressively cutting costs, which should help third quarter results. Analysts pointed to Milwaukee-based Firstar Corp as one bank that could benefit from an aggressive cost-cutting plan.
Others point to banks that have been generating fee revenue, such as Northern Trust Corp and Norwest Corp, as also primed for strong gains.  
"Most people are working very hard at expense controls," said Thomas Maier, banking analyst at EVEREN Securities. "I'm more in mind at looking more favorably at those banks that are strong revenue growers. Ultimately, you've got to sell product, in any business."
Another factor helping gains in earnings per share is stock buyback programs, with many banks aggressively repurchasing their stock. First Bank System Inc, which announced a plan earlier this year to repurchase 25 million shares, was seen by analysts as one of the most aggressive on this front.  
Meanwhile, analysts said the 10 percent pace of earnings gains should continue into next year.
"Even though the credit quality cycle is not getting any better, it certainly is not getting any worse at any kind of a rapid pace," said Ben Crabtree, analyst at Dain Bosworth.
Following are third quarter earnings estimates and actual earnings reported a year earlier, according to First Call:
BANK				1996		    1995
----			     ----		    ----
Banc One Corp		   $0.82		   $0.75
Boatmen's Bancshares Inc   $0.94		   $0.86
Commerce Bancshares Inc    $0.81		   $0.72
Fifth Third Bancorp	  $0.83		   $0.73
Firstar Corp		    $1.00		   $0.88
First Bank System	     $1.21		   $1.06
First Chicago NBD	     $1.09		   $1.06
KeyCorp			   $0.95		   $0.90
Marshall and Ilsley Corp   $0.52		   $0.48
Mercantile Bancorp Inc	$0.98		   $1.02
Northern Trust		 $1.12		   $0.98
Norwest			   $0.79		   $0.69
--Reuters Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787
Caterpillar Inc., the world's largest construction and mining equipment maker, Tuesday reported record third-quarter profits of $310 million, up 45 percent from $213 million a year ago.
Sales jumped to $4.03 billion from $3.73 billion, while earnings per share rose 50 percent to $1.61 from $1.07.
The results exceeded expectations on Wall Street and Caterpillar stock jumped $2.50 to $76.625 on the New York Stock Exchange. Analysts had forecast profits of $1.34 a share, according to First Call, which tracks earnings estimates.
For the first nine months of 1997, sales were $12.06 billion, up slightly from $11.86 billion a year ago, while profit surged to $980 million from $836 million.
"There really wasn't much of a sales increase but there was a tremendous bottom-line increase," Caterpillar Chief Financial Officer Douglas Oberhelman said in a telephone interview. Most of the earnings gain was due to improved operations, though some was currency related, he said.
Profit margins rose to 25 percent in the quarter from 19 percent a year ago, primarily due to higher prices, stronger volume and the effects of a stronger U.S. dollar, Caterpillar said. Price gains were seen equally inside and outside the United States, Oberhelman said.
Continuing improvements in manufacturing and essentially flat material costs also helped boost profits but were partly offset by an unfavourable product sales mix, the heavy equipment maker said.
The sales mix in the quarter shifted more toward lower margin smaller machines, Oberhelman said, but he added that this mix shifts month-to-month and quarter-to-quarter.
"The thing that's encouraging is the gross margins remain strong," said Lisa Shalett, analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Co., Inc. "It looks like the productivity gains they talked about in the second quarter are continuing"
Higher machine sales in the United States accounted for most of a 5 percent increase in sales volume in the quarter, Caterpillar said.
But deliveries to U.S. dealer rental fleets fell from a year ago as rental inventories remained high, the company said.
Machine sales in Europe fell due to declines in Germany and France, where the contruction sector remains weak, the company said. Sales in China, Japan, Australia and Latin America were up, while sales in Canada were unchanged and sales fell in the former Soviet Union.
The company also said it expected 1997 sales to be up slightly from an expected record in 1996, while it expects 1996 profits to exceed the $1.14 billion reported in 1995. The current record for sales is $16.07 billion, set in 1995.
"Our preliminary outlook for 1997 is to slightly surpass the record levels achieved in 1996," Chairman Donald Fites said in a statement.
"We continue to see opportunities for solid growth in the vast majority of the global markets we serve, particularly in the fast-growing developing nations where infrastructure needs are greatest," Fites said.
Higher industrial demand in developing regions, Canada and Australia are expected to offset slightly lower demand in the United States, Europe and Japan, the Peoria, Ill.-based company said.
"The outlook statement surprised me on two levels," Shalett said. "It talked about slightly higher sales but not higher profit. I thought that was deliberate."
She also said that while sales gains outside the United States, Europe and Japan are expected to offset lower demand in those areas, "it's not clear to us that it makes up for (those areas) on the profit side."
Struggling to stay on course away from its troubled past, Trans World Airlines Inc. now must find a new chief executive to take the helm of the troubled carrier.
How quickly it can find an experienced airline executive for the job will determine whether it stays on course or runs into more financial trouble, industry analysts said.
The St. Louis-based airline said on Thursday that Chief Executive Officer Jeffrey Erickson, who has headed the company for the past two years, will leave in January.
"The last thing that the company needs now is more management turmoil," said one analyst, who declined to be identified. "It doesn't have a strong or stable enough footing to deal with this kind of stuff."
Erickson's departure comes just four months after Chief Financial Officer Robert Peiser left the company. At the time, TWA said Peiser's decision to leave was over differences in management direction.
"They're going to have to regain the confidence of Wall Street," said William Fiala, who follows the airline industry for Edward D. Jones &amp; Co., which is based in TWA's hometown. "The only way they're going to do that is by coming up with a leader that's a proven turnaround (manager), or well-respected in the industry."
Erickson, who became chief executive officer in August 1994, brought the airline through its second bankruptcy reorganization and back to where it was buying new aircraft. But the turnaround is not finished, and higher fuel costs and the July 17 crash of Paris-bound Flight 800, which hurt confidence in the carrier and therefore its sales, have stalled the company's improvement.
"Erickson was the one who really steered them through the first half of the turnaround, but they still have a way to go," Fiala said.
The company on Thursday reported a $14.3 million third-quarter loss and said its yield, a measure of fares, fell in the quarter.
"I don't know specifically the reason he chose to depart now," said Don Jacobs, chairman of the TWA Master Executive Council of the Airline Pilots Associaition. "I think it's probably an impact of the third quarter financials and Flight 800."
TWA's unions have four seats on the company's board of directors and will play a part in choosing a successor for Erickson, Jacobs said, though he could not suggest possible replacements.
"We would expect that the board would replace Jeff with a top-notch airline manager," he said. "As both employees and the stockholders in the company, we will be concerned and involved in that."
Industry experts said TWA's board of directors might have become impatient with the pace of the turnaround after seeing the third-quarter results. But they also quickly defended Erickson's record at the company.
"When you see what TWA was three years ago and what it is now, it's a world of difference," said Michael Boyd, president of Aviation Systems Research Corp., a research and consulting firm  in Golden, Colo.
Calls to Erickson at TWA's offices Friday were transferred to a public relations office, which said he was unavailable for comment. TWA Chairman Thomas Meagher did not return calls.
Analysts said TWA's board would need to move quickly and that the next chief executive would need a good degree of independence from the board.
"Whatever they do to replace Erickson, they need a hands-on manager, not a messiah," Boyd said. "In a situation like this, you have to have free reign. You can't have people behind you second-guessing every one of your moves."
Boyd said several managers at United Airlines might be interested in the job. He also suggested that former Alaska Air Group Chief Executive Raymond Vecci could be a candidate.
Earlier this year, Erickson, who was criticized by families of the Flight 800 victims for the company's response to the crash, told students at Washington University in St. Louis that the aftermath of the crash was draining, said Stuart Greenbaum, dean of the university's business school.
"I can't help believing the crash just took a lot out of Jeff," said Greenbaum, who said he is a friend of Erickson's. "That was so difficult for him, as it would be for any human being, to try to represent the company to the world" after the tragedy, in which 230 died.
Struggling to stay on course away from its troubled past, Trans World Airlines Inc. now must find a new chief executive to take the helm of the troubled carrier.
How quickly it can find an experienced airline executive for the job will determine whether it stays on course or runs into more financial trouble, industry analysts said.
The St. Louis-based airline said on Thursday that Chief Executive Officer Jeffrey Erickson, who has headed the company for the past two years, will leave in January.
"The last thing that the company needs now is more management turmoil," said one analyst, who declined to be identified. "It doesn't have a strong or stable enough footing to deal with this kind of stuff."
Erickson's departure comes just four months after Chief Financial Officer Robert Peiser left the company. At the time, TWA said Peiser's decision to leave was over differences in management direction.
"They're going to have to regain the confidence of Wall Street," said William Fiala, who follows the airline industry for Edward D. Jones &amp; Co., which is based in TWA's hometown. "The only way they're going to do that is by coming up with a leader that's a proven turnaround (manager), or well-respected in the industry."
Erickson, who became chief executive officer in August 1994, brought the airline through a bankruptcy reorganization and back to where it was buying new aircraft. But the turnaround is not finished, and higher fuel costs and the July 17 crash of flight 800, which hurt confidence in the carrier and therefore its sales, have stalled the company's improvement.
"Erickson was the one who really steered them through the first half of the turnaround, but they still have a way to go," Fiala said.
The company on Thursday reported a $14.3 million third-quarter loss and said its yield, a measure of fares, fell in the quarter.
Industry experts said TWA's board of directors might have become impatient with the pace of the turnaround after seeing the third-quarter results. But they also quickly defended Erickson's record at the company.
"When you see what TWA was three years ago and what it is now, it's a world of difference," said Michael Boyd, president of Aviation Systems Research Corp., a research and consulting firm  in Golden, Colo.
"I do not see anything you can ascribe to Jeffrey Erickson that occurred in the third quarter. I don't see any decision made by Jeffrey Erickson that messed up the airline."
Calls to Erickson at TWA's offices Friday were transferred to a public relations office, which said he was unavailable for comment. TWA Chairman Thomas Meagher did not return telephone calls.
Analysts said TWA's board would need to move quickly and that the next chief executive would need a good degree of independence from the board.
"Whatever they do to replace Erickson, they need a hands-on manager, not a messiah," the consultant Boyd said. "In a situation like this, you have to have free reign. You can't have people behind you second-guessing every one of your moves."
Boyd said several managers at United Airlines might be interested in the job. He also suggested that former Alaska Air Group Chief Executive Raymond Vecci could be a candidate.
Earlier this year, Erickson, who was criticised by families of the flight 800 victims for the company's response to the crash, told students at Washington University in St. Louis that the aftermath of the crash was draining, said Stuart Greenbaum, dean of the university's business school.
"I can't help believing the crash just took a lot out of Jeff," said Greenbaum, who said he is a friend of Erickson's. "That was so difficult for him, as it would be for any human being, to try to represent the company to the world" after the tragedy, in which 230 died.
Mercantile Bancorp Inc said Monday it could still make other acquisitions while it is completing its $855 million merger with Mark Twain Bancshares Inc.
"While this will be an active project for us beginning today, it doesn't mean that we don't have additional capacity to continue," John Beirise, Mercantile's group president in charge of mergers and acquisitions, said in an interview.
Beirise noted that not all of Mercantile will be involved in the acquisition of St. Louis-based Mark Twain, so acquisitions in other geographic locations might be possible. He also said Mercantile has been an active acquirer, and so is adept at assimilating mergers.
St. Louis-based Mercantile, with $18.2 billion in assets, currently has four mergers pending.
The Mark Twain deal, announced Monday and expected to close in the second quarter of 1997, is an exchange of shares valued at $49.62 per Mark Twain share, based on Friday's closing price, the banks said.  
That works out to 2.8 times Mark Twain's book value, a price Beirise conceded was lofty for banks in general.
"In general it is, yes, but not many banks earn 1.8 (return) on assets," he said. Mark Twain reported return on average assets of 1.82 percent in the third quarter, well above average for Midwest banks.
Beirise said Mercantile was not considering its potential as a takeover target when it made the deal to acquire Mark Twain. Mercantile, the second largest bank holding company in Missouri behind Boatmen's Bancshares Inc, has been mentioned by analysts as an acquisition target for banks trying to expand their Midwest presence. Boatmen's agreed in August to be acquired by NationsBank Corp.
Beirise said as long as the bank delivered value for shareholders, it would be a difficult takeover target.
"Someone would have to make the case that we're not doing the job," Beirise said. "We think as long as we're doing the job, we are the best value for our shareholders."
--Reuters Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787
Mercantile Bancorp Inc would likely remain a potential target in the Missouri bank merger wave after its planned combination with Mark Twain Bancshares Inc.
"This certainly doesn't mean that Mercantile is no longer a buyout candidate," said Michael Ancell, analyst at Edward D. Jones &amp; Co. "It's clear that the bank merger wave has rolled into St. Louis and it's turning into a tsunami."  
As the largest bank holding company in Missouri behind Boatmen's Bancshares Inc, Mercantile is seen by analysts as attractive to banks looking to establish a presence in the lower Midwest.
In August, NationsBank Corp agreed to buy Boatmen's Bancshares Inc for $9.5 billion.
That deal valued Boatmen's at a pricey 2.7 times book value, analysts said. Mercantile's deal values Mark Twain at about 2.8 times book value, analysts said. The pooling of interests deal is worth $49.62 a share to Mark Twain shareholders, based on Friday's closing price, the banks said.  
The St. Louis-based bank holding companies would have a combined total of $21.3 billion in assets.
"It's a pretty pricey transaction," said James Schutz, banking analyst at Chicago Corp. "Mark Twain is a very profitable and a very attractive franchise."
Mark Twain reported return on average assets of 1.82 percent in the third quarter and return on average realized common equity of 18.49 percent, putting it in the upper echelon of Midwest banks, analysts said.  
"It's an in-market deal, which allows for a tremendous ammount of efficiencies, which is good for Mercantile," said Joseph Steiven, analyst at Stifel Nicolaus. "They're paying full-boat prices, but they're getting an excellent company."
But Schutz noted that Mark Twain already operates efficiently, and questioned how much more in efficiency Mercantile could wring out of Mark Twain.
"The question I would ask is how is Mercantile going to earn back this premium they're paying," Schutz said.  
That question appeared to be in the market Monday, with Mercantile shares down 2-3/8 at 49-3/4 and Mark Twain up 3-5/8 to 46.
Mark Twain chief executive John Dubinsky, who is slated to become chief executive of Mercantile's St. Louis bank when the deal is completed, indicated there were not likely to be wholesale job cuts when the two banks combine.
"Between Mercantile and Mark Twain as we sit here today, there are over 200 job openings," Dubinsky said in an interview. "There will be some duplications, there will be some consolidation of job functions."
But "quality" individuals whose jobs are eliminated because of duplication will be able to apply for other jobs, he said, noting "I would be very surprised if there was a large number of individuals that won't be needed."
Dubinsky also would not rule out the possibility of the combined Mercantile/Mark Twain being acquired.
"Banking is changing so rapidly," he said. "One couldn't make any comment with certainty about the future."
--Reuters Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787
As the world's first Internet bank, Atlanta-based Security First Network Bank has had somewhat of an identity problem with potential customers.
"We get a lot of questions," Chief Executive Officer James Mahan III said. "Are you real? Are you virtual? Where are you really?"
Part consumer bank, part software testing site, Security First opened its virtual doors a year ago this month.
But now Security First plans to add actual doors, opening small offices in Atlanta, Cambridge, Mass., and Silicon Valley in California.
"I think we can more effectively market if we have a physical presence," Mahan said in an interview.
Comparing his bank to discount brokerage firm Charles Schwab &amp; Co., Mahan said having the offices may give customers a sense of security, even if they never use an office.
Security First's current location is on the Internet. The bank is one of five in the United States that operates directly on the Internet, according to the Bank Administration Institute.
Federally insured Security First can be accessed at Website (www.sfnb.com), which brings consumers to a home page that looks like a bank lobby.
Customers can reach their account anywhere they have access to the Internet, rather than being tied to a single terminal where they have finance software, like other computer banks.
"Our goal was to have a bank that was fully interactive, where an individual could see all his information," Mahan said.
Most Security First customers have a money market account and a demand deposit account. Customers can open a checking account with as little as $100, an amount most choose to start to make sure the bank works, Mahan said.
Customers can pay bills electronically, purchase certificates of deposits or acquire a Visa card. Security First is also hoping to offer brokerage products and first and second mortgage products by the end of the year. Funds can be accessed by automatic teller machine, and Security First absorbs interbank fees for using the machines.
With limited infrastructure, Security First can offer higher yields, Mahan said. The bank was offering a six-month CD with an annaul percentage yield of 5.9 percent.
Security First was spawned as an idea of Mahan, who was chief executive officer at Kentucky-based Cardinal Bancshares Inc., and his sister-in-law's husband, Michael McChesney, who was starting a security software firm.
"He educated me on the Internet for years and years and years," Mahan said. Mahan used the charter of one of Cardinal's thrifts, changed its name to Security First and used it to start the Internet bank.
McChesney's, firm, SecureWare Inc. developed software that Mahan said has military-grade security. So far, the bank has not had its security breached, Mahan said.
"That doesn't mean that there haven't been a number of sophisticated attempts," he said. "If you have enough money and enough time you can break into anything."
Outsiders agree that Security First has shown a record of being secure, avoiding viruses, data theft and other potential dangers of Internet commerce.
"They do use a level of security that the Pentagon reserves for its most secure and sensistive systems," said Paul Schmeltzer, executive vice president for network services at Southeast Switch Inc., the corporate organisation for the Honour Network, the fourth largest ATM network in the country. "Is any security design totally foolproof or totally secure? Probably not."
That software and others developed for the bank is likely to be the prime money maker for Security First. Mahan admits that Five Paces Inc., Security First's software unit, will be the prime contributor to the company's net income.
"The bank is really a test site to use as a demonstration for potential customers of the software business," said Gary Craft, an analyst who follows the bank for Alexandria, Va..-based Friedman, Billings, Ramsey &amp; Co.
Security First's stock is traded on Nasdaq.
Security First has opened about 5,600 accounts. Most of its customers are male, between the ages of 25 and 45, with average income above $63,000 a year. More than 80 percent own their own home, attractive demographics for marketing.
Security First has also attracted competition. This month, Atlanta Internet Bank opened for business.
Unlike Security First, Don Shapleigh, chief executive of Atlanta Internet, says he does not plan to open any customer offices. "I have the WorldNet. I have other ways to get out." Federally insured Atlanta Internet currently offers its services to subscribers of AT &amp; T's WorldNet Services.
Shapleigh also argues that Atlanta Internet is the first true Internet only bank, saying that Security First is really a software company.
"I'm not selling software," he said. "I'm a banker."
Atlanta Internet, which is a service provided by a unit of Carolina First Corp. can be reached on the Internet at (www.atlantabank.com).
Caterpillar Inc. said Tuesday it is prepared to unilaterally impose employment terms, effective Oct. 1, on employees represented by the United Auto Workers after declaring an impasse in talks with the union.
The impasse revolves around the firings of some union workers before and during the 17-month strike against the Peoria, Ill.-based heavy equipment maker that ended in December without a new contract.
Caterpillar is willing to have firings after the strike sent to arbitration, but not those before and during the walkout.
The terms Caterpillar said it will impose at its eight UAW-represented plants in the United States include a pledge not to close any faciltities except the company's York, Pa., plant through September 2001, and job guarantees through that time period. Caterpillar has 31 manufacturing plants in the United States.
"We are taking this step to provide our employees with an added sense of security about their future, while giving Caterpillar the labor costs and the flexibility we need to keep jobs in the U.S. and keep our U.S.-made products competitive around the world," Caterpillar Vice President Wayne Zimmerman said in a statement.
Other terms include a 19 percent increase in Caterpillar's supplement of pensions for retirees until they become eligible for Social Security, an average increase of 7-1/2 percent in pensions and a doubling of potential incentive pay, Caterpillar said.
Caterpillar's UAW workers have been working without a contract since 1991. A 17-month strike against the equipment maker ended in December without a resolution of contract issues.
The UAW said Tuesday it does not agree that it has reached a lawful impasse with the company that makes it necessary for the terms to be put into effect.
"This tactic is yet another attempt to subvert the collective bargaining process," UAW Vice President Richard Shoemaker said in a statement.
The union said it will pursue the appropriate legal remedies if the company takes action to implement employment conditions without the existance of an impasse.
One analyst said the impasse declaration by Caterpillar appears to be genuine, not just a bargaining ploy.
"I don't think this is really a bargaining move," said Barry Bannister, analyst at S.G. Warburg. "It's just an obvious impasse."
He also said he did not expect the move to affect the stock, noting that strikers returned to Caterpillar several months ago without an effect on the company's profit margins.
Corporate financing for a downtown Detroit sports stadium complex is in place and land acquisition nearly complete, Mayor Dennis Archer said Friday.
"We believe that we are very, very close in making it happen," Archer said at a news conference. "If property has to be taken, by condemnation or eminent domain, we will move in a timely manner in the manner in which it will be needed."
Legislation pending in the Michigan Legislature could help facilitate the condemnation process, Archer said.  
Archer also said a deadline of 1700 EST Friday for the Detroit Tigers baseball team and Detroit Lions football team to make a commitment to the $505 million stadium complex was flexible.
Lions President William Clay Ford Jr. said after the news conference that Monday was the true deadline, as Wayne County voters will have to decide Tuesday whether to approve a tax on hotels and rental cars geared at raising $80 million for the complex.  
"We can't go to the voters without this," Ford said after the news conference, referring to a complete accounting of land on which the complex would be built.
The owner of a parcel that houses the Gem Theatre appears to be the major holdout, officials indicated.
"The one owner is a big problem at this point," said June West, press secretary to the Wayne County executive's office. "There's a price issue."
The owner of the parcel, Chuck Forbes, could not be reached for comment Friday. West said stadium negotiators and Forbes were meeting Friday.
Olympic Financial Ltd said Tuesday it could reach a deal to sell the company by October.
"I would expect that the time frame hopefully would be sometime in October," said Warren Kantor, chairman of Olympic's executive committee, in an interview. He was referring to the process of its investment banker Donaldson, Lufkin and Jenrette considering strategic alternatives for the Minneapolis-based automobile finance company.  
Olympic said Monday it has received an indication of interest from a potential buyer. Kantor said others have also expressed interest in the company since Monday's announcement.
"Effectively, what I believe is happening is due to the public announcement, those people who would go through a longer time frame... want to be sure (they are) not left out," Kantor said.
He would not comment on the identity of any potential suitors, but said the first contact came from a company with investment grade credit.  
A combination with an investment grade company could allow Olympic greater access to capital to expand its business, Kantor said. Olympic's credit is not investment grade.
Olympic needs capital to expand technology as its business expands, Kantor said.
"We think that the circumstances of the company are such that it makes sense to consider offers in order to take advantage of our rapid growth and opportunities," he said, noting that access to capital could especially become an issue in the event of a recession.  
While capital may be harder to come by in a recession, demand for loans from Olympic's customers, who essentially need their cars to get to work, would not wane much, Kantor said.
Kantor would not rule out the option of remaining independent and slowing down its growth plans, but added that it was likely the company would receive an acceptable buyout offer. "While we think it is likely that we will get offers that are acceptable, we're not going to accept (just) anything," he said.
Olympic's loans serviced have jumped to $3 billion at the end of June from $1.5 billion a year ago and the company is looking to further expand into a somewhat higher risk loan category it refers to as Classic, Kantor said.
Those loans net 16-18 percent rates, while 80 percent of its portfolio is made up of loans at about a 12 percent rate, Kantor said, adding that Olympic wants Classic loans to make up 50 percent of the portfolio by the end of the year.
Kantor would not comment on analysts' estimates ranging from $25 a share to more than $30 a share as a sale price for the company. Olympic rose 2-1/2 to 26-1/2 Tuesday.
--Reuters Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787
The newly appointed chief executive officer of Meredith Corp said Monday that the company was beginning to see prices for television stations peak and come down.
That could lead to Meredith making an acqusiiton sometime in 1997, said William Kerr, who is currently president and chief operating officer of the media company.
"We are hopeful that certainly in the course of the next calendar year that we would see some action," said Kerr, who will become chief executive January 1.  
In the next few years, Meredith, which owns seven television stations could acquire about five more, he said in an interview.
"I think it may be easier in calendar 1997 than in calendar 1996 to make an attractive acquisition," he said, describing attractive as a VHF network affiliate in the 10th to 40th largest U.S. markets. "We'd like a larger market, but we think it's unlikely one will become available," he said.
The Des Moines, Iowa-based company also publishes magazines including Better Homes and Gardens and Ladies' Home Journal.  
He said Meredith will not seek publishing acqusitions, he said. Instead, the company plans to launch new titles, including Family Money magazine, which is expected to be launched in the first half of 1997.
Due to consolidation in the magazine business in the 1980s and early 1990s, "we do not think there are many acquisitions" to be made on the publishing side, he said.
Kerr said he did not see another major magazine launch by the time the company's fiscal year ends next June, but said one could be launched later in the calendar year.  
He would not say what the next title would be, but said it would be compatable with the publisher's family focus.
Publishing currently makes up about 54 percent of Merideth's earnings, broadcasting about 43 percent, with the rest coming from licensing, Kerr said.
The company currently has two licensing agreements with Wal-Mart Stores Inc, and Kerr said other agreements are possible, both with Wal-Mart and other companies.
But he also said a new deal is not likely to happen for 12 to 18 months.
"I think it is unlikely that we would have a major new deal to announce in this fiscal year," Kerr said.
On Monday, Meredith said its board of directors appointed Kerr chief exectuive officer. He had been president and chief operating officer. Kerr, 55, will replace Jack Rehm January 1, though Rehm will remain chairman until December 31, 1997, when he plans to retire, Kerr said.
--Reuters Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787
McDonnell Douglas Corp. stock tumbled Monday after the Defence Department eliminated the company from the race to build a new generation fighter jet that eventually could be worth $200 billion or more.
The decision was a blow to McDonnell Douglas, the nation's second-largest defence contractor and a long-time leader in fighter jets, and could force it to restructure, seek a merger or become more acquisition-minded, industry analysts said.
The Pentagon on Saturday awarded four-year contracts to Boeing Co. and Lockheed Martin Corp. to develop prototype fighter jets for the early 21st century for the Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps and the British Royal Navy.
British and U.S. forces have announced plans to buy 3,000 of the joint strike fighter jets, with initial delivery scheduled for 2008.
With potential export sales of another 2,000 jets and additional funding for development and support, the programme could be worth $200 billion to $500 billion over the coming decades, industry executives said.
McDonnell Douglas stock lost $4.25 to close at $52.50 on the New York Stock Exchange, where it was one of the biggest losers of the day. Boeing rose $1.50 to $93.25 and Lockheed Martin rose $1.875 to $95.625, also on the NYSE.
John Modzelewski, an analyst at PaineWebber, said the decision could force St. Louis-based McDonnell Douglas to seek acquisitions more aggressively to help build its business, or into a merger with another defence or aerospace company.
"Everything's back on the table," Modzelewski said.
In the past year, McDonnell Douglas has been the subject of rumoured talks with Boeing, Rockwell International Corp. and Raytheon Co..
McDonnell Douglas has declined to comment on potential mergers and acquisitions. "We have said we will look at mergers, acquisitions and partnerships that will grow our business," a company spokesman said.
"This will be something of a wakeup call," CS First Boston analyst Peter Aseritis said. "It's a fairly sharp and dramatic blow to McDonnell Douglas and I would venture to guess one they probably didn't see coming."
PaineWebber's Modzelewski said, "Without having the internal growth such as joint strike fighter would give them, they're going to have to grow through acquisition." That could include Texas Instruments Inc.'s defence electronics business, which is for sale, according to published reports.
McDonnell Douglas Chief Executive Harry Stonecipher said on Saturday the loss was a surprise to the company.
"Certainly in terms of the overall future, 10 years and beyond, it is a significant programme to us," Stonecipher said.
But in a statement to employees Monday, Stonecipher noted the company's backlog of aircraft orders to the military at home and abroad and said it was pursuing other orders. The company has a $46 billion order backlog, a spokesman said.
"This decision does not mean we are out of the military aircraft business," Stonecipher said.
McDonnell currently builds the Air Force F-15 fighter and the Navy-Marine F-18E/F as well as the C-17 military cargo plane. Both the F-15 and the F-18 are to be replaced by the joint strike fighter in the next century.
PaineWebber's Modzelewski said McDonnell Douglas was likely to participate in the new jet fighter programme as a subcontractor, as politics will force the wealth to be spread.
But despite its key role providing fighter jets for decades, the based company has failed to win a major role in any of the next generation of tactical aircraft.
Already the smallest of the three major commercial jet makers, McDonnell said last month it would not continue to compete against Boeing and Europe's Airbus Industrie in the market for the biggest commercial jetliners.
Dayton Hudson Corp., the nation's fourth-largest retailer, Tuesday reported higher third-quarter results, giving added credence to analysts' projections of an industrywide strong holiday shopping season.
Women's retail chains Ann Taylor and The Limited also posted higher results.
General merchandise retailers should post decent gains in November and December combined, said Howard Eilenberg, an analyst at Johnson Redbook Service, a unit of Lynch, Jones &amp; Ryan Inc.
"It's going to be overall in the 5-to-5-1/2 percent increase range (over the previous year's sales). More importantly, the gross margins and the profits are going to look better," Eilenberg said.
Dayton Hudson said it had a 164 percent increase in operating earnings for its third quarter ended Nov. 2. Results were aided by a strong performance at its Target discount stores.
The Minneapolis-based retailer reported operating earnings of $116 million, or 49 cents a share, several cents above analysts' estimates. A year earlier it earned $44 million, or 18 cents a share.
"The key issue was a very strong performance from Target in all areas," said Saul Yaari, retail analyst at Piper Jaffray.
Target's operating profit in the third quarter rose 82 percent to $213 million, and total revenues increased 14 percent while same-store revenues rose 5 percent, Dayton Hudson said.
Meanwhile, Dayton Hudson's Mervyn's unit reported a 98 percent increase in operating profits to $64 million in the quarter, boosted by reductions in marketing costs, store expenses and headquarters costs. The increase came despite a 3 percent drop in revenue and a decrease in gross margins.
"Our third-quarter results reflect continued strong profit performance at Target and Mervyn's," Dayton Hudson Chairman Bob Ulrich said in a news release. "While the holiday calendar is challenging, we believe we are well positioned for a successful finish to 1996."
The 1996 holiday season includes five fewer selling days between Thanskgiving and Christmas than a year ago.
New York-based AnnTaylor Stores Corp. reported net income of $3.3 million, or 13 cents a share, after a $2 million, or 8-cent-a-share after-tax charge related to obligations under its former chairman's contract. That compared with $666,000, or 3 cents a share, a year ago.
Columbus, Ohio-based Limited Inc. reported operating earnings of $88.4 million, or 15 cents a share, before gains from initial public offerings, compared with $69.1 million, or 10 cents a share, a year ago.
"Our much improved third-quarter results reflect performance gains and continuing momentum in certain of our women's and our emerging businesses" including the Abercrombie &amp; Fitch business, Limited Chief Executive Leslie Wexner said in a statement.
"Consistent with our sales plan, we enter the holiday period well positioned, with overall inventories up 3 percent per square foot at retail," he said.
Analysts agreed The Limited was well positioned for the key holiday shopping season.
"I think they're positioned for a decent Christmas," said Elizabeth Pierce, analyst at Stephens Inc. "Inventories are conservatively managed."
Dayton Hudson stock rose $1.25 to $37.625, Limited rose 25 cents to $17.75 and AnnTaylor fell 87.5 cents to $20.50, all on the New York Stock Exchange.
McDonnell Douglas Corp. said Monday it would consider mergers and acquisitions, but not a restructuring, after the Defence Department eliminated the company from the race to build a new generation fighter jet that eventually could be worth $200 billion or more.
"We've always been interested in mergers and acquisitions and we continue to look at them," Chief Executive Officer Harry Stonecipher said in an interview with CNBC financial television network.
The Pentagon on Saturday awarded four-year contracts to Boeing and Lockheed Martin Corp. to develop prototype fighter jets for the early 21st century for the U.S. Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps and the British Royal Navy.
The decision was a blow to St. Louis-based McDonnell Douglas, the nation's second-largest defence contractor and a long-time leader in fighter jets, and could force it to restructure, seek a merger or become more acquisition-minded, industry analysts said.
McDonnell Douglas had reportedly had preliminary merger discussions with Boeing Co. earlier this year. Stonecipher would not comment on any specific mergers or acquisitions.
"I don't think Boeing would be on our radar screen," he said regarding a possible acquisition. "We may be on theirs."
Stonecipher also said he would be interested in trading McDonnell Douglas commercial aircraft assets for Boeing's military aircraft business, but noted there have been no talks in that area. Boeing said it did not comment on rumours or speculation about mergers and acquisitions.
Already the smallest of the three major commercial jet makers, McDonnell said last month it would not continue to compete against Boeing and Europe's Airbus Industrie in the market for the biggest commercial jetliners.
British and U.S. forces have announced plans to buy 3,000 of the new generation fighter jets, with initial delivery scheduled for 2008.
With potential export sales of another 2,000 jets and additional funding for development and support, the programme could be worth $200 billion to $500 billion over the coming decades, industry executives said.
McDonnell Douglas stock lost $4.25 to $51.50 on the New York Stock Exchange, where it was one of the biggest losers of the day. Boeing rose $1.50 to $93.25 and Lockheed Martin rose $1.875 to $95.625, also on the NYSE.
John Modzelewski, an analyst at PaineWebber, said the decision could force St. Louis-based McDonnell Douglas to seek acquisitions more aggressively to help build its business, or into a merger with another defence or aerospace company.
"Everything's back on the table," Modzelewski said.
In the past year, McDonnell Douglas has been the subject of rumoured talks with Boeing, Rockwell International Corp. and Raytheon Co.
"This will be something of a wakeup call," CS First Boston analyst Peter Aseritis said. "It's a fairly sharp and dramatic blow to McDonnell Douglas and I would venture to guess one they probably didn't see coming."
PaineWebber's Modzelewski said, "Without having the internal growth such as joint strike fighter would give them, they're going to have to grow through acquisition." That could include Texas Instruments Inc.'s defence electronics business, which is for sale, according to published reports.
"Texas Instruments is a very interesting property if in fact it is for sale," Stonecipher said in repsonse to a question about the defence electronics business.
In a statement to employees Monday, Stonecipher noted the company's backlog of aircraft orders to the military at home and abroad and said it was pursuing other orders. The company has a $46 billion order backlog, a spokesman said.
"This decision does not mean we are out of the military aircraft business," Stonecipher said.
McDonnell currently builds the Air Force F-15 fighter and the Navy-Marine F-18E/F as well as the C-17 military cargo plane. Both the F-15 and the F-18 are to be replaced by the joint strike fighter in the next century.
H&amp;R Block Inc. Thursday reported a big loss for the latest quarter, as its CompuServe online service posted a $58 million loss and became more of a headache to its parent.
H&amp;R Block had a net loss of $74.1 million, or 71 cents a share, in its second quarter ended Oct. 31, compared with a loss of $8.3 million, or 8 cents a share, in the 1995 quarter. Revenues grew to $253.4 million from $221.0 million.
Kansas City-based H&amp;R Block, the nation's largest tax preparation company, blamed the bad news mainly on losses at its CompuServe unit, the world's second-largest online service, which has failed to sign up new subscribers, especially in the United States.
H&amp;R Block still owns 80.1 percent of CompuServe, after selling the rest of the stock in April in an initial step to spin off the unit.
But plans to complete the spin-off were suspended in August after CompuServe reported poor first-quarter earnings and projected second-quarter losses.
Just nine months ago, shareholders and analysts were pushing for a spinoff, arguing that CompuServe's value was being held back by H&amp;R Block's staid tax business.
Now they want a spinoff because the online services provider is weighing on H&amp;R Block's performance.
"The business model changed for CompuServe in a fairly dramatic way and now CompuServe's valuation is clearly holding back H&amp;R Block's valuation," said Martin Romm, analyst at CS First Boston.
"How quickly things change," said Dennis Hudson, analyst at George K. Baum. "What happened was a whole lot of competition came in (to the online market.) The market became saturated before people expected."
Analysts said H&amp;R Block was waiting for CompuServe's new business strategy announced Thursday -- focusing on the corporate market rather than home users -- to push the unit toward profitability before the spinoff is completed.
H&amp;R Block also cut its quarterly dividend to 20 cents a share from 32 cents, a move that it had previously said would occur after the spinoff was completed.
"Even though the separation has not been completed, the board decided such action was prudent at this time because CompuServe is not adding to the company's profitability," said Frank Salizzoni, H&amp;R Block's president and chief executive officer and CompuServe's chairman.
"In taking this action today, the board is indicating it anticipates the separation of CompuServe."
Both Romm and Hudson said they continue to rate H&amp;R Block stock as a buy and stressed that there was nothing wrong with the company's core tax business.
The company said its Tax Services unit reported a pretax loss of $42.2 million in the second quarter, up $6.9 million a year ago.
"This year's deeper second quarter loss in these core businesses is in large part a result of the company's investments to expand its office network and roll out new products," Salizzoni said.
"They're making these investments primarily in new stores that are absorbing costs primarily without any commensurate contribution in revenue," Romm said, noting that the tax season does not begin until early next year.
H&amp;R Block stock fell 37.5 cents to $28 on the New York Stock Exchange. CompuServe lost 93.75 cents to $10.6875 on Nasdaq.
Just nine months ago, shareholders and analysts were pushing for H&amp;R Block Inc to spin off its CompuServe unit, arguing that the unit's value was being held back by H&amp;R Block's staid tax business.
On April 19, H&amp;R Block began that process with a public offering of about 20 percent of CompuServe Corp.
Analysts are still looking for the spinoff to be completed, but now the focus is on the sagging fortunes of the online service which is weighing on H&amp;R Block's performance.  
"The business model changed for CompuServe in a fairly dramatic way and now CompuServe's valuation is clearly holding back H&amp;R Block's valuation," said Martin Romm, analyst at CS First Boston.
On Thursday, H&amp;R Block reported a net loss for the fiscal 1997 second quarter of $74.1 million or $0.71 a share, compared to a loss of $8.3 million or $0.08 a share a year ago. Kansas City-based H&amp;R Block said the larger loss was primarily due to CompuServe's $58 million second quarter loss. H&amp;R Block still owns 80.1 percent of CompuServe.  
"How quickly things change," said Dennis Hudson, analyst at George K. Baum. "What happened was a whole lot of competition came in (to the online market.) The market became saturated before people expected."
In August, H&amp;R Block suspended the rest of the spinoff, citing CompuServe's performance and market conditions, among other factors.
Analysts said H&amp;R Block is waiting for implementation of CompuServe's newly announced business strategy -- focusing on business and professional users, rather than home users -- to push the company toward profits before completing the spinoff.  
H&amp;R Block also said Thursday it was reducing its quarterly dividend to $0.20 a share from $0.32, a move that it had previously said would occur after the spinoff was completed.
"The timing of (the dividend cut) was a little bit surprising," Romm said.
Both Romm and Hudson said they continued to rate H&amp;R Block stock as a buy and stressed that there was nothing wrong with the company's core tax business.
"I believe the company will have a very good tax season this year," Romm said, noting H&amp;R Block has made investments to grow the business. The company said its Tax Services unit reported a pre-tax loss of $42.2 million in the second quarter, up $6.9 million from a year ago.
"They're making these investments primarily in new stores that are absorbing costs primarily without any commensurate contribution in revenue," Romm said, noting that the tax season does not begin for more than a month.
H&amp;R Block stock was down 1/2 at 27-7/8 Thursday, after falling as low as 26-3/8 earlier in Thursday's session.
--Reuters Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787
Dutch bank ABN AMRO Holding NV said Friday it agreed to pay $1.9 billion to acquire Standard Federal Bancorp, which owns the seventh-largest savings bank in the United States and the biggest in Michigan.
ABN AMRO, which already has a U.S. banking arm, the LaSalle group, said it was offering $59 a share for Standard Federal, a bank holding company with $15.5 billion in assets based in Troy, Mich.
SFB owns Standard Federal Bank, a large home mortgage lender in Michigan that operates about 180 bank branches and 11 home lending centres. It also operates a wholesale mortgage banking business.
Despite the offer, SFB stock fell after running up sharply in recent days on takeover speculation. Some investors were disappointed the price was not higher, analysts said.
"All the people were really speculating yesterday that it was a lot higher are selling today because they're disappointed," said Tony Howard, analyst at Olde Discount Corp.
SFB stock lost $1.625 to $56.375 in active trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Standard Federal chief lending officer Garry Carley said at a news conference that ABN AMRO had made the highest bid for the bank among several serious suitors.
"We had others who expressed strong interest in the bank," Carley told reporters.
ABN AMRO, the Netherlands' leading bank, said it would issue $750 million in preferred stock to help fund the acquisition, its biggest to date. It said it would issue the shares through a U.S. subsidiary, ABN AMRO North America Inc.
Formed in a 1990 merger, ABN AMRO already is the biggest foreign bank in the United States. Its LaSalle group has 130 branches and 7,750 staff members, mainly in the Chicago area.
The agreement marks ABN AMRO North America Inc.'s sixth acquisition in three years and is likely to be the last for a while, ABN AMRO North America Chief Executive Officer Harrison Tempest said at a news conference.
"We're out of the acquisition business for some time now," Tempest said. When asked how long before it might make another deal, he said, "probably two years."
The combined banks will also be the eighth largest mortgage originator in the United States, ABN AMRO said.
"It gets us into the league we want to be in mortgage servicing and mortgage origination," Tempest said.
SFB employs about 4,000 people and serves 1 million clients in Michigan, Ohio, Illinois and Indiana.
ABN AMRO said Standard Federal's banks will continue to operate under the Standard Federal name and there would be "significant cost savings" following the deal.
While saying no jobs would be cut initially, both companies said some job cuts were likely eventually as administrative functions and some branches were consolidated.
With Standard Federal, ABN AMRO North America will have the second largest deposit base in the Chicago market.
Analysts said recent changes in U.S. banking law that will level the playing field between thrifts and banks should help speed other acquisitions of savings and loans.
"I think you're going to see an increased level of activity, both in banks acquiring thrifts and thrifts acquiring thrifts," said Jonathon gray, analyst at Sanford Bernstein &amp; Co.
ABN AMRO said it had reached agreement with Standard Federal's board, but the deal still needed the approval of its shareholders and supervisory authorities.
The acquisition was expected to be completed by mid-1997, ABN said, adding that the deal would contribute to its earnings.
Shoppers lined up outside stores Friday, some arriving before dawn to get an early start on the holiday shopping season.
The day after Thanksgiving is traditionally one of the busiest days of the year for retailers and the unofficial start of the holiday shopping season, the make-or-break time for many retailers.
With consumer confidence high and employment strong, analysts are generally expecting sales gains of about 5 percent over last year's weak sales growth. The crunch is especially tight this year, since there are five fewer days between Thanksgiving and Christmas.
"The money's there. The confidence is there. The jobs are there. The goods are there and the pent-up demand is there," said Allen Sinai, chief economist at Primark Decision Economics. Sinai forecast sales growth of 4.5 percent for November and December, compared with 2.9 percent gains a year ago.
Shoppers also were there, with many retailers offering early bird sales to entice them.
Roni Campos lined up outside the door of the Wal-Mart at first Colony Mall in Sugarland, Texas, a suburb of Houston, at 6:30 a.m.
"You should have seen Wal-Mart. They had a 13-inch television on sale for $99, and people were fighting for those TVs. Arms were flying, and people were just pulling those things off the shelf," she said.
Stephanie Foster, of Richmond, Texas, was shopping for baby gifts in Mervyns California, a Dayton Hudson Corp. store chain.
"They had a line outside Target of at least 200 people," said Foster, who began her shop-a-thon this year at 5 a.m., shopping list in hand. "I started out with a list of what everybody wanted and what time every store opened."
As one of the first customers through the door at Target, she was handed a bag with treats, juice, coupons and mints.
"I came here for a 64 bit Nintendo (for my granddaughters) and they had 40 in stock, but I ended up with two bags of Christmas presents," Rosalee DiGregorio said at the Menlo Park Mall in Edison, N.J.
Other items that were expected to be hot this year are those related to the movies "101 Dalmatians" and "Space Jam," said Tracy Mullin, president of the National Retail Federation. Barbie dolls from Mattel Inc. are also expected to be hot sellers, especially Holiday Barbie.
"Believe it or not, Barbie still has legs," Mullin said.
The federation is forecasting holiday sales will rise about 6 percent over last year, reaching about $460 billion.
While the the day after Thanksgiving attracts traffic and media attention, actual sales for retailers tend to come later in the holiday season.
"This whole weekend only accounts for 8 percent of purchasing," said John Konarski, vice president of research for the International Council of Shopping Centers.
Susan Eich, a spokeswoman for Dayton Hudson, said sales volume the day after Thanksgiving is typically three times the retailer's normal sales. That day and the Saturday before Christmas are typically the company's busiest days.
Filene's Basement Corp.'s flagship store in downtown Boston opened at 7 a.m. and was packed with shoppers by 7:30. Filene's Basement Chief Executive Samuel Gerson said the cold weather and a late Thanksgiving were making for a busy season.
At the Falls, a mall near Miami, a small fire on a utility pole nearby cut off power to the complex for about an hour Friday morning.
"We actually ran registers, but off power. Everyone was doing it by hand, doing it by candle light," said a spokeswoman for the Bloomingdale's store at the mall. Bloomingdale's is owned by Federated Department Stores Inc..
Norm Allen, head of customer services at the Glendale Galleria in suburban Los Angeles, said the 280-store complex opened at 8 a.m. with about 100 shoppers in line to enter.
"This is going to be a good year. Our volume sales are already up 8 to 10 percent over last year at this time," he said.
Apparel and soft goods were expected to lead sales nationwide, while analysts and retailers expect tough competition and a lack of major new items to pressure sales at elctronics stores.
"We'll provide an array of holiday sales," said John Costello senior executive vice president of marketing for Chicago-based Sears, Roebuck and Co.. "Our sales are comparable to last year."
From free gift wrapping and valet parking to sweepstakes and private scheduled visits with Santa, retail malls are pulling out the stops to attract customers during the key holiday season.
So far their efforts, as well as a strong economy, appear to be yielding results, as mall operators said they saw double-digit sales increases on Black Friday, the name retailers have given to the day after Thanskgiving.
"I think overall, consistently across the board, we're seeing sales up anywhere from high single digits to low double digits for the day," said Robert Michaels, president of General Growth Properties Inc., which owns and operates 120 retail centers across the country.
Traffic patterns varied at different malls, with some reporting traffic up by close to 10 percent, while others saw traffic flat. But unlike last year, when there were many window shoppers, this year, people were buying.
"Everyone was browsing last year," said Sarah Liddle, associate marketing director of Newport Centre Mall, in Jersey City, N.J. "Everyone was a little skeptical about what they were going to buy. Yesterday, it was unbelievable how many (shopping) bags were going through this mall."
That appeared to be the case throughout the country, according to Billie Scott, spokeswoman for Simon DeBartolo Group Inc, which owns Newport Centre and owns or has an interest in 185 properties, most of them malls and retail centers.
"For the most part, (according to) the people I talked to, traffic was at last year's level or above, but I guess the big difference is people were buying," she said.
The publicly traded companies that own many malls -- and are known as real estate investment trusts (REIT) -- do not have as much of their revenue directly generated during the holiday shopping season as retailers. But a portion of rents are based on a percentage of sales, and the season will also help set rents in the future.
"The high sales in the fourth quarter justify the rent the rest of the year," said Lee Schalop, an analyst who follows REITs at J.P. Morgan Securities.
To attract shopppers, malls offer features ranging from free gift wrapping to giveaways including $1,000 shopping sprees.
At the Woodfield Mall in Schaumburg, Illinois, a northwest suburb of Chicago, Santa is available for five-minute prescheduled visits during the hour before the shopping center opens. Woodfield is owned by Bloomfield Hills, Michigan-based Taubman Centers Inc., which also said sales appeared strong to kick off the holiday shopping season.
"Everything we're hearing is positive," said Taubman spokeswoman Karen Mac Donald. "Everyone is saying they had a good day yesterday. They were up."
At the Paramus Park mall in Paramus, N.J., prizes are being given away each week, with a grand prize of a trip to New York and dinner with the Rockettes.
"It's an effort to distinguish ourselves," said Kathy Lickteig, spokeswoman for Columbia, Maryland-based Rouse Co., which owns Paramus Park. "At this time of the year, it is very important to have something special to attract shoppers."
But while services are a factor in attracting shoppers, mall owners said having the best stores is the key for bringing shoppers in to a mall.
"Number one, it does come down to having the right shops," said General Growth's Michaels.
Mall operators said the stronger economy and the fact that there are five fewer days between Thanksgiving and Christmas may have helped prompt more shopping Friday.
In fact, many operators said they have had promotions earlier this season because of the shorter shopping period, with some starting as early as Veteran's Day.
Heidi Holwerda, vice president of marketing for Muskegon, Michigan-based Horizon Group Inc., an outlet mall operator with 36 centers, said her company began coordinated sales Nov. 10.
"As a result, we've seen some pretty significant increases in November in regard to traffic," she said, noting that traffic was up 10 percent in centers that the company has owned for at least a year.
A brisk start to holiday shopping should help retailers post solid sales gains for November and make this season merrier than last year for the nation's store chains.
But quirks in the calendar, with a later Thanksgiving this year, and some retailers tallying sales differently than others, could obscure overall results for November.
Industry analysts said they expect sales at stores open at least a year to rise 2.5 percent to 4.0 percent overall in November, with clothing continuing to be a strong contributor, as it was in October.
Most retailers report November sales on Thursday.
"We think the majority of companies are going to be on or above plan for the month of November, with good inventory levels," said Harry Ikenson, retail analyst at Rodman &amp; Renshaw Inc. "We think the promotional level for Thanksgiving was high, but probably no higher than last year."
With discounts and markdowns no higher and in some cases lower than last year, and inventories being managed tightly, profit margins should improve, helping to lift fourth quarter earnings, analysts said.
"On balance, good business now is going to translate into decent earnings," said Dean Ramos at Dain Bosworth Inc. Ramos said his index of sales could be one to two points higher than the 3.1 percent rise reported last year and that the trend should continue through December.
"Absent some sort of event that shakes the consumer you should see good retail sales" in December, he said.
Holiday sales are crucial to retailers who typically earn a quarter or more of the year's profits during the season, analysts said. Steady economic growth and low unemployment have helped boost sales so far, and store chains should also benefit from easy comparisons with weak results a year ago.
Consumers got off to a fast start on their holiday shopping after Thanksgiving, analysts said.
Retail consumer spending in the post-Thanksgiving weekend rose 4.3 percent from a year ago, according to TeleCheck Services, which tracks check-writing volume. Overall, same-store sales rose 2.1 percent, TeleCheck said.
Several department store operators were expcted to be among the winners when sales are reported on Thursday.
Rodman &amp; Renshaw's Ikenson said he expected J.C. Penney Co. Inc. and May Department Stores Co. to be above expectations, with Penney's same-store sales up 7.5 percent to 8 percent and May's up 6 percent to 7 percent. Federated Department Stores Inc. should be up 7 percent to 9 percent, with gains in all its segments, he said.
He also sees speciality retailer Paul Harris Stores Inc. up 15 percent to 17 percent, but Charming Shoppes Inc. slightly below expectations with a gain of 5 percent.
Dean Witter analyst Patrick McCormack said in a research report he expected sames store sales to be up 3 percent in the month for the firm's index of 44 companies.
He also saw JC Penney, May, and Federated above expectations, as well as Sears, Roebuck and Co.
Sears was forecast by analysts to post a smaller-than-expected decline of 1 percent to 2 percent, which is due to a quirk in the company's sales reporting calendar that should help boost results in December.
Sears Senior Executive Vice President John Costello said on Sunday that post-Thanskgiving sales appeared to be up across the board, from men's and children's clothing to Craftsman tools to fine jewelry.
"Optimism is up and it looks like consumers are responding to the short season by getting an earlier start," he said.
Most analyts expect big-ticket consumer electronics to continue to be weak, though one saw some signs of a pickup in sales at the end of the month.
"Sears and Wal-Mart over the last week talked about a pickup in the computer area," said Michael Niemira, analyst at Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi. He forecast sales overall up 2.5 percent for November at a comparable number of stores.
A brisk start to holiday shopping should help retailers post solid sales gains for November and make this season merrier than last year for the nation's store chains, industry analysts said Tuesday.
But quirks in the calendar, with a later Thanksgiving this year, and some retailers tallying sales differently than others, could obscure overall results for November.
Industry analysts said they expect sales at stores open at least a year to rise 2.5 percent to 4.0 percent overall in November, with clothing continuing to be a strong contributor, as it was in October.
Most retailers report November sales on Thursday, though Paul Harris Stores Inc., a speciality women's apparel chain, reported November same-store sales up 26 percent from a year ago on Tuesday.
"We think the majority of companies are going to be on or above plan for the month of November, with good inventory levels," said Harry Ikenson, retail analyst at Rodman &amp; Renshaw Inc. "We think the promotional level for Thanksgiving was high, but probably no higher than last year."
With discounts and markdowns no higher and in some cases lower than last year, and inventories being managed tightly, profit margins should improve, helping to lift fourth quarter earnings, analysts said.
"On balance, good business now is going to translate into decent earnings," said Dean Ramos at Dain Bosworth Inc. Ramos said his index of sales could be one to two points higher than the 3.1 percent rise reported last year and that the trend should continue through December.
"Absent some sort of event that shakes the consumer you should see good retail sales" in December, he said.
Holiday sales are crucial to retailers who typically earn a quarter or more of the year's profits during the season, analysts said. Steady economic growth and low unemployment have helped boost sales so far, and store chains should also benefit from easy comparisons with weak results a year ago.
Consumers got off to a fast start on their holiday shopping after Thanksgiving, analysts said.
Retail consumer spending in the post-Thanksgiving weekend rose 4.3 percent from a year ago, according to TeleCheck Services, which tracks check-writing volume. Overall, same-store sales rose 2.1 percent, TeleCheck said.
Several department store operators were expcted to be among the winners when sales are reported on Thursday.
Rodman &amp; Renshaw's Ikenson said he expected J.C. Penney Co. Inc. and May Department Stores Co. to be above expectations, with Penney's same-store sales up 7.5 percent to 8 percent and May's up 6 percent to 7 percent. Federated Department Stores Inc. should be up 7 percent to 9 percent, with gains in all its segments, he said.
Ikenson said he sees Charming Shoppes Inc. slightly below expectations with a gain of 5 percent.
Dean Witter analyst Patrick McCormack said in a research report he expected sames store sales to be up 3 percent in the month for the firm's index of 44 companies.
He also saw JC Penney, May, and Federated above expectations, as well as Sears, Roebuck and Co.
Sears was forecast by analysts to post a smaller-than-expected decline of 1 percent to 2 percent, which is due to a quirk in the company's sales reporting calendar that should help boost results in December.
Sears Senior Executive Vice President John Costello said on Sunday that post-Thanskgiving sales appeared to be up across the board, from men's and children's clothing to Craftsman tools to fine jewelry.
"Optimism is up and it looks like consumers are responding to the short season by getting an earlier start," he said.
Most analyts expect big-ticket consumer electronics to continue to be weak, though one saw some signs of a pickup in sales at the end of the month.
"Sears and Wal-Mart over the last week talked about a pickup in the computer area," said Michael Niemira, analyst at Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi. He forecast sales overall up 2.5 percent for November at a comparable number of stores.
Freight hauler Yellow Corp. said Wednesday it could cut 1 percent to 2 percent of its workforce as part of a restructuring of its largest operating unit, Yellow Freight System.
Overland Park, Kan.-based Yellow Corp. said it has offered early retirement to 153 employees who are 55 and older and that it will announce layoffs in the first quarter.
The company also said it will take an unspecified charge to fourth quarter earnings to cover expenses resulting from early retirement, severance and other costs related to a reorganization of Yellow Freight along geographic lines.
Each geographic unit will have a group vice president who reports to Yellow Freight President Bill Zollars, while five officers at the central office will also report to Zollars, the company said.
"We are decentralizing responsibility for the business processes that touch the customer in an effort to be more responsive to their LTL needs," Zollars said of the less-than-truckload freight hauling business.
"All members of the leadership and management teams will be focused and incentive-based on four priorities," said Zollars. "Those areas are customer satisfaction, improved profitability, revenue growth and operating safely."
Employees will have until Jan. 15 to make their decisions on whether to take early retirement, Yellow said.
The number of layoffs will be determined, in part, based on the early retirement decisions, as well as the needs of the company as it reorganizes, a spokesman said. He estimated about 1 percent to 2 percent of Yellow's 24,700 employees could be affected.
Analysts said the moves announced Wednesday were part of a strategy to improve performance at Yellow and help it regain market share.
"I think they need to focus on some labour productivity," said Corina Bergschneider, analyst at George K. Baum &amp; Co. "Obviously, that needs to be done in line with their union contract and what can be allowed."
Yellow shares fell 12.5 cents to $14.50 on the Nasdaq system.
First Chicago NBD Corp, while still open to acquisitions to expand its banking network, expects more retail branches to be cut over time as customers bank electronically or at supermarkets.
"As customers use more and more of those (channels), we've got to take away more of the brick and mortar" branches, Verne Istock, chief executive, said in an interview Thursday.
But don't expect First Chicago to make drastic cuts like the nearly 280 branches that Ohio-based KeyCorp said last month it would close or sell.  
"I don't think that's the approach we want," Istock said. "I think that's pretty dramatic. I think you're better off to do it on an orderly basis from a customer satisfaction standpoint as well as an employee basis."
First Chicago has closed about 25 branches since the merger with Detroit-based NBD Bancorp a year ago that created what is now the ninth largest bank holding company in the United States, with $106.7 billion in assets.
But at the same time, First Chicago could be looking to expand its retail customer base through acquisitions of other banks in the greater Midwest.  
"I have publicly said on more occasions than once that this organization does have an interest in expanding through acquisitions where it makes sense for shareholders," Istock said.
This means any acquisition First Chicago does could only dilute earnings for a short time, if at all, he added.
But Istock also said First Chicago has not had talks with Milwaukee based Firstar Corp, which has been mentioned as a possible First Chicago target for at least a year.
"We've had no discussions," he said of Firstar. He would not comment on other possible acquisition targets.  
Istock also reiterated that an acquisition could be made outside of traditional banking as regulatory lines between banking other financial businesses are erased.
Insurance, investment banking and securities banking are all areas that could be targets of traditional banks, he said.
"We're willing to consider any alternative that we think makes sense for our shareholders first of all and also for enhancing our customer relationships," Istock said.
Analysts see First Chicago as having excess capital on its books, which weighs on a bank's performance. EVEREN Securities analyst Thomas Maier said the bank could have more than $2 billion in excess capital, while others estimate a lower amount.
An aggressive 40-million-share stock repurchase plan has helped allay analysts' and investors' concerns about the excess capital. But making a purchase could also put capital to work.
"It's a way of in fact buying your stock back without having to go out in the market to do it," Maier said.
First Chicago shares were up 5/8 at 55-1/2 Friday.
((--Chicago newsdesk 312 408 8787))
First Chicago NBD Corp chief executive Verne Istock expects to see more job cuts at the corporate banking unit as the bank tries to turn around a business that has far underperformed the rest of the company.
"I suspect as part of our restructuring of the corporate bank there'll probably be reduced head count in the corporate bank, and there will be reduced capital allocated to the corporate bank," Istock said in an interview.
He would not say how many jobs would be cut.  
The corporate banking unit posted a dismal return on equity of eight percent in the first nine months of the year, compared with nine percent a year ago, with results this year weighed down by a $12 million trading loss. Overall, the bank reported return on equity of 16.9 percent in the first nine months of 1996.
Now the corporate and institutional banking unit is being reshaped, paring back business lines to focus on those central to customer relationships.  
"I firmly believe that something that's chugging along at eight or nine percent can in fact be improved and we fully expect to get it up to that 15 percent or better return" on equity, Istock said.
Stockholders and analysts appear to accept Istock's argument that the corporate bank's results can only go up.
"You can criticize them, but frankly, it can only improve," said Joseph Duwan, analyst at Keefe Bruette &amp; Woods. "I think they're taking a hard look at the businesses they're in in corproate banking."  
Istock stressed that increased revenue will come from the corporate bank by focusing on areas that will grow and cutting unprofitable areas.
Already this year, the bank has said it will exit the institutional custody and master trust businesses, two paperwork-intensive lines that would have required major investment to gain significant market share.
Istock also said the bank was trimming its trading operations, again focusing on instruments customers need.  
"I don't think we will have to have the entire (trading) product line or be on the edge of the envelope," Istock said. But he added that the types of trading vehicles customers need change.
Istock said he was aware of the corporate bank's troubled performance before First Chicago Corp and NBD Bancorp merged a year ago, forming what is now the ninth largest bank holding company in the United States with assets of $106.7 billion.
Meanwhile, First Chicago's stock hit a post merger high last week, before sliding in a sell off of most bank stocks this week. An aggressive 40 million share stock repurchase plan announced in October has helped boost the stock.
But another area of concern to analysts is credit card chargeoffs, which jumped earlier this year.
Istock said while chargeoffs will likely rise more as the economy slows, the business will continue to be a strong earner for First Chicago.
"It's a business we know, we understand and we plan to stay in," Istock said. He added that the bank is beginning to use its 13-million-customer credit card database to sell other products to credit card holders.
First Chicago shares were up 1/8 at 55 Friday.
((--Chicago newsdesk 312 408 8787))
The $9.5 billion proposed acquisition of Boatmen's Bancshares Inc. by NationsBank Corp. could spark a flurry of other mergers involving Missouri banks, which until last year were protected from outside buyers by state regulations.
"NationsBank just strolled into the Midwest and bagged the biggest banking trophy in the landscape," said Michael Ancell, banking industry analyst at Edward D. Jones &amp; Co. "Whoever wants a big market position in the Midwest has to come in and grab Mercantile or Commerce."
St. Louis-based Mercantile Bancorp Inc., a bank holding company with $18.04 billion in assets, was seen by many analysts as the most attractive Missouri franchise in size after Boatmen's. Kansas City, Mo.-based Commerce Bancshares Inc., with $9.32 billion in assets, also could help a regional bank establish a strong presence in the lower Midwest, analysts added.
"It focuses more attention on Mercantile, Commerce and Roosevelt," said James Weber, analyst at A.G. Edwards &amp; Sons. Roosevelt Financial Group Inc is a $9.33 billion asset-St. Louis based thrift.
"Now ... the most coveted bank out there is Mercantile," Weber said.
Mercantile and Commerce did not return phone calls seeking comment.
Among those seen as having an interest in buying in Missouri are Minneapolis-based First Bank System Inc. and Norwest Corp., Ohio-based KeyCorp and Banc One Corp., and First Chicago NBD Corp. in Illinois.
Representatives of First Bank, Norwest, Banc One and First Chicago said the banks do not comment on rumors of possible mergers or acquisitions. KeyCorp, contacted by phone, would not comment.    With a presence in nine states and $41 billion in assets,
Boatmen's was the prize in Missouri, where barriers to outside acquirers were brought down last year by a federal banking statute.
"Boatmen's was the plum of Missouri and was the plum of the central Midwest," Weber said.
Talk that the Missouri banks were seeking inflated prices from buyers was seen as a reason a deal has not occurred sooner. But NationsBank's bid, representing a premium of 40 percent for Boatmen's stock, was large enough to get the deal done.
"I think Boatmen's was shopping itself, and everybody knew if you wanted to be the winning buyer here, you had to make the bid nobody would beat," Ancell said.
But some analysts cautioned that other targets should not expect as large a premium. They also questioned whether NationsBank can recoup shareholder value with such a large bid for Boatmen's.
"I think initially some stocks will trade up on sympathy, but the wild premium NationsBank put on this deal here, I don't see a lot of other deals being done at this premium," said Michael Durante, analyst at McDonald &amp; Co.
Firstar Corp's announcement on Thursday that it expected to fall short of analysts' fourth-quarter earnings estimates for what it believes are temporary factors includes one element -- a continued modest decline in commercial loans outstanding -- that could be a more lasting concern, analysts said.
The Milwaukee-based bank holding company, which has $19.9 billion in assets, said it expects fourth quarter earnings of about $0.95 a share excluding any one-time gains, $0.08 short of the consensus and unchanged from a year ago.  
Firstar is in the midst of a program to trim costs and enhance revenues and said factors including the implementation of that program and assimilation of recent acquisitions would hurt earnings. But the bank also said continued declines in its commercial loans outstanding would also hinder earnings, and was a temporary factor.
"I think while that sounds plausible, it also remains to be proven," said Ben Crabtree, banking analyst at Dain Bosworth. Crabtree had forecast earnings of $1.08 a share for the quarter.  
While expenses from the restructuring and acquisitions should eventually be eliminated, analysts were not as sure that the loss of loans would be reversed.
"The question going forward, and that's an unanswerable question, is the long-term impact on the revenue side," said Thomas Maier, banking analyst at EVEREN Securities.
Firstar investor relations spokesman Joe Messinger said the decline in loans outstanding is due mostly to the focus on the restructuring during the first two quarters of the year.  
Firstar also said credit card charge-offs will remain higher than the company's historic levels in the quarter, though they will be in line with the industry overall.
"It's something they've indicated in the past," Maier said, adding that higher charge-offs were already built into his previous $1.05 a share estimate on fourth quarter earnings and outperform rating on the stock.
In the 10-Q filing with the SEC for the third quarter, Firstar said it expected credit card charge-offs to rise to 4.5-5.0 percent in the fourth and first quarters, before declining to 4-4.5 percent. Charge-offs were 4.06 percent in the third quarter.
If Firstar meets its $0.95 a share estimate for the quarter, 1996 earnings would be $3.34 a share, compared to $3.00 a share a year ago.
Firstar shares fell one to 51 Thursday amid a downturn in banking stocks.
((--Chicago newsdesk 312 408 8787))
Mercantile Bancorp Inc's planned $1.07 billion purchase price for Roosevelt Financial Group Inc and an expected merger-related charge of $25-$30 million after tax both appear reasonable for an in-market deal, analysts said Monday.
The St. Louis-based bank holding company said it expects to take the charge in the quarter the deal closes.
"For a deal this size, I think, it's probably relatively modest," analyst Steve Schroll at Piper Jaffray said.  
Roosevelt, a $9 billion thrift holding company also located in St. Louis, has 83 branches, 73 of which overlap with Mercantile, Schroll said.
The banks told analysts they expect to eliminate 50 of the overlapping branches by the middle of 1998, he said, adding that Mercantile also expects to cut 37 percent of Roosevelt's pre-tax cost base by 1999.
In a news conference, Mercantile would not specifically say how many branches would be shut.  
The cost reductions help justify the $1.07 billion price tag, which is about 11 times 1997 earnings estimates for Roosevelt, Schroll said.
"It's reasonable," Schroll said. "For an in-market deal, because of the opportunities to save costs, it's reasonable."
With its recently announced plan to acquire Mark Twain Bancshares Inc for $855 million, Mercantile will be the largest financial institution in Missouri, with $30 billion in assets once both deals close.
That could make Mercantile, often mentioned as a takeover candidate, even more attractive.  
"I'd say Merc was already attractive anyway," said Joseph Stieven, a banking analyst at Stifel Nicolaus, which advised Roosevelt on the deal. "This makes them no less attractive."
Joseph Roberto, a banking analyst at Keefe Bruyette &amp; Woods, said, "I think it makes Mercantile more attractive. It gives them the number one market share across the state."
But the process of closing the two deals, expected in the second quarter, and absorbing the acquisitions could take Mercantile out of play as an acquisition target in the short term, analysts said.
"I would think in the short term, an acquisition of this size, when combined with the acquisition of Mark Twain, probably delays the likelihood of somebody from outside coming in to buy Mercantile," Schroll said.
Meanwhile, St. Louis-based Magna Group Inc and Kansas City, Missouri-based Commerce Bancshares Inc could become more attractive for suitors looking to buy in the Missouri market, analysts said.
((--Chicago newsdesk 312 408 8787)).
Mercantile Bancorp Inc. said Monday it agreed to acquire Roosevelt Financial Group Inc. for about $1 billion in cash and stock, a move that would create the largest bank in Missouri.
The companies said the acquisition will create the largest locally managed and independently owned financial services organisation based in the southern Midwest. It will make Mercantile the largest banking company in Missouri, with more than 23 percent of the state's deposits, Mercantile said.
Mercantile will become the largest bank in St. Louis, where it is headquartered, and in Springfield, Mo., and will strengthen its presence in other major Missouri markets such as Kansas City.
Roosevelt, a savings and loan with $9 billion in assets that is also based in St. Louis, has 81 offices and branches in Missouri, Kansas and Illinois.
The acquisition follows Mercantile's agreement to buy Mark Twain Bancshares Inc., another St. Louis-based bank, for $855 million in stock. That deal was announced on Oct. 28.
"Our combination with Roosevelt will materially enhance our mix of strong retail, middle market lending and other speciality businesses," Mercantile Chairman Thomas Jacobsen said in a statement.
Mercantile plans to take a pretax charge of $25 million to $30 million for merger-related costs when the deal closes next year but also expects it to add to earnings in 1997 and 1998, officials said.
The deal would save about $20 million a year in branch costs annually, Jacobsen said but would not elaborate on how many branches would be closed.
"There will be some certainly, but probably fewer than you might think," Jacobsen said at a news conference.
Analysts said they were told separately that about 50 overlapping branches were expected to be closed by 1998.
Due to attrition and since the two companies will not be completely merged, layoffs were expected to be minimal, officials said.
"We're not aware of anyone at this time that won't be able to find a role with the ongoing company," said Stanley Bradshaw, chief executive at Roosevelt.
Mercantile, which said both the Roosevelt and Mark Twain acquisitions were expected to close in the second quarter of 1997, would not rule out future acquisitions.
"We have continuing interest in Illinois, Iowa and Arkansas," said John Beirise, group vice president for emerging markets at Mercantile. "Oklahoma has interest to us and would also be a logical extension."
The Mercantile that emerges after the pending takeovers are completed will have $30 billion in assets and could itself become an attractive takeover target, analysts said.
Mercantile, which will have a stock market worth of more than $4 billion, could be even more attractive once the acquisitions have been assimilated.
"I'd say Merc was already attractive anyway," said Joseph Stieven, a banking analyst at Stifel Nicolaus, which advised Roosevelt on the deal. "This makes them no less atttractive."
Said Joseph Roberto, banking analyst at Keefe Bruyette &amp; Woods, "I think it makes Mercantile more attractive. It gives them the No. 1 market share across the state."
Mercantile said it will exchange up to 13 million shares of its stock at a ratio of 0.4211 Mercantile share for each Roosevelt share, and pay $22 cash for each remaining share.
Based on the $50.75 closing price Friday of Mercantile's shares on the New York Stock Exchange, the exchange ratio would value Roosevelt shares at about $21.37 each. Roosevelt's stock closed Friday at $18.125 on Nasdaq.
Roosevelt shares added $2.375 to $20.50 on Nasdaq while Mercantile stock fell $1 to $49.75 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Mercantile also said it planned to repurchase up to 7 million of its own shares in connection with the acquisition.
'Twas the day before Christmas and all through the malls, retailers were looking for a last minute push for a merry holiday sales season.
Industry analysts said sales were hovering near or a shade below expectations for the holiday shopping season so far.
After a strong start, sales came in below retailers' own expectations last week, according to a weekly survey of chain store sales by BTM/Schroders, a venture of two investment houses.
Analyst Michael Niemira at Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi, which compiles the index with Schroder/Wertheim, said he expected December sales to rise 4 percent to 4.5 percent, compared with earlier expectations for a 4.5 percent to 5.0 percent rise.
But activity picked up Monday and Tuesday as shoppers, pinched by five fewer shopping days between Christmas and Thanksgiving this year or just old-fashioned procrastination, rushed to find gifts at the last minute, retailers said.
"It definitely feels active," said Karen Farnham, assistant manager at an Abercrombie &amp; Fitch Co. in Manhattan. "Yesterday (Monday, I'd say, was probably the busiest," she said, noting that Abercrombie customers spend hundreds of dollars apiece, on average.
At the Limited Inc., last-minute shopping has been hectic, store manager Christina Vigo said in Manhattan.
"It's out of control. Yesterday was the busiest day all season. We started sales extremely early to draw business, but everyone's shopping last minute," she said, noting the average sale has been about $50.
In New York, lone men, coursing through stores with a clear purpose, accounted for a good portion of store traffic on Christmas Eve. "I'm just not finished yet. I get lazy, I guess," said Eric Gotthard.
Tom Kurpiewski said he, too, fell behind in his holiday shopping, adding that he's spending about the same as he did in 1995.
Saul Yaari, senior retailing analyst at Piper Jaffray Inc., said sales should be about 5 percent above last year's results, measuring on a store-for-store basis.
Yaari said sales at department stores have slowed in the last week after a strong holiday start while discounters have done well.
But people were still spending freely last weekend, reflecting a trend toward later shopping during the season, Yaari said.
Clothing, shoes, jewelry and certain toys, such as Nintendo's new video game system and Tyco Toys Inc.'s Tickle Me Elmo, sold very well, Yaari said.
"Consumer electronics was a very poor category," he added, noting retailers were offering free computer accessories and generous financing terms to stir up interest.
Analysts said the holiday shopping season and fourth quarter as a whole should be strong for retailers, boosted by tighter inventories and fewer unplanned promotions, as well as comparisons with a dismal season last year.
Clothing continues to lead the stronger sales.
"My read so far is I don't think it was as promotional as last year in apparel," said Harry Ikenson, retailing analyst at Rodman &amp; Renshaw Inc.. He added that electronics sales appeared to be under much more pressure than apparel.
Peter Schaeffer at Dillon Read &amp; Co. Inc., said he expected sales to rise 4 percent to 5 percent overall but only 2 percent to 3 percent at comparable stores open at least a year.
Discounters and off-price retailers such as TJX Cos. Inc. and Ross Stores Inc., as well as some of the big chains, notably J.C. Penney Co. Inc. and Sears, Roebuck and Co., should do better than average, he said.
Retailers looking for a post-Christmas rush to boost lukewarm holiday sales may be disappointed as snow in some areas and holiday exhaustion kept many shoppers from bargain-hunting Thursday.
"I think people did their shopping" before Christmas, said John Konarski, vice president at the International Council of Shopping Centers, a group of retail mall operators that surveys 85 large regional malls across the country.
"You're going to have some people out today (but) you're not going to see the massive crowds some people expected."
Konarski said he expected that holiday season sales would be up 4 percent to 6 percent from a year ago, which is about what he expected before the season began.
But after strong activity in the weekend following Thanksgiving, retailers' hopes for even better sales ended up being dashed by a slowdown in the week before Christmas.
"I think generally, the overall picture appears to be we had a good, solid holiday sales period, but not a spectacular one," said Tracy Mullin, president of the National Retail Federation, which represents major store chains.
She said she expects holiday sales rose about 5 percent from last year, when gains were a weak 2.5 percent to 3 percent.
Store officials and analysts said that while sales were coming in at or just below retailers' expectations, that still beats the dismal results last year.
"They slowed up very moderately, actually, from the input we're getting," said Jay Meltzer, managing director of LJR Redbook Research. "You know, we didn't go over a cliff and a year ago we did go over a cliff."
In Chicago, snow and cold weather appeared to be keeping crowds down in the Michigan Avenue shopping district the day after Christmas.
"Sales today are relatively slow compared to before Christmas," said Julie Towson, manager of the Knot Crazy tie store in Water Tower Place. "I think a lot of people spent all of their money before the holiday. Also, who wants to come out in this kind of weather?"
In central New York State, where it was also snowing, Konarski said there were lines at malls before stores opened at 7 a.m. EST (1200 GMT), but most shoppers were looking for markdowns on holiday accessories and to return merchandise.
In Cleveland, many workers were on vacation and some offices were closed, and shopper traffic at the Tower City Center mall complex was moderate.
"We've had a good, strong season," said the manager of a women's clothing store who has worked in retailing 11 years. "Business today is pretty good. Volume is moderate."
At Tower City's AnnTaylor store, sales associate Mary Rogonjich said Thursday morning traffic was slow but she expected things to pick up during lunch hour.
"Things have been steady this morning, and we have not had that many returns," she said. "We've had a very good season -- above plan." The store was offering up to 50 percent off on silk blouses, pants, jackets, shoes and other items on Thursday.
In Miami, some shops were seeing more traffic.
"The store is very busy. Really everything is marked down," said a spokeswoman at Federated Department Stores Inc.'s Macy's store in Miami's Falls mall.
But analysts said that while promotions picked up before Christmas and would accelerate this week, special discounts were fewer and less steep than last year, which should help retailer profits.
"Some retailers did get promotional in the last few days," Mullin said. "I think you'll see it really starting today."
Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the nation's largest retailer, said in a telephone message for investors on Monday that discount and warehouse sales were at the low end of plan for the holidays in the third week of December.
The company is in line for sales increases of 4 percent to 5 percent for November and December, the company said.
Dayton Hudson Corp. said on Tuesday sales were meeting expectations and that the company had planned its inventories well.
Sears, Roebuck and Co. said overall sales and sales at stores open at least a year were showing upper-single digit increases.
"Overall sales were strong the last three days before Christmas," Vice President of Marketing John Costello said, noting that clothing, tools, jewelry, multimedia computers and tires sold well.
Magna Group Inc. has a definitive agreement to acquire Homeland Bankshares Corp., the second-largest banking company in Iowa, for about $216 million, the companies said Tuesday.
St. Louis-based Magna will issue 5 million shares of its common stock and pay $92 million in cash in exchange for all theoutstanding Homeland common shares. Homeland shareholders may choose to exchange each of their shares for either about 1.55 Magna shares, a comparable amount in cash or a combination.
Magna said it will repurchase about 600,000 shares of the stock, under its current repurchase plan.
"We certainly will consider buy back programmes beyond that, but nothing has been approved beyond that," G. Thomas Andes, Magna chairman, said in a news conference.
Waterloo, Iowa-based Homeland, with assets of $1.2 billion as of June 30, owns and operates four commercial banks and one savings bank and provides financial services through a network of 33 locations in Iowa.
Magna, with $5.35 billion in assets, is the third-largest banking institution in the St. Louis metropolitan area and the nation's 95th largest banking company. It has 106 banking locations throughout Illinois and Missouri and a trust and brokerage company.
After the acquisition, Magna would have about 55 percent of its assets in Illinois, 25 percent in Missouri and 20 percent in Iowa, Andes said.
The deal is subject to approval by Homeland shareholders and regulators.
Magna said it expected the acquisition to boost earnings within 12 months, and save about $8 million through centralization of systems and procedures.
Some of the cost savings will come from job cuts, though those cuts could come from attrition, Andes said.
Homeland Chief Executive Erl Schmiesing said during the news conference that cuts were underway at Homeland in any case as it consolidated.
Magna will continue to consider other acqusitions, possibly in Iowa, Andes said.
"We certainly like the state of Iowa," he said. "We would certainly welcome the opportunity to expand in the state of Iowa, as well as Illinois and Missouri."
Magna is also among several Missouri-based banks considered by analysts to be likely acquisition targets, a perception that did not change with the Homeland acquisition announcment.
"It certainly doesn't make them any less attractive or likely as a takeover candidate," said Steven Schroll, a banking industry analyst at Piper Jaffray.
Homeland's stock rose $1.75 to $35.75, while Magna edged down 6.25 cents to $24.81 Tuesday on Nasdaq.
Rawlings Sporting Goods Inc chief financial officer Paul Martin said on Friday the company is not for sale, although it recognizes its responsibility to shareholders.
"The company is not for sale and the company doesn't comment on takeover rumors," Martin said in a telephone interview. "Obviously, we recognize our fiduciary responsibilities." Stock of the St. Louis-based sporting goods company has jumped more than 50 percent since early December, with market sources pointing to takeover rumors.  
"We keep hearing takeover, takeover," said one analyst, who does not follow the stock directly.
Another analyst said he was skeptical there were any takeover talks currently underway.
"I think it's just pure speculation right now, I don't think there's anything happening," said Timothy Conder, analyst at A.G. Edwards. He added that, based on fundamentals, the stock, which closed up 1-1/8 at 12-5/8 Friday, has a fair price of 9-1/2.  
In a research report on Thursday, Conder reiterated a maintain/aggressive rating on the stock, saying in the long term, Rawlings brand name makes it an attractive takeover candidate.
One potential acquirer for Rawlings that is repeatedly mentioned is Beaverton, Oregon-based Nike Inc. A Nike spokesperson could not be reached for comment Friday.
Conder said Friday the case for Nike is that it would round out the company's on-field baseball presence. But the case against Nike is that Rawlings is too small and does not have margins that match Nike's.  
Martin said Rawlings is scheduled to report fiscal 1997 first quarter financial results Tuesday, but added the company in November said it expected to report a modest loss for the quarter.
Rawlings said it expected revenues to decline in the quarter because of lower sales in baseballs and baseball gloves. The company reported net income of $890,000, or $0.12 a share a year ago.
Conder pointed out in his research note that the recent settlement of the Major League Baseball labor situation removes a large risk factor.
Major League Baseball is also considering using commemorative Jackie Robinson and Joe DiMaggio baseballs during the 1997 baseball season, which could boost Rawlings business in 1997, he said.
((--Chicago newsdesk 312 408 8787))
Magna Group Inc's planned acquisition of Homeland Bankshares Corp is not likely to alter the St. Louis-based bank holding company's own potential to be acquired, analysts said.
"It certainly doesn't make them any less attractive or likely as a takeover candidate," said Steven Schroll, a banking industry analyst at Piper Jaffray.
Magna is among several Missouri-based banks considered by analysts to be likely acquisition targets.  
"I don't think it probably changes the company either way too much" in terms of takeover prospects, said Joseph Stieven, a banking analyst at Stifel Nicolaus.
Still, with Iowa's limit on how much of the state's total deposits a single banking company can hold, Magna's acquisition of Iowa-based Homeland could prevent some potential buyers from swallowing up Magna, analysts noted.
"It could complicate it, because Iowa does have relatively low state cap," Stieven said. "But it doesn't necessarily mean it was done as a defensive measure."  
Schroll's initial reading of the proposed deal is that it will add to Magna's earnings in 1997, the year the deal is expected to close.
"We believe it could be 15 cents accretive, maybe more," Schroll said, cautioning that this was a preliminary view of the deal.
Magna said in a news release the deal would be accretive within 12 months.
Other analysts noted that Homeland has a relatively high ratio of equity to assets and said paying about 1.65 times book value for Homeland might be a bit expensive. Homeland's ratio of equity to assets was 10.79 percent in the second quarter.
The price of "165 (percent) of book could be pretty generous if you've got an overcapitalized bank," said Ben Crabtree, banking analyst at Dain Bosworth.
"It sounds like a pretty big price," agreed Stieven.
Magna was down 1/4 at 24-1/2 Monday afternoon, while Homeland was up 2-1/4 at 36-1/4.
--Reuters Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787
Aiming to fill Americans' seemingly insatiable desire for sport utility vehicles, Chrysler Corp.  and Ford Motor Co.  both introduced new models of the go-anywhere vehicles Tuesday at the North American International Auto Show.
The plush Lincoln Navigator and the brawny Dodge Durango were introduced a day after General Motors Corp.'s unit unveiled an upscale version of its popular Yukon sport/utility vehicle and Subaru of America Inc., a unit of Fuji Heavy Industries Ltd  7270T, debuted a new sport/utility based on a passenger car chassis.
Sport/utility vehicles sales climbed to just over two million in the United States in 1996 and are the fastest-growing automotive segment.
The vehicles are so popular that even sportscar maker Porsche AG said Tuesday it also plans to enter the market by the turn of the century.
Although more and more companies are adding more and more models, the market is yet to be saturated, as more drivers foresake cars for the larger vehicles.
"They really are considered substitutes," said Diane Swonk, deputy chief economist at First Chicago NBD Corp. "These are replacing old station wagons. They're also eating very heavily into the luxury car markets."
Luxury is a key feature of the new Ford and GM models.
Ford's Lincoln Navigator, which is expected to be available in July, includes leather seating surfaces, walnut wood accents and second row bucket seats.
It is expected to be priced in the mid-$40,000 range and will compete at the premium end of the market with vehicles by Lexus and Land Rover. It is aimed at affluent empty nesters or high-profile active families. The target age for Navigator owners is 45-55, said Jim O'Connor, general manager of Ford's Lincoln Mercury division.
The vehicle, which O'Connor expects will sell 20,000 annually, was driven through a mock rock wall and waterfall to make its debut.
The vehicle seats eight, has a 5.4-litre V8 engine with 8,000 pound towing capacity and 116.4 cubic feet of cargo space.
GMC's Yukon Denali, which is scheduled to be in production in  the 1998 calendar year, features four heated seats and a premium sound system, among other accessories.
"We're certainly going upscale," Roy Roberts, general manager of GM's Pontiac-GMC division, said when asked about pricing. He declined to comment further.
Chrysler made its typical auto show splash with the introduction of the Dodge Durango, which broke through the floor of a mock-up of the automaker's new headquarters building.
Touting it as a breakthrough vehicle that offers "more of everything," Chrysler said sales could eventually reach 200,000 units. The automaker invested $910 million to bring the vehicle to market.
The Durango, which goes on sale in December, uses the same chassis and beefy front end as the Dodge Dakota pickup truck. It is aimed at a more downscale audience than Chrysler's tony Jeep Grand Cherokee. One unique feature is a rear cargo well sized to fit a hunting rifle.
The vehicle is bigger than Ford's popular Explorer, but smaller than the Yukon, Navigator and Ford Expedition.
Durango features an optional third bench seat, boosting its seating capacity up to eight people.
Despite growing criticism about sport/utilities' poor fuel economy, the Durango offers the biggest engines in its class, including 5.2-litre and 5.9-litre V8s.
Pricing was not announced, but Chrysler Vice Chairman Robert Lutz said the Durango could be made with a four-cylinder engine, if necessary.
With so many new sport/utility vehicles entering the market, it is becoming more competitive, which will eventually lead to pressure on margins.
"We'll get saturation if people can't afford to buy these things, relative to the cars they drive," said Joseph Phillippi, analyst at Lehman Brothers.
Demand for more affordable sport/utilities will push manufacturers to build them on car platforms, as Subaru, Toyota and Honda are doing, Phillippi said, adding that few drivers travel far off road and don't need the ruggedness and high ground clearance of a truck-based sport/utility.
Executives at the Big Three automakers stress that their new sport/utility vehicles will not compete with existing lines.
"We don't think this will be a major drag at all on Expedition," O'Connor said of Ford's current top-of-the-line sport utility vehicle. Instead, he said the Navigator should attract new customers to Lincoln-Mercury.
"I think it will bring a whole new customer to Lincoln," he said.
But the automakers also know that if they don't offer sport/utility vehicles in a variety of niches, others will.
"I'd rather have the alternative be in my dealer" showroom, said Chrysler's Lutz.
As for Porsche, Chairman Wendelin Wiedeking would not go into specifics on the German automaker's plans in the sector, other than to say it was in discussions with a third party.
The U.S. economy should provide a repeat in 1997 of the steady growth seen in 1996, which should also lead to car and truck sales near 1996 levels, according to economists who work for the Big Three automakers.
Economists for Ford Motor Co and General Motors Corp both forecast vehicle sales between 15 million and 15.5 million in 1997, while Chrysler Corp's economist predicted sales of 15.2 million. Sales were about 15.4 million in 1996. The forecasts were made in a presentation to the Society of Automotive Analysts.  
"We are likely to see more of the same," Chrysler's W. Van Bussmann said, echoing the view of the other two analysts.
"We see no significant changes in either direction on fiscal or monetary policy," said G. Mustafa Mohatarem of General Motors.
Ford's Martin Zimmerman was even more optimistic. "I frankly don't see why this growth can't continue into 1998," he said.  
But that does not mean the auto industry has no concerns. The one short-term worry all three economists voiced was the weakening of the yen, which fell to about 117 to the dollar Monday from about 106 a year ago. A weaker yen makes Japanese imports, including automobiles, less expensive in the United States.
That, in turn, makes Japanese cars more competitive in the U.S. market, giving Japanese automakers more flexibility in pricing, analysts said.  
But the analysts all expected political or market pressures to cause the yen to stabilize and then strengthen somewhat against the dollar this year.
"We should see the yen start to strengthen," Zimmerman said.
Bussmann forecast the yen at 106 to the dollar by the end of 1997.
In western Europe, analysts see continued economic pressure associated with the move to European union in 1999 continuing to weigh on the economy there and keep vehicle sales about flat.  
But Mohatarem argued that there is a possibility for a positive surprise in central Europe, saying Russia could achieve three percent economic growth by 1998.
Mexico was also seen as an area for growth, with that economy recoverying quicker than expected from the recent peso crisis, analysts said.
Meanwhile, Bussmann argued that capacity usage for truck production will remain at about 80 percent through the year 2000 and that truck demand as a percentage of total vehicle market share will continue to rise.
"We see the light truck demand reaching 50 percent (of total vehicle demand) by just past the turn of the century," he said.
But other analysts were not as optimistic about demand for light trucks, which generally have higher profit margins than cars.
"I don't think it will reach 50 percent of demand," said Thomas Webb, chief economist with the National Automobile Dealers Association.
During his presentation, Webb also said his forecast for 1997 auto sales was on the low end of a range he defined between 14.7 million and 15.1 million autos.
	 ((Chicago newsdesk 312 408-8787))
Chrysler Corp. Wednesday introduced all-new versions of its Chrysler Concorde and Dodge Intrepid family sedans, part of a $2.1 billion revamp of the car line that helped rescue the automaker five years ago.
Detroit's third-largest automaker said the cars, which will reach showrooms in the fall, will stay in the same price range as the cars they replace -- about $20,000-$26,000.
The strategy contrasts with that of Ford Motor Co., which in 1995 introduced a redesigned Taurus sedan with more upscale features that resulted in higher prices. Ford later brought out a lower-priced Taurus when sales failed to meet expectations.
"Our concept is to keep them as affordable as possible and keep them in the same price range of today's" models, Chrysler Vice Chairman Robert Lutz told reporters following the introduction of the new model at the North American International Auto Show here.
Chrysler introduced the original "LH" car line in 1992 at a time when the automaker was emerging from its second brush with bankruptcy in a decade. Dubbed by some analysts as the company's "Last Hope," the cars' acceptance by consumers brought badly needed cash and confidence to the company.
Chrysler did not introduce other LH variants, which include replacements for the Chrysler LHS luxury car and the Eagle Vision.
Improved production processes will help keep prices down, though the cars' features include all new engine technology, Lutz said.
The cars, as well as two other models to be introduced in the fall, were the result of a 31-month development programme that cost Chrysler about $2.1 billion, including two new overhead-cam V-6 engines, Chrysler said.
The automaker expects to sell 250,000 to 260,000 of the cars annually, with the Intrepid accounting for about 50 percent of the sales and the other three models making up the rest.
To follow up on its launch Tuesday of the new Durango sport/utility vehicle, which broke through the floor of a mock-up of Chrysler's new corporate headquarters, Chrysler unveiled the new sedans in a fake thunderstorm, complete with water falling on the Cobo Hall stage. The theme of the presentation was "Lightning Strikes Twice."
The programme marks the launch of a new family of V-6 engines for Chrysler, part of a significant revamping of the company's engine line.
The base models of both cars will be powered by an all- aluminum, 2.7-litre 24-valve V-6 engine rated at 200 horsepower. The Concorde LXi and Intrepid ES will have 3.2-litre, 24-valve V-6 engines rated at 220 horsepower.
Chrysler said it engineered the cars to offer a quieter ride and better handling than current models.
The cars also include larger headlights and larger brakes, increased usable cargo room, platinum tipped spark plugs and a "coil-on-plug" ignition system to eliminate tuneups before 100,000 miles, Chrysler said.
Chrysler stressed that the two sedans are designed to appeal to different consumers, with Intrepid geared toward slightly younger, less affluent buyers.
The cars will be assembled at Chrysler's Bramalea, Ontario plant.
Lutz admitted that Chrysler was introducing the cars into a declining market for sedans, with typical sedan buyers now opting for other choices, including sport/utility vehicles.
But he said the decline was cyclical and could change with the next generation of car buyers.
"We know each generation rejects what its parents had," said Lutz.
U.S. retailers reported overall sales near plan for the key December holiday shopping month Thursday, but results varied widely by store and sector with department stores appearing to take some market share from specialty stores.
"The major retailers continue to gain market share," said Michael Niemira, analyst with Bank of Tokyo/Mitsubishi Ltd. "Even within the Sears report, they talk about the electronics area being one of the stronger areas" while that area was weak for retailers overall."  
Sears, Roebuck and Co was one of the better performers, analysts said. The Hoffman Estates, Ill.-based retailer said domestic same-store sales rose 9.5 percent.
Sears chairman Arthur Martinez told CNBC that gross margins are very favorable for December and the fourth quarter.
Sears stock was up 1-1/8 at 46-3/8 Thursday. Other gainers included Paul Harris Stores Inc, up 1-7/8 at 20-1/2, Kohl's Corp, up 1-1/4 at 37-3/4, Dayton Hudson Corp up one at 37-3/8 and Saks Holdings Inc up 5/8 at 39-5/8.
First Chicago NBD Corp said Wednesday rising bankruptcy filings contributed to a rise in credit card charge offs in the fourth quarter.
Charge offs rose to 6.7 percent of managed receivables in the quarter, compared to 5.9 percent a year ago.
"The fourth quarter increase is due to a combination of factors, including a resurgence of bankruptcy filings after a third quarter lull, an increase in contractual charge offs, and average loan volume that was basically flat in the third quarter," chief financial officer Robert Rosholt said.  
But in a telephone message to investors, Rosholt also noted that credit card fee revenue rose 28 percent from a year ago to $259 million, adjusting for securitization.
"Clearly this demonstrates bank card's ability to counter some of the effects of deteriorating credit quality," he said.
While the credit card business continues to be profitable for the $104.6 billion asset bank holding company, some analysts noted the charge-off rate was high.
"I think that's very clear that that's not as profitable an operation as it is at other places," said James Schutz, analyst at Chicago Corp.  
But other analysts said the bank has tightened credit standards in the past year and were less concerned about the charge-off rate.
"That thing has bounced around all over this year (1996) and it's still a very profitable line of business this year," said Robert Ollech, analyst at Principal Financial Securities.
Rosholt also said the bank plans to improve its trading operations to restore results in market-driven revenues.  
Market-driven revenues were $83 million in the fourth quarter, up from $40 million in the previous quarter but down from the bank's average of $100 million a quarter, Rosholt said.
Trading profits were $12 million in the quarter, compared to a $12 million loss in the third quarter.
"We plan to get back to our $100 million per quarter average as we improve our execution of trading activities this year," Rosholt said.
Return on common equity was 17.5 percent in the quarter, up from 15.4 percent a year ago, while return on assets was 1.46 percent, up from 1.02 percent a year ago.
Earlier Wednesday, the bank reported operating income of $377 million or $1.14 a share in the fourth quarter, compared to $318 million or $0.96 a year ago.
Earnings were $0.01 a share below estimates, according to First Call. First Chicago shares were up 1/8 at 54-3/8.
((--Chicago newsdesk 312 408 8787))
Equity Residential Properties Trust, a real estate investment trust led by Chicago real estate investor Sam Zell, agreed Friday to buy Wellsford Residential Property Trust( in a deal valuing Wellsford at $1 billion.
The deal would make Equity Residential, which is already the largest publicly traded apartment building owner in the country, the second largest real estate investment trust in any category, the company said.
"Consolidation of this industry is critical for its evolution," Zell, who is chairman of Equity Residential, said in a statement. "The size and liquidity of the combined entity reinforces EQR's status as the No. 1 multifamily (real estate investment trust)."
The deal values New York-based Wellsford at about $1 billion, or $29.61 a share, an 18.7 percent premium over its recent stock price, the companies said.
Equity Residential said it expected to trim about $3.1 million in annual general and administrative expenses and $800,000 in property management expenses after the closing of the deal, which is expected to occur by May.
Equity Residential expects the merger to add 10 cents to 13 cents a share in annualized funds from operation -- the measure commonly used to measure real estate investment fund performance.
When the deal closes, Equity Residential will own and operate 317 properties with 90,873 units. It also adds properties in areas like the Pacific Northwest and West Coast, where strong demand allows for higher rents.
"Those markets have higher rental growth than the national average from other markets," said Jeff Langbaum, associate analyst at investment firm Alex. Brown &amp; Sons. Equity Residential estimated rent growth in those areas at 5 percent to 6 percent annualy, while Langbaum estimated the national average at about 4 percent.
Each Wellsford share will be exchanged for 0.625 share of Equity Residential, or about $27.11, plus one share of Wellsford Properties Inc., a newly formed company that will continue Wellsford's development activities, the companies said in a joint statement.
The exchange ratio is subject to upward revision if Equity Residential shares fall below $40. If they drop below $37, the parties have the right to terminate the merger agreement.
Equity Residential also will exchange about $158 million in preferred shares. In addition, Equity Residential will assume about $330 million in Wellsford's debt.
The deal continues the consolidation of real estate investment trusts (REIT).
"It's pretty apparent that that's the way the REIT world, especially apartments right now, is heading," Langbaum said.
In December, Houston-based Cambden Property Trust said it would acquire Dallas-based Paragon Group Inc., to create an apartment real estate trust with 36,199 units.
Unlike the hostile takeover Zell's Manufactured Home Communites Inc. launched against Chateau Properties Inc., which was rebuffed by the manufactured housing community operator last year, the Equity Residential deal was unanimously approved by both companies' boards of trustees, the companies said.
Wellsford shares were up $1.875 at $27.625, while Equity Residential was down $1.125 at $42.25 on the New York Stock Exchange in late trading.
Caterpillar Inc. Tuesday reported record profits of $1.36 billion for 1996, spurred by a 27 percent jump in fourth-quarter earnings, but said it expected near flat results this year.
The world's largest heavy equipment maker said earnings for all of 1996 rose from 1995's $1.14 billion while revenues grew 2.8 percent to $16.52 billion from $16.07 billion.
For the fourth quarter, profits rose to $381 million, or $1.99 a share, from $300 million, or $1.53 a share, in the 1995 period.
Peoria, Ill.-based Caterpillar's fourth-quarter results exceeded Wall Street analysts' average estimate of $1.88 a share, according to First Call Corp., which tracks earnings estimates.
Despite the strong results, investors pushed Caterpillar's stock down $2.125 to $76.375 on the New York Stock Exchange, apparently on concerns about the outlook for 1997.
The company said it expected 1997 profits to be nearly flat with 1996 levels, with revenues from ongoing operations growing only slightly.
Caterpillar said higher demand in developing regions should offset a slightly weaker market for its machines in the United States and Japan this year.
"It's basically '97," Lisa Shalett, analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein, said of the stock's fall. But she added that one-time currency factors also helped boost the earnings above estimates.
"It comes across as a surprise, but it's not necessarily a surprise from operations," Shalett said of fourth-quarter earnings.
But other analysts suggested Cateprillar was being too conservative in its view for 1997.
"Caterpillar always looks at the glass being half empty," said Thomas Burns Jr., analyst at NatWest Securities Corp. "We think its half full.
"We expect a better U.S. economy," he said. "We don't expect housing starts to be off." He noted that Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan made positive comments about the economy on Tuesday.
Caterpillar said it stood by its forecast, but was prepared to meet higher demand than expected, as it did in 1996.
"We're trying to call it as we see it," Chief Financial Officer Douglas Oberhelman said in a telephone interview. "I will tell you that a year ago, we called for a softer economy in the U.S. and it didn't happen. We were pleasantly surprised."
Caterpillar said profit margins as a percent of sales rose to 25.2 percent in 1996 from 22.3 percent in 1995 due to higher prices and the effect of the stronger dollar against the yen and European currencies.
Lower material costs and improvements in the manufacturing process also helped.
Total capital expenditures in 1996 were $642 million and are expected to increase 10 to 15 percent in 1997, Caterpillar said.
"In 1997, we plan to increase spending for capital assets, research and product development to enhance our prospects for long-term growth and profitability," Chairman Donald Fites said in a statement accompanying the results. "In addition, we intend to increase our investments for new business opportunities around the globe."
Research and development spending is expected to rise 20 percent from $410 million in 1996, the company said.
Major initiatives include electric power generation, agricultural products, mining systems, compact machines and strengthening the company's product support system, Caterpillar said.
Caterpillar Inc chief financial officer Douglas Oberhelman said Tuesday that an increase in U.S. dealer new machine inventories at the end of 1996 was intentional.
"It's higher than it was a year ago and that's by design," Olberhelman said in an interview with Reuters. "As it turned out last year, we didn't have enough inventory in dealer hands and this year we will, we hope," he said.
Some analysts expressed concern Tuesday at the increase in inventories.  
The Peoria, Illinois-based heavy equipment maker Tuesday reported record net income of $381 million or $1.99 a share for the fourth quarter, up from $300 million or $1.53 a share a year ago and $0.11 ahead of consensus estimates.
But the company's outlook that the 1997 profit level would "approximate" that of 1996 appeared to be pushing the stock lower Tuesday.
Oberhelman defended the company's view of slowing U.S. economic growth in the face of analysts' comments that the view was too conservative.  
"We're trying to call it as we see it," he said. "I will tell you that a year ago, we called for a softer economy in the U.S. and it didn't happen. We were pleasantly surprised."
He added that the company is prepared to increase production if demand is stronger than expected, as it did in 1996.
After focusing the last several years on improving operations, Oberhelman said the company now thinks it's time to increase spending on research and development and on capital assets to improve shareholder value in the future.  
Total capital expenditures were $642 million in 1996 and are expected to rise 10 to 15 percent in 1997, while research and development is expected to rise 20 percent from the $410 million spent in 1996, Caterpillar said.
"It's going to be a little bit of everything," he said when asked if the expenditures would be focused on acquisition or internal development.
He said the company is likely to continue its pace of about 50 new or upgraded product introductions a year through 1999.
One area the company is looking to gain in is power generation equipment, a $5 billion worldwide market Caterpillar sees tripling in the next several years.
"We'll still be building there, both internally and through acquisitions," he said.
Caterpillar shares were down 1-3/4 at 76-3/4 Tuesday.
(Chicago newsdesk 312 408 8787)
A conservative forecast for 1997, calling for profits near 1996 levels, helped push Caterpillar Inc stock lower despite record earnings reported for 1996 Tuesday.
But the outlook was also causing some analysts to question the conservatism of the Peoria-based heavy equipment maker.
"Caterpillar always looks at the glass being half empty," said Thomas Burns Jr., an analyst at NatWest Securities Corp. "We think it's half full."  
"We expect a better U.S. economy," Burns said. "We don't expect housing starts to be off." He noted that Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan made positive comments about the economy Tuesday.
But Caterpillar said in its earnings statement that it expects U.S. gross domestic product growth of about two percent in 1997, slower than in 1996.
Burns is also more optimistic about European growth than Caterpillar.
"Clearly, as far as we're concerned, there's a turn up on the way in Europe," he said.  
But in Caterpillar's view, bullish factors will be offset by delays of infrastructure products as countries impose fiscal restraint to meet the entry criteria for the European Monetary Union.
Caterpillar reported earnings of $381 million, or $1.99 a share for the fourth quarter of 1996, above the $1.53 a share reported in 1995 and the consensus estimate of $1.88 a share reported by First Call Corp.  
But the stock was down 1-1/8 at 77-3/8 Tuesday, mostly because of the outlook.
"It's basically '97," Lisa Shalett, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein, said of the stock's downturn. But she noted that one-time currency factors helped boost the earnings above estimates.
"It comes across as a surprise, but it's not necessarily a surprise from operations," Shalett said.
Still, despite Caterpillar's guidance on profits in 1997, Burns and other analysts are sticking by estimates showing earnings per share climbing from the $7.07 reported in 1996.
Burns estimates earnings of $7.70 a share for 1997.
Blair Brumley, an analyst at Dain Bosworth Inc, is even more bullish, forecasting earnings of $8.00 a share.
"It doesn't look like there's anything in the outlook statement that would cause us to be concerned with this year," Brumley said, noting that share repurchases, gains in the engine business from a recent acquisition and price gains from new products should boost earnings.
"Even assuming flat unit sales, you're not going to see a flat bottom line," he said.
((Chicago newsdesk 312 408 8787))
Intuit Inc Wednesday launched its new, streamlined banking system on America Online Inc's online computer system, with some of the largest banks in the United States agreeing to use the product.
Intuit's BankNOW will be offered as part of America Online's Banking Center, along with products by CheckFree Corp, Online Resources and  Visa Interactive.  
BankNOW is geared to customers who wish to conduct banking transactions such as bill paying and fund transfers online, but do not use the personal finance software that is part of Intuit's Quicken banking package, Mountain View, California-based Intuit said in a news release.
So far, 14 U.S. financial institutions, including First Chicago NBD Corp and CoreStates Financial Corp are using BankNOW, with an additional eight committed to use the product, Intuit said.  
Dulles, Virginia-based America Online, said 19 financial institutions provide banking services on the system.
The BankNOW software can be downloaded for free from America Online. Financial institutions charge their customers for using the product.
For example, First Chicago said it will charge $3.95 a month for customers using online-banking and $9.95 a month for online banking and bill paying, though some premium checking account users will be able to do online banking for free.
First Chicago looks at BankNOW as a premium service it can offer customers.
"We think there is a large market for this," First Chicago spokesman Thomas Kelly said. "We also think this is a point of differention in our markets."
But to some, the scope of online banking still remains in doubt.
"I don't know whether its the wave of the future," said James Schutz, banking analyst at Chicago Corp. "I don't think they (the banks) know either. I just think they're keeping their options open."
--Reuters Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787
Sears, Roebuck and Co. Thursday said earnings jumped 24.6 percent in the fourth quarter, boosted by strong sales and improved profit margins during the Christmas selling season.
"We ended the year with excellent fourth-quarter results, which are even more impressive given the strength of last year's fourth quarter," Sears Chairman Arthur Martinez said in a statement.
December included the company's first ever back-to-back billion-dollar sales weeks, he said. The Christmas season is crucial for retailers since store chains typically earn half or more of their annual profit during the period.
"They had a great 1996 capped off by the best Christmas of any department store operator," said Alan Rifkin, analyst at Dain Bosworth Inc. He noted that Sears' sales at comparable stores rose 9.5 percent in December.
The nation's second-largest retailer said earnings rose to $567 million, or $1.42 a share, in the quarter, from $455 million,  or $1.13 a share, in the 1995 period. Sales grew 10.8 percent to $12.04 billion from $10.87 billion.
The earnings beat Wall Street forecasts that averaged $1.38 a share, according to First Call, which tracks estimates.
But Sears' stock fell $2 to $49.125 on the New York Stock Exchange, mostly on profit-taking.
"The stock was up strongly early in the week and I think people are just taking profits," Rifkin said.
Analysts said Sears gained from its decision to remodel some stores and expand its clothing offerings.
"Clearly they're gaining market share and clearly they're doing the right thing and the consumer likes what she sees when she goes into the store," said Karen Sack, analyst at the S&amp;P Equity Group.
Operating income from domestic operations rose 14.8 percent to $531 million in the quarter as revenue rose 11.6 percent to $10.92 billion. Comparable-store sales rose 5.4 percent for the quarter.
Operating income from domestic operations for all of 1996 rose 20.9 percent to $1.28 billion, while revenues increased 10.2 percent to $34.85 billion.
Gross margins as a percent of merchandise sales rose to 27.9 percent from 26.9 percent in the 1995 period.
Rifkin said margins were not likely to rise as much in 1997 as in the fourth quarter, but said cost-cutting should drive earnings growth this year.
He forecast earnings at $3.60 a share in 1997 and $4.25 a share in 1998, up from $3.12 a share in 1996.
International operations, including merchandising and credit operations in Canada and Mexico, earned $36 million in the quarter, compared with a loss of $7 million in the 1995 period.
The increase in earnings was largely attributable to improved performance at both Sears Canada and Sears Mexico, lower selling and administrative expenses at Sears Mexico, and writeoffs of Sears Canada properties in the year-ago quarter, it said.
Sears, based in Hoffman Estates, Ill., operates more than 800 department stores and 2,500 other stores offering clothing, home and automotive products and services.
While earnings rose in the quarter, they fell for the year, in part because 1995 included a gain of $776 million from the former Allstate Corp. subsidiary, which was spun off to Sears' shareholders in June 1995.
For all of 1996, Sears earned $1.27 billion, or $3.12 a share, in net profits, down from $1.80 billion, or $4.50 a share, in 1995. Sales grew 9 percent to $38.22 billion from $35.0 billion.
Wallace Computer Services Inc. said Thursday its directors will unanimously recommend that shareholders reject a bid by Wyser-Pratte &amp; Co. Inc. to gain control of the computer services company's board.
Wyser-Pratte, which holds 2.3 percent of Wallace's outstanding shares, has proposed three candidates as directors for the Lisle, Ill.-based company, as well as a special committee to explore ways to maximize shareholder value.
It seeks to remove Wallace's poison pill takeover defence, which requires an 80 percent vote to approve certain mergers.
Wyser-Pratte filed the proposals with the Securities and Exchange Commission after Moore Corp. Ltd., a huge Canadian business forms manufacturer, abandoned a 13-month campaign to acquire Wallace in a $1.3 billion deal in early August.
Wallace's board said in a letter to Wyser-Pratte that it will recommend that its shareholders vote against the proposals at their annual meeting on Nov. 6, as they are not in the best interests of them or the company.
Wallace said it was aware that Wyser-Pratte tried to contact the three Wallace directors who were nominated by former suitor Moore at last year's annual meeting.
"You should be under no illusion that you or your purported director nominees have three allies on the Wallace board. We want to emphasise that we are unanimous in opposing your actions," the letter said.
Guy Wyser-Pratte, president of Wyser-Pratte, responded that he would continue to push his proposals.
He said although Wallace had increased its dividend substantially and reported higher-than-expected earnings Wednesday, the stock was only up slightly. Wallace rose 12.5 cents to close at $27.375 on the New York Stock Exchange.
"They're not delivering value to shareholders," he said.
Wallace said its profits jumped to $19.2 million, or 42 cents a share, in the fourth quarter ended July 31, from $15.8 million, or 35 cents a share, in the year-ago period. Sales rose 8.2 percent to $214.5 million from $198.2 million.
Factoring in the company's stock split, the stock is trading at just over $54, compared with Moore's offer last year of $60, Wyser-Pratte said.
"It's been a year and nothing has happened with the stock," he said.
However, analysts said that strong business fundamentals and a presumed change in Wallace's shareholder profile should protect it from Wyser-Pratte's proposals.
Many arbitrageurs likely sold their Wallace stock after Moore abandoned its 13-month takeover campaign, resulting in more shareholders interested in long-term gains, analysts said.
Mercury Finance Co. said Wednesday it found problems in its bookkeeping that caused it to overstate earnings by $90 million over four years and that its chief accountant had apparently disappeared.
The Northbrook, Ill.-based finance company said the irregularities appear to have come from unauthorised entries in financial records by its chief accounting officer.
The company said a special committee of the board has been formed to investigate with legal and accounting experts.
The accountant, James Doyle, was last seen at the company on Jan. 23, the day it reported fourth quarter results, Mercury Finance spokesman Joseph Kopec said.
"He called Friday and said he would not be in for personal reasons," Kopec said. "They haven't seen him since."
Doyle's whereabouts were unknown.
The problems may jeopardise Mercury's planned acquisition of Fidelity Acceptance Corp., a consumer finance company, from BankBoston Corp. in a $393 million deal announced on Jan. 10.
Wednesday's announcement caught the financial community by surprise, with analysts unwilling to comment after Mercury's statement, saying they were still trying to gather information.
As a result of the adjustments, shareholders' equity as of Dec. 31, 1996, would be reduced from $353 million to $263 million, the company said.
As a result of the overstatement of earnings, Mercury said it is in violation of some of its debt agreements and was negotiating with lenders.
It said its financial condition remained strong and would support continuing operations and its expansion plans.
BankBoston said it would await the results of the accounting investigation before proceeding with the sale of Fidelity Acceptance. Mercury said it was optimistic about completing the deal.
Mercury said 1996 net income would be restated to $56.7 million from $120.7 million, 1995 profits would be cut to $76.9 million from $98.9 million and 1994 earnings would be $83 million instead of the $86.5 million originally reported.
In addition, 1993 profits would be trimmed to $64.2 million from $64.9 million.
Mercury stock was halted all day on the New York Stock Exchange. It closed Tuesday at $14.875.
Moody's Investors Service cut its rating on Mercury's short-term borrowings and Standard &amp; Poor's said it may lower its rating.
Mercury Finance suffered another blow last year, when Daniel Terra, chairman of the company since it went public in 1989, died in June.
Mercury Finance Co.'s agreement to buy a consumer finance business fell apart Thursday after the auto-loan company said phony bookkeeping entries had inflated its earnings and it had fired its chief accountant.
At the same time, the officer blamed for the overstated earnings may be cooperating with federal authorities.
BankBoston Corp. said it terminated its agreement to sell its Fidelity Acceptance Corp. unit to Mercury for 32.7 million shares of Mercury stock. When the deal was announced on Jan. 10, the stock was worth about $458 million.
Mercury Finance stock has not traded since it closed at $14.875 on the New York Stock Exchange on Tuesday. The NYSE would not indicate where the stock might open but traders said it was changing hands at $4.25 overseas. That would make the 32.7 million shares worth about $139 million.
"BankBoston today informed Mercury Finance Co. that recent events regarding Mercury Finance constituted a breach of the provisions of BankBoston's agreement for the exchange of shares of Fidelity Acceptance Corp. for shares of Mercury Finance," BankBoston said in a statement.
Analysts said BankBoston, a Boston-based banking company, would have little trouble finding another buyer for Fidelity, its auto financing arm.
"At the time they were structuring this deal there were four or five other firms that expressed interest or made bids on Fidelity," said Nancy Bush at Brown Brothers Harriman.
"I don't think they're going to get the kind of sweetheart deal they got with Mercury," she added.
A Mercury Finance spokesman declined to comment on the deal.
But the spokesman said the company was interested in talking to James Doyle, the controller who Mercury Finance said had disappeared but who is reportedly cooperating with federal authorities.
A Dow Jones news wire report quoted Doyle's attorney as saying Doyle had accused Mercury Finance of a charade and that the controller had not disappeared but was cooperating with the authorities.
The attorney was not available and his assistant would not confirm the accuracy of the Dow Jones report.
A spokesman for the U.S. attorney's office in Chicago declined to comment.
Mercury Finance said on Wednesday its 1996 earnings would be restated to $56.7 million from $120.7 million and that earnings for the three prior years would also be adjusted downward, though not as sharply.
The problems appeared to stem from unauthorised entries in financial records by its chief accounting officer, Doyle, who the company said had been fired.
Mercury Finance also said it was in violation of certain provisions if its loan agreements and that a special committee of directors has been formed to investigate the problems.
Mercury Finance said Thursday that the NYSE was seeking more information. Mercury spokesman Joseph Kopec said the exchange wanted "additional assurance that the numbers in the release Wednesday were reliable."
Kopec said he did not know if the Lake Forest, Ill.-based finance company would issue additional information.
Mercury Finance also got hit by at least three lawsuits charging it violated securities laws.
Filed in federal court in Chicago on Wednesday and Thursday, the lawsuits alleged the company and some senior officers misrepresented or omitted crucial information about Mercury Finance's earnings for the last three years, lawyers who filed the suits said in statements.
Also, Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. cut its debt rating on the company's commercial paper and said it may cut the rating further.
Mercury Finance Co. got hit by a lawsuit charging it violated securities laws after the auto-loan company said phony bookkeeping entries had inflated its earnings and that it fired its chief accountant.
The stock, which remained halted on the New York Stock Exchange, has not traded since it closed at $14.875 on Tuesday.
The exchange would not indicate where the stock might open but traders said it was changing hands at $4.25 overseas, which would mean a loss of more than $1.8 billion in market worth for the company, based in suburban Lake Forest, Ill.
One of the officers named in the lawsuit was James Doyle, the former controller who Mercury said has not been seen since last Thursday. In its statement on Wednesday, Mercury said it fired Doyle.
Filed in federal court in Chicago on Wednesday, the lawsuit alleges the company and some senior officers misrepresented or omitted crucial information about Mercury's earnings for the last three years, lawyers who filed the suit said in a statement.
The lawsuit also said Doyle had sold tens of thousands and Chairman John Brincat hundreds of thousands of shares of Mercury stock at inflated prices, netting millions of dollars in illegal profits.
Brincat was not available for comment. A company spokesman declined to comment. Attempts to locate Doyle were not successful.
The finance company said on Wednesday its 1996 earnings would be restated to $56.7 million from $120.7 million and that earnings for the three prior years would also adjusted downward, though not as sharply.
The problems appeared to stem from unauthorised entries in financial records by its chief accounting officer, Doyle, the company said.
It also said it was in violation of certain provisions if its loan agreements and that a special committee of directors has been formed to investigate the problems.
Analysts were hesitant to talk about Mercury, saying they did not have much information.
But they did say the company's planned acquisition of Fidelity Acceptance from BankBoston Corp. was unlikely to be completed. The deal, announced on Jan. 10, called for Mercury to issue about $458 million in stock to BankBoston. BankBoston said on Wednesday it was awaiting an audit of Mercury.
"I think the odds are very high that the deal will not go through," one analyst said, who asked not to be identified.
Analysts also said Mercury has not been as forthcoming as other consumer finance companies when providing detailed financial information.
Mercury helped pioneer the business of lending to consumers whose credit was less than perfect. It started making loans to people in the military and has grown into one of the country's largest lenders in the used-car market.
"They haven't been quite as open as any others in the industry have been," one analyst said.
Two brokerage firms cut ratings on Mercury Thursday.
Gruntal &amp; Co. said it suspended its rating, adding, "We recommend that holders exit positions as soon as possible."
Piper Jaffray cut its rating to market performer from buy and in a research report said, "Our guess is most of the over recognised income came from (Mercury's) insurance subsidiary."
Mercury Finance Co. said Wednesday it found problems in its bookkeeping that caused it to overstate earnings by $90 million over four years and that its chief accountant had apparently disappeared.
The Northbrook, Ill.-based finance company said the irregularities appear to have come from unauthorized entries in financial records by its chief accounting officer.
The company said a special committee of the board has been formed to investigate with legal and accounting experts.
The accountant, James Doyle, was last seen at the company on Jan. 23, the day it reported fourth quarter results, Mercury Finance spokesman Joseph Kopec said.
"He called Friday and said he would not be in for personal reasons," Kopec said. "They haven't seen him since."
Doyle's whereabouts were unknown.
The problems may jeopardize Mercury's planned acquisition of Fidelity Acceptance Corp., a consumer finance company, from BankBoston Corp. in a $393 million deal announced on Jan. 10.
Wednesday's announcement caught the financial community by surprise, with analysts unwilling to comment after Mercury's statement, saying they were still trying to gather information.
As a result of the adjustments, shareholders' equity as of Dec. 31, 1996, would be reduced from $353 million to $263 million, the company said.
As a result of the overstatement of earnings, Mercury said it is in violation of some of its debt agreements and was negotiating with lenders.
It said its financial condition remained strong and would support continuing operations and its expansion plans.
BankBoston said it would await the results of the accounting investigation before proceeding with the sale of Fidelity Acceptance. Mercury said it was optimistic about completing the deal.
Mercury said 1996 net income would be restated to $56.7 million from $120.7 million, 1995 profits would be cut to $76.9 million from $98.9 million and 1994 earnings would be $83 million instead of the $86.5 million originally reported.
In addition, 1993 profits would be trimmed to $64.2 million from $64.9 million.
Mercury stock was halted all day on the New York Stock Exchange. It closed Tuesday at $14.875.
Moody's Investors Service cut its rating on Mercury's short-term borrowings and Standard &amp; Poor's said it may lower its rating.
Mercury Finance suffered another blow last year, when Daniel Terra, chairman of the company since it went public in 1989, died in June.
Mercury Finance Co is likely to spend a tense weekend with its bankers trying to work out arrangments to solve its liquity crisis, the failure of which could force the company to file for bankrupcty protection, analysts and attorney's said.
The Lake Forest, Illinois-based auto finance company said Friday it could not raise new commercial paper to repay maturing debt and could not pay $17 million in commercial paper due Friday.
A finance company like Mercury makes money on the difference, or spread, between what it pays to borrow money and the higher rates it charges its customers. A finance company without a source of funds is like a retailer without a source of merchandise, analysts noted.
"If you can't fund, you're out of business," one equity analyst that follows the company said, requesting anonymity.
Some rating agencies, including Standard &amp; Poor's Corp, lowered Mercury's commercial paper to a default rating Friday.
"They're very close to some reorganization, bankruptcy filing, probably a voluntary reorganization," said Thomas Kmiotek, analyst at Duff &amp; Phelps Credit Rating Co.
He and other analysts noted the company has another $100 million in commercial paper due Thursday, February 6.
A Mercury  spokesman did not return repeated calls seeking comment on the company's financing Friday afternoon.
Aside from the company's current inability to sell debt, Mercury is also facing a host of shareholder lawsuits, filed after the company said it had to restate its net income over the past four years by a total of about $90 million because of accounting irregularities.
Lawsuits do not become a financial liability for the company unless there is a judgment in favor of the shareholders. However, the company's admission of misstatements makes it easier for the sharheolders to prove their case, leaving only the questions of who would have to pay how much, one securities lawyer said.
"Securities laws are very, very simple," said Ted Koenig, a partner with Chicago-based lawfirm Holleb &amp; Coff "If there is an ommission or misstatement of a material fact... there's liabiltiy."
Also, the company's market capitalization plunged by about $2.2 billion Friday, based on the 13 point fall of Mercury's shares and the 172 million shares the company said it had outstanding late last year. That reduces the equity cushion the company has available to show its creditors, Koenig said.
But analysts also said the company had about $1 billion in loans receivable on its books at the end of October, 1996 -- an asset to show creditors.
"No one has questioned the validity of the amount of receivables they have on their books or the quality of those receivables," Kmiotek said.
Also, Mercury has generally been well regarded in the sub-prime credit quality loan business, which could help it negotiate with its banks and continue as a going concern, said analysts and lawyers familiar with the company.
Mercury said in a statement it is in discussions with its lenders to satisfy working capital needs, but that it could not predict the outcome of those discussions.
((Chicago newsdesk 312 408 8787))
