Strong demand for light trucks and relatively few production headaches will boost the Big Three U.S. automakers' combined profits to nearly $2 billion for the third quarter, exceeding year-ago results by a healthy margin, analysts said Tuesday.
The quarter is traditionally the weakest of the year with summer vacations and model changeovers, but Chrysler Corp. and Ford Motor Co., are expected to post strong gains from minivan and truck output.
General Motors Corp.'s earnings were held back by a significant increase in incentives, analysts said.
In the third quarter of 1995, the three automakers earned $1.35 billion.
"It'll be a good quarter overall for the Big Three," said Dean Witter Reynolds Inc auto analyst Kenneth Blaschke. "The issue that remains is how long the strike in Canada against GM will last."
GM, the nation's largest automaker, on Oct. 15 is expected to report third quarter net income of about $850 million, or $1.02 a share, according to the First Call financial information service.
The results include an after-tax gain of $250 million, or 33 cents a share from the reversal of the automaker's decision to close its Wilmington, Del., plant and build a new Saturn model there at the end of the decade.
In the year-ago period, GM earned $642 million, or 42 cents a share. The third quarter 1995 results also included $246 million in earnings from Electronic Data Systems Corp., the computer services unit that the automaker spun off in June after 12 years of ownership.
Burnham Securities auto analyst David Healy said GM's worldwide car and truck production rose 11 percent in the third quarter over a year ago. But a heavier mix of less-expensive vehicles and a $230 increase in incentives per vehicle squeezed GM's profit margins, resulting in a small pretax loss in North America during the period.
On an operating basis, Ford's third quarter profits, are expected to increase 78 percent to $637 million, or 51 cents a share, from $357 million, or 28 cents, a year earlier, marking the biggest rebound of the Big Three. Ford results are scheduled for release on Oct. 16.
The strength at Detroit's No. 2 automaker largely rides on the fact that it is not paying the enormous product launch costs for the Taurus sedan and F-Series pickup truck that dragged down year-ago results.
Ford also is beginning to reap profits from the F-Series, and the Expedition full-size sport utility vehicle, which have brightened the automaker's future outlook.
"We think Ford's new products will enable it to gain an increased share going forward, and as a result Ford's earnings momentum should continue," Blaschke said.
Ford's profits would be even better had it not been for losses in Brazil and Argentina that the automaker warned analysts about in September.
Ford is scambling to put its Fiesta small car into production in Brazil following the breakup of the company's Autolatina joint venture with Volkswagen AG in 1995.
Chrysler's profits for the July-September period, scheduled for release Oct. 14, are expected to increase 41 percent to about $500 million, or 69 cents a share, from $354 million, or 48 cents, a year earlier.
No. 3 Chrysler also experienced launch problems in the year-ago period in its all-important minivan product lines.
This year, the company is churning out minivans and has raised its share of the U.S. vehicle market to record levels. The launch glitches have not returned, as the company's new Dodge Dakota compact pickup truck is proceeding ahead of schedule, analysts said.
"Chrysler has everthing going for it right now and it should be reflected in the earnings," said Bear Stearns &amp; Co. auto analyst Nicholas Lobocarro, who added that he would not be surprised if Chrysler's results exceeded Wall Street estimates.
General Motors Corp. may face mounting losses as the strike against its Canadian operations heads for a second week, but GM Chairman Jack Smith Wednesday vowed not give up his quest for competitiveness.
The last of 26,000 Canadian Auto Workers members are set to strike GM plants at midnight Wednesday, bringing the automaker closer to parts shortages and assembly plant shutdowns in the United States.
The strike will inevitably affect GM's U.S. plants, but they can "run for a while" before a shutdown, said G. Richard Wagoner, president of GM's North American Operations.
But Smith, who met with reporters at GM's Technical Center to receive a new J.D. Power and Associates award, said some of the union's demands on outsourcing -- the shifting of work to outside, often non-union companies -- are unacceptable.
"We've got certain things that will cripple the company if we don't get fixed right," Smith said. "There's a couple (items) on the table that we need to work our way through, otherwise we will not be competitive."
He said GM, the least efficient U.S. automaker, needs to sell certain parts plants, despite the CAW's objections, because their wage structures are too high for GM to compete effectively.
Smith also said GM was in a strong financial position to handle the strike, with $13 billion in cash, and a fully funded pension plan.
Adding to its wherewithal, GM also on Wednesday filed a shelf registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission that would allow it to sell up to $1.3 billion in debt securities.
Despite the labor strife, Smith credited both U.S. and Canadian workers for helping GM win J.D. Power's first-ever Chairman's Award, which recognizes its gains in quality and customer satisfaction.
Smith also said GM continued to have a "constructive dialogue" with the United Auto Workers hoped to reach a labor agreement coviering 215,000 U.S. hourly workers soon.
Although GM so far has been able to avoid major U.S. shutdowns from the Canadian strike, analysts said the first casualties may be the company's Cadillac luxury car plant in Hamtramck, Mich., which uses trim components made at a Windsor, Ontario, plant set to go on strike Wednesday.
GM's small and mid-size car plants in Lansing, Mich., Lordstown, Ohio, and Oklahoma City, Okla., also are in danger of shutdowns, because they use transmissions from another Windsor plant to be struck Wednesday.
The Oklahoma City plant is in the midst of launching two important new mid-size sedans, the 1997 Chevrolet Malibu and Oldsmobile Cutlass.
The cars, slightly smaller than the Ford Taurus and expected to be priced in the $15,000-$17,000 range, could help GM regain a sizeable piece of the mid-size car market, a segment it once dominated.
GM also is launching an all-new Pontiac Grand Prix sedan and a trio of new minivans that are viewed as the automaker's first serious challenge to Chrysler Corp.'s dominance of the segment.
Analysts said the Canadian strike, if it continues, will wreak havoc on the production and marketing launches of the products and hand market share gains to Chrysler, Ford Motor Co. and import manufacturers. The only new car to reach dealers in significant volume has been the Grand Prix.
"There was some very strong opportunity for them to gain share with some of the new vehicles," said Wesley Brown, an analyst with CSM Forecasting, an automotive consulting firm in Farmington Hills, Mich. "This will push back their launches."
Dean Witter auto analyst Kenneth Blaschke estimates that a three-week Canadian strike will cost GM about $700 million in profits. A 17-day strike at two Dayton, Ohio, parts plants in March reduced the automaker's first quarter profits by $900 million.
But Wall Street analysts maintain the costs, both in profits and lost market share, are worth it if GM can retain the right to shift parts work to outside suppliers and sell unprofitable plants.
With the strike against General Motors in Canada headed for a second week, the automaker's losses will start mounting as its U.S. plants are forced to shut down, delaying the launch of important new models, analysts said Wednesday.
The walkout by the Canadian Auto Workers union is set to spread to two key components plants in Windsor, Ontario, Wednesday at midnight, which could cause the first shutdowns of GM's U.S. assembly plants by early next week. Much of GM's core North American automotive business could be crippled in about two weeks if the strike is not resolved.
"Once you start shutting assembly plants, the other plants start shutting very quickly," said Wesley Brown, an analyst at CSM Forecasting, an automotive consulting firm in Farmington Hills, Mich.
The expected first casualties will be GM's Cadillac luxury car plant in Hamtramck, Mich., which uses trim components made in Windsor, and GM's small and mid-size car plants in Lansing, Mich., Lordstown, Ohio, and Oklahoma City, Okla., which use transmissions from Windsor.
The Oklahoma City plant is in the midst of launching two important new mid-size sedans, the 1997 Chevrolet Malibu and Oldsmobile Cutlass.
The cars, slightly smaller than the Ford Taurus and expected to be priced in the $15,000-$17,000 range, could help GM regain a sizeable piece of the mid-size car market, a segment it once dominated.
GM also is launching an all-new Pontiac Grand Prix sedan and a trio of new minivans that are viewed as the automaker's first serious challenge to Chrysler Corp.'s dominance of the segment.
Analysts said the Canadian strike, if it continues, will wreak havoc on the production and marketing launches of the products and hand market share gains to Chrysler, Ford Motor Co. and import manufacturers. The only new car to reach dealers in significant volume has been the Grand Prix.
"There was some very strong opportunity for them to gain share with some of the new vehicles," Brown said. "This will push back their launches."
Dean Witter auto analyst Kenneth Blaschke estimates that a three-week Canadian strike will cost GM about $700 million in profits. A 17-day strike at two Dayton, Ohio, parts plants in March reduced the automaker's first quarter profits by $900 million.
But Wall Street analysts maintain the costs, both in profits and lost market share, are worth it if GM can retain the right to shift parts work to outside suppliers and sell unprofitable plants.
Lehman Brothers analyst Joseph Phillippi said investors would be extremely disappointed if GM caves in to the Canadian Auto Workers' demands to restrict outsourcing.
"They've got to do whatever it takes to get competitive," he said. "They cannot be focused on short-term considerations of market share."
He also noted that with $13 billion in cash reserves, virtually no debt and a fully funded pension plan, GM is in a strong position to take a longer strike. "They aren't the financial cripple they were in 1993," he said.
James Harbour, an automotive manufacturing consultant based in Troy, Mich., said he believes GM is finally determined to retain control of its sourcing decisions.
"This is a battle for the right to run their company," Harbour said. "It's going to be a long cold winter."
Strong demand for light trucks and relatively few production headaches boosted the combined profits of the Big Three U.S. automakers to nearly $2 billion in the third quarter, exceeding year-ago results by a healthy margin, analysts said.
The third quarter is traditionally the industry's weakest, with summer vacations and model changeovers, but strong minivan and truck output helped buoy profits at Chrysler Corp and Ford Motor Co, they said.  
General Motors Corp operating earnings were held back by a significant increase in U.S. incentives, analysts said.
In the third quarter of 1995 the three automakers earned a combined total of $1.35 billion.
"It'll be a good quarter overall for the Big Three," said Dean Witter Reynolds Inc analyst Kenneth Blaschke. "The issue that remains is how long the strike in Canada against GM will last."
GM is expected to report third quarter net income of about $850 million, or $1.02 a share, according to First Call.  
The results will include an after-tax gain of $250 million, or $0.33 a share, from the reversal of GM's decision to close its Wilmington, Del., plant and build a new Saturn model there at the end of the decade.
In the year-ago third quarter GM earned $642 million, or $0.42 a share, including $246 million in earnings from Electronic Data Systems Corp, the computer services unit spun off by GM in June.
Burnham Securities analyst David Healy said GM's worldwide car and truck production rose 11 percent in the third quarter over a year ago.  
But a heavier mix of less-expensive vehicles and a $230 increase in incentives per vehicle squeezed GM profit margins, which likely resulted in a small pretax loss in North America during the period, he said.
GM is to report third quarter results on October 15.
On an operating basis, Ford's third quarter profits are expected to increase 78 percent, to $637 million, or $0.51 a share, from $357 million, or $0.28, a year earlier, marking the biggest rebound of the Big Three. Ford results are due October 16.  
The strength at Ford largely rides on the fact that it is not paying the enormous product launch costs for the Taurus sedan and F-Series pickup truck that dragged down year-ago results.
Ford also is beginning to reap profits from the F-Series and the Expedition full-size sport utility vehicle, which have brightened the automaker's outlook.
"We think Ford's new products will enable it to gain an increased share going forward, and as a result Ford's earnings momentum should continue," Blaschke said.  
Ford's profits would have been even better but for losses in Brazil and Argentina that the automaker warned about in September.
Ford is scambling to put its Fiesta small car into production in Brazil following the breakup of the company's Autolatina joint venture with Volkswagen AG in 1995.
Chrysler's third quarter profits, scheduled for release October 14, are expected to increase 41 percent, to about $500 million, or $0.69 a share, from $354 million, or $0.48, a year earlier.
Chrysler also experienced launch problems in the year-ago period in its all-important minivan product lines.
This year, it is churning out minivans and Dodge Ram pickup trucks and has raised its share of the U.S. vehicle market to record levels. The launch glitches have not returned, and the company's new Dodge Dakota compact pickup truck is proceeding ahead of schedule, analysts said.
"Chrysler has everthing going for it right now and it should be reflected in the earnings," said Bear Stearns &amp; Co analyst Nicholas Lobocarro.
He said he would not be surprised if the automaker's results exceeded Wall Street estimates.
Ford Motor Co. is in talks with the Detroit Lions on a multi-million dollar deal to purchase naming rights to the football team's proposed new stadium in downtown Detroit, Ford Chairman Alex Trotman said Thursday.
The deal, expected to be signed in the next few days, comes as little surprise, since the Lions are owned by Ford board members William Clay Ford and his son, William Clay Ford Jr.
Trotman, speaking to reporters following a Ford board of directors meeting at the automaker's Dearborn, Mich., headquarters, said reports that Ford would pay $30 million to $40 million for the rights "aren't far off" from the deal Ford is discussing with the National Football League team.
Trotman said the company wants to have exclusive rights with the Ford name prominently featured on the domed structure, but has not yet decided on a specific name.
"It would be big-time Ford something -- we don't know what -- either Ford Stadium or Ford Dome," Trotman said.
William Clay Ford Jr., who holds the Ford board's purse strings as chairman of its finance committee, abstained from board discussions of the project, as did his father. The new stadium project is largely viewed as the younger Ford's brainchild.
A contribution of $30 million to $40 million would help the $225 million domed stadium meet a major financing hurdle -- the Lions face a Nov. 1 deadline to gain committments for $50 million in corporate and private contributions.
The proposed 65,000-seat football stadium would be built near the end of the decade next to a new $240 million, open-air ballpark for the Detroit Tigers on the edge of downtown Detroit that would seat about 45,000 people.
The Lions would leave the Pontiac Silverdome in suburban Pontiac, Mich., where they have played for the past 21 years, but have pledged to honour terms of their current lease, which expires in 2004.
The 80,000-seat Silverdome, opened in 1975 at a city-financed cost of $50 million, would become the youngest major league sports facility in the United States to be replaced with a new venue.
The president of the Canadian Auto Workers held out little hope on Friday for a quick end to a 10-day-old strike against General Motors Corp and said his counterparts at the United Auto Workers are having similar problems reaching a labor pact with the automaker.
Basil "Buzz" Hargrove told reporters in a conference call that GM is trying to resist the U.S. pattern agreement set at Ford Motor Co and Chrysler Corp, which guarantee employment levels at 95 percent of the companies' current hourly workforces.  
The provision is aimed at curbing the automakers' ability to shift work to outside suppliers, known as outsourcing, which also is the major sticking point in the CAW talks.
"I'd be quite happy if Steve were to get a settlement," Hargrove said of UAW President Stephen Yokich. "He's having the same problem -- getting the pattern agreement with GM."
He said GM has "agreed to the principle of limiting the outsourcing" in the U.S.", but doesn't want to meet the 95 percent employment guarantee and wants to exclude parts plants it has on sale from the guarantee.  
Talks between the UAW and GM have been low key during the Canadian strike. Negotiators have met only during normal business hours and do not plan to meet over the weekend.
UAW spokesman Reg McGhee declined to characterize progress of the discussions, only to say bargainers were "down to the larger issues."
But Hargrove has not asked Yokich to delay a U.S. settlement with GM during the Canadian strike.
The CAW launched an escalating strike on October 3 and all the union's 26,000 GM workers were on the picket line by midnight on Wednesday.  
The UAW has about 215,000 U.S. hourly workers at GM and, so far, only about 2,000 have been idled at an engine plant and a transmission plant.
The strike may affect some of GM's U.S. plants next week, although the automaker canceled most overtime work this week.
Hargrove said he saw no progress in talks with the automaker.
"I don't want to kid anybody," he said. "It hasn't been very productive last few days, I do not believe it will be productive today."
Hargrove wanted the Canadian walkout to have as little effect on GM's U.S. production as possible so as to protect UAW workers and the profit-sharing checks they expect to receive this year. Prolonged shutdowns in the U.S. due to lack of Canadian-made parts could seriously hurt GM's profits and reduce profit sharing for employees.
Ford Motor Co. said Friday it will pay $40 million for the right to put its name on the future home for the National Football League's Detroit Lions, a new domed stadium to be built in downtown Detroit.
Ford, which has not yet chosen a formal name for the facility, will pay the fee over several years to Detroit's newly created stadium authority, which is developing the $225 million, 70,000-seat stadium for the Lions, other athletic and entertainment events and conventions.
The facility is expected to be built on the edge of downtown Detroit, adjacent to a new, $240 million, open air ballpark for the Detroit Tigers baseball team.
The deal follows a growing trend for major sports facilities to sell naming rights to corporations for millions of dollars.
"The value of having your company's name associated with a high-profile athletic facility is extraordinary," said Ford Chairman Alex Trotman.
The deal leaves stadium backers about $10 million short of their fund-raising goals for the project. They face a Nov. 1 deadline to secure land purchases and raise $50 million in private and corporate contributions.
"I believe we will able to meet those conditions before Nov. 1," Detroit Mayor Dennis Archer told a news conference.
Detroit area voters will be asked on Nov. 5 to approve new taxes on hotel rooms and car rentals to help finance the project through an $80 million bond issue.
William Clay Ford Jr., a member of Ford's board of directors who is an owner of the Lions, said both he and his father, William Clay Ford, did not participate in any board discussions on the deal.
"It was truly an arm's length deal," said the younger Ford, who is leading the stadium project.
Ford, 39, said the Lions and the stadium authority did not expect to get much of the remaining $10 million in funding from General Motors Corp. and Chrysler Corp. Instead, they will seek funds from other companies, including automotive parts suppliers.
Ford also said if the referrendum passes, the Lions will begin discussions with the city of Pontiac, Mich., for an early termination of the team's lease on the Pontiac Silverdome, which expires in 2004.
The Silverdome, opened in 1975, would be the youngest U.S. major league sports facility to be replaced with a new venue.
Second-shift workers at General Motors Corp. 's Cadillac assembly plant here will not report to work on Monday because of the Canadian Auto Workers strike and thousands more U.S. assembly employees may be laid off this week, GM said on Sunday.
The Cadillac plant on the outskirts of Detroit will operate with only one shift on Monday and Tuesday, when it is expected to halt production completely unless the strike is resolved, GM spokesman Thomas Klipstine said.
"Once they run out of parts, that's it," he said.
The plant employs more than 3,000 hourly workers represented by the United Auto Workers union, but Klipstine said he did not know the exact number of workers on each shift.
The sprawling factory, which builds Cadillac's DeVille, Seville and Eldorado luxury cars, depends on interior trim parts made at a strike-bound plant in Windsor, Ontario, just across the Detroit River.
GM's Canadian workers began an escalating strike on Oct. 3, shutting down all of the automaker's operations in Canada by late on Oct. 9.
The company and union have been unable to reach an agreement for a new national labour contract for GM's 26,000 CAW members because of disagreements over the thorny issue of shifting parts work to outside suppliers, known as outsourcing.
The union wants tough restrictions on outsourcing to protect its members' jobs, while GM, the least efficient automaker in North America, says it needs flexibility on parts purchases to become more competitive.
So far, GM's U.S. operations have been relatively untouched by the strike in Canada, largely because the CAW gave the automaker ample warning that it was preparing to strike. That, coupled with the slow escalation of the strike over a week-long period, allowed GM to build up stocks of some parts and prepare for the walkout.
"The bottom line is there was no surprise with this strike," Klipstine said. "We did as much as we could, but we don't have huge amounts of parts stockpiled."
Klipstine said he did not know how much longer GM could operate its U.S. plants.
Industry analysts have said some of GM's plants may be able to continue to operate until the end of the month, particularly those that build GM's popular full-size pickup trucks and sport-utility vehicles.
On Friday, Ford Motor Co. President Alex Trotman said he did not believe his company would be able to gain a significant amount of market share due to the strike, because there has been "little evidence" that GM's hottest-selling truck lines will be affected.
Most GM dealers have sufficient car inventories to weather the strike without turning away customers, he said.
Thus far, the CAW has been responsible for the idling of only 2,000 U.S. workers.
The walkout forced the layoff of 1,050 workers at an engine plant in Tonawanda, N.Y., near Buffalo, and 950 at a transmission plant in Ypsilanti, Mich., near Detroit.
By contrast, a UAW strike in March at two Dayton, Ohio, brake plants had forced more than 55,000 of GM's workers off the job just one week after that walkout began.
No formal talks were scheduled between GM and the CAW, although CAW President Buzz Hargrove was expected to be in contact with GM's chief negotiator, Dean Munger.
Canada celebrates its national Thanksgiving Day holiday on Monday.
Meanwhile, in the United States, negotiators working towards a contract for GM's 215,000 United Auto Workers members also took the weekend off.
The UAW talks have taken a low profile during the Canadian strike.
Second-shift workers at General Motors Corp. 's Cadillac assembly plant here will not report to work on Monday because of the Canadian Auto Workers strike and thousands more U.S. assembly employees may be laid off this week, GM said on Sunday.
The Cadillac plant on the outskirts of Detroit will operate with only one shift on Monday and Tuesday, when it is expected to halt production completely unless the strike is resolved, GM spokesman Thomas Klipstine said.
"Once they run out of parts, that's it," he said.
The plant employs more than 3,000 hourly workers represented by the United Auto Workers union, but Klipstine said he did not know the exact number of workers on each shift.
The sprawling factory, which builds Cadillac's DeVille, Seville and Eldorado luxury cars, depends on interior trim parts made at a strike-bound plant in Windsor, Ontario, just across the Detroit River.
GM's Canadian workers began an escalating strike on Oct. 3, shutting down all of the automaker's operations in Canada by late on Oct. 9.
The company and union have been unable to reach an agreement for a new national labor contract for GM's 26,000 CAW members because of disagreements over the thorny issue of shifting parts work to outside suppliers, known as outsourcing.
The union wants tough restrictions on outsourcing to protect its members' jobs, while GM, the least efficient automaker in North America, says it needs flexibility on parts purchases to become more competitive.
So far, GM's U.S. operations have been relatively untouched by the strike in Canada, largely because the CAW gave the automaker ample warning that it was preparing to strike. That, coupled with the slow escalation of the strike over a week-long period, allowed GM to build up stocks of some parts and prepare for the walkout.
"The bottom line is there was no surprise with this strike," Klipstine said. "We did as much as we could, but we don't have huge amounts of parts stockpiled."
Klipstine said he did not know how much longer GM could operate its U.S. plants.
Industry analysts have said some of GM's plants may be able to continue to operate until the end of the month, particularly those that build GM's popular full-size pickup trucks and sport-utility vehicles.
On Friday, Ford Motor Co. President Alex Trotman said he did not believe his company would be able to gain a significant amount of market share due to the strike, because there has been "little evidence" that GM's hottest-selling truck lines will be affected.
Most GM dealers have sufficient car inventories to weather the strike without turning away customers, he said.
Thus far, the CAW has been responsible for the idling of only 2,000 U.S. workers.
The walkout forced the layoff of 1,050 workers at an engine plant in Tonawanda, N.Y., near Buffalo, and 950 at a transmission plant in Ypsilanti, Mich., near Detroit.
By contrast, a UAW strike in March at two Dayton, Ohio, brake plants had forced more than 55,000 of GM's workers off the job just one week after that walkout began.
No formal talks were scheduled between GM and the CAW, although CAW President Buzz Hargrove was expected to be in contact with GM's chief negotiator, Dean Munger.
Canada celebrates its national Thanksgiving Day holiday on Monday.
Meanwhile, in the United States, negotiators working towards a contract for GM's 215,000 United Auto Workers members also took the weekend off.
The UAW talks have taken a low profile during the Canadian strike.
Chrysler Corp. said Monday it rode strong sales of its pickup trucks, minivans and sport/utility vehicles to a 92 percent jump in third-quarter profits, soundly beating Wall Street's optimistic forecasts.
Detroit's No. 3 automaker earned $680 million, or 93 cents a share, in the July-September period, setting records for both net income and earnings per share for the third quarter.
A year earlier, when Chrysler was struggling through the slow production launch of its current-generation minivans, the company earned just $354 million, or 45 cents a share.
"Chrysler's performance in the third quarter was outstanding," Chairman Robert Eaton said in a statement. "It was fuelled by record-setting demand for our products, which led to a new third-quarter U.S. retail unit sales record and produced the best model year for U.S. retail unit sales in the company's history."
The results included an after-tax charge of $55 million, or 7 cents a share, to cover costs of an early retirement programme. About 531 salaried employees opted to leave the company under the programme during the quarter.
Excluding the charge, Chrysler earned $735 million, or $1 a share, from operations, solidly exceeding Wall Street estimates. According to First Call, which tracks earnings estimates, analysts had expected Chrysler to earn about $520 million, or 71 cents a share.
Chrysler shares jumped $1 to $32.75 after touching $33 on the New York Stock Exchange.
"I think it was all in the sales mix," Burnham Securities analyst David Healy said of Chrysler's strong performance. "They've raised prices and the mix has shifted to trucks. They're selling not so many Neons and a lot more Jeep Grand Cherokees and Town &amp; Country minivans."
Indeed, light trucks -- which typically carry higher profit margins than passenger cars -- made up 66 percent of Chrysler's sales mix, versus 62 percent in the 1995 quarter. The automaker had full availability of its new minivans, and a St. Louis plant that had just started building Dodge Ram pickup trucks in August 1995 is now churning the vehicles out.
Chrysler earned a profit of $982 on each vehicle in the quarter, almost double the $492 earned per vehicle a year earlier. Incentive spending fell to $685 per vehicle from $870 a year ago, but was up from $625 in the second quarter.
Chrysler Chief Financial Officer Gary Valade said he expected similar conditions in the fourth quarter, and added that Chrysler next year plans another big increase in truck-building capacity.
He told reporters on a conference call that the automaker will be able to build 190,000 more trucks in 1997 than in 1996, including the launch of a new Dodge sport/utility vehicle at Chrysler's Newark, Del., plant.
The four-door vehicle is expected to be based on the new Dodge Dakota pickup truck that Chrysler is launching and will give Dodge dealers their first sport/utility vehicle since the two-door Ram Charger was discontinued in 1993.
Valade said Chrysler will end the year with about 16.2 percent of the North American car and light truck market, but cautioned the company will be prudent when adding capacity.
"We don't feel ourselves share constrained at this 16 percent share level, but neither are we hell-bent to get to 20 (percent) at any cost," he said.
Sales climbed to $14.4 billion, a third-quarter record and up 20 percent from $12.0 billion in the 1995 quarter.
The automaker said it shipped 650,529 cars and trucks, up from 581,853 in the year-ago period, boosting its share of the combined U.S. and Canadian retail car and truck market to 15.5 percent from 13.6 percent in the third quarter of 1995.
In the international market, Chrysler's retail sales were 57,209 vehicles, up 19 percent over the 48,207 vehicles it sold in the third quarter of 1995.
In Europe, Chrysler vehicle sales rose 28 percent.
The automaker said it bought back $452 million of its common stock in the quarter, bringing the total for 1996 to $1.6 billion, out of a $2 billion programme. The company bought back $1 billion worth of stock in 1995 and under its five-year peace accord with billionaire investor Kirk Kerkorian, has pledged to buy back another $1 billion in 1997.
For the nine months, earnings were $2.72 billion, or $3.65 a share, nearly triple the $985 million, or $1.28 a share, in the first nine months of 1995.
Chrysler Corp., planning for a future without fear of financial crisis, said Tuesday it can boost its annual production capacity past 4 million vehicles and grab 20 percent of the U.S. car and truck market.
Chrysler's top executives, in a series of briefings Tuesday, said the automaker was poised to boost its financial performance further through cost cuts, engineering innovations, new products and other initiatives.
Chrysler Chairman Robert Eaton said the automaker has not made market share a goal, but said an 18 percent to 20 percent share of the U.S. car and truck market "is not unrealistic" for Chrysler.
Detroit's third-largest automaker held 16.2 percent of the market during the first nine months of 1996 -- roughly its highest share ever.
After working to rebuild Chrysler's product line, operations and balance sheet after financial crises in 1980 and 1991, the automaker's management team is now focusing on long-term growth.
"For the first time in its history, this company doesn't have to spend every waking moment looking over its shoulder and worrying about its future," said Chrysler President Bob Lutz. "We've moved beyond saying 'never again' to 'Why not?'"
Indeed, Eaton said he now believes that Chrysler can withstand a 10 percent to 20 percent drop in production and remain profitable -- something that was impossible five years ago.
With a string of hit products, especially Jeeps and minivans, under its belt, the automaker is planning to boost capacity to 3.765 million vehicles by the year 2000 from 3.2 million this year.
Included in those figures are a new Dodge sport utility vehicle that will go on sale in the fall of 1997. Industry analysts have said the vehicle will be called the Dodge Durango and will be based on the new Dakota compact pickup truck.
The automaker could build up to 4.2 million vehicles annually in its current assembly plants if it adds third production shifts, said manufacturing Executive Vice President Dennis Pawley.
That does not include the possible replacement of Chrysler's Toledo, Ohio, assembly plant.
Eaton confirmed that the automaker was working with state and local officials to study replacement options for the 86-year-old facility, but has made no firm plans.
Much of Chrysler's increased capacity will be aimed at overseas markets. The executive vice president of international operations, Thomas Gale, said Chrysler expected to double its international vehicle sales to 500,000 vehicles over the next three years from 250,000 this year.
Gale said he believed Chrysler can ultimately sell more than 1 million vehicles overseas but did not offer a timetable.
He showed off a prototype of a proposed ultra-low-cost car for emerging markets such as China, which features an all-plastic body and a two-cylinder, 0.8-litre engine made by Briggs &amp; Stratton Corp.
The bare-bones car, which would not meet U.S. emissions and safety regulations, resembles France's discontinued but much-loved Citroen 2CV and could sell for $5,000 to $6,000.
Eaton, who Monday announced surprisingly strong third-quarter earnings of $680 million, up from $365 million a year ago, outlined several financial goals for the automaker, without giving a timetable. They include:
-- Boosting production by 6 percent a year.
-- Cutting research and development spending to 2.5 percent of revenues from 2.7 percent. Ford Motor Co.'s spending rate is 5.9 percent of revenues, General Motors Corp. is at 5.5 percent and Toyota Motor Corp. is at 5.0 percent, Chrysler said.
-- Cutting marketing costs to 6.3 percent of sales from 6.5 percent currently.
-- Boosting return on sales to 8.0 percent from 6.5 percent for the first nine months of 1996 and 3.7 percent for the same period of 1995.
Lear Corp., furthering its quest to supply complete car interiors, said Friday it agreed to buy the instrument panel and trim parts unit of Denmark-based Borealis Holding AB.
Lear said it signed a memorandum of understanding to acquire Borealis Industrier AB for undisclosed terms.
Based in Gothenburg, Sweden, Borealis Industrier manufacturers instrument panels, door panels, climate systems, exterior trim and various other components for the European car and truck industry.
Borealis Industrier had 1995 sales of about $230 million and owns five plants in Sweden that employ about 1,800 people.
Primary customers for the business include Swedish carmakers AB Volvo and Saab Automobile AB and truckmaker Scania AB.
Borealis Holding is owned by Finnish state-controlled oil and energy group Neste Oy  and Norwegian state-owned oil group Statoil AS.
Completion of the transaction is subject to approval by the Swedish competition authority and other conditions.
Lear said the acquisition supports its strategy of having in-house capability to provide total automotive interior systems, including instrument panels.
"Not only does this acquisition strengthen relations with our European customers, but it positions Lear as the only independent automotive supplier in the world with in-house capabilities in all five interior systems -- broadening the appeal of our already strong one-stop-shopping competitive advantage," Lear Chairman Kenneth Way said in a statement.
The deal is the latest of a series of consolidation moves in the automotive interior market. Lear earlier this year purchased carpet and floor-mat maker Masland Corp. for $384 million, and last year bought door panel and console maker Automotive Industries Inc for $626 million.
Lear's U.S. operations include the manufacturing of a wide range of automotive interior components.
The company's stock was unchanged Friday at $38 a share on the New York Stock Exchange.
Lear's competitors are also pursuing the same acquisition strategy.
Johnson Controls Inc., which has a strong seating business, recently acquired interior parts maker Prince Automotive, based in Holland Mich., for $1.35 billion in cash.
Canada's Magna International Inc., one of the "Big Three" automotive interior firms along with Lear and Johnson Controls, recently acquired seat maker Douglas &amp; Lomason Co. for $135 million.
Ford Motor Co., which reported a $472 million loss in Europe this week, faces a long and difficult job to cut costs and jump-start its product line to deal with a sluggish European market and tough competition, analysts said Friday.
Ford executives this week disclosed that they plan a broad effort to cut costs in Europe, including product costs, material costs, and personnel and plant costs.
"We need to restructure and we need to reduce our costs," Ford Vice President of Finance David McCammon told reporters.
The cuts will include an early retirement programme that is expected to eliminate more than 2,000 jobs in Europe, he said.
The initiatives, to be announced within the next three months, follow Ford's actions in 1993 to eliminate about 13,000 jobs from its Euoprean operations.
Ford's $472 million European loss compared with a $320 million deficit a year ago, and was due partly to product launch costs.
But analysts said there are no quick fixes to Ford's problems in Europe, which include high costs for its smaller cars and the lack of a competitive, high-volume large car.
"I don't think it's something that's corrected in one or two quarters," said PaineWebber analyst Michael Ward. "We probably have another year or two where the news from Ford's European operations is not very good."
The automaker's production and parts suppliers are heavily concentrated in Germany, where costs are high and the company is more susceptible to fluctuations in currency exchange rates. General Motors Corp.'s assembly operations and suppliers are spread more evenly throughout Europe, giving the automaker a competitive advantage.
Although the third quarter is typically the weakest period of the year because of vacations and model changeovers, GM's European operations earned $75 million during the third quarter, compared with a year-ago loss of $98 million -- a performance analysts attribute to extremely low investment costs and strong product acceptance.
Shifting Ford's supplier base is a long-term task, as is cutting investment costs in new products. The first new cars developed under Ford's more efficient "Ford 2000" structure are not expected to be on the market for at least two more years, analysts said.
The new Ford Ka minicar, developed for $250 million using off-the-shelf components, is a step in the right direction, but is expected to bring only razor thin profit margins, due to its low price, analysts said.
Unlike in the United States, Ford in Europe cannot count on highly profitable light trucks and sport utility vehicles to make most of its money. It must rely on mostly small cars, including the Fiesta, Escort and the mid-size Mondeo.
Ford's Scorpio large car, which was widely panned two years ago when it was last redesigned, has performed poorly against the likes of Bayerische Motoren Werke AG's 5-Series, GM's Opel Omega and the Mercedes-Benz E-Class.
"They have no money spinner in Europe," said Lehman Brothers auto analyst Joseph Phillippi.
Ford's Mondeo, a strong seller, is still handicapped by its initial $6 billion development cost, which also included the Ford Contour and Mercury Mystique in the United States.
Although the Mondeo received exterior and interior changes for the 1997 model year, competition in that segment of the market is much tougher than it was when the car first debuted in 1993.
Opel's new Vectra, Audi AG's A4 and Volkswagen AG's new Passat are expected to draw many buyers away from the Mondeo.
Making matters worse is the sluggish market. Analysts estimate that automakers have enough capacity to build 16 million cars in Europe, but sales this year will be only about 12.5 million, forcing deep price cuts.
"What's happening is there's an overcapacity situation in Europe," Ford's McCammon said. "Everybody's fighting it out for market share and spending a lot of money for marketing incentives."
He said all European automakers, except for GM, have been struggling through the same problems. A decade ago, it was GM that was struggling in Europe and Ford was the top performer.
"I guess things switched," McCammon said. "We had a great position of leadership and we're unhappy that we don't have that any more."
Lear Corp., furthering its quest to supply complete car interiors, said Friday it agreed to buy the instrument panel and trim parts unit of Denmark-based Borealis Holding AB.
Lear said it signed a memorandum of understanding to acquire Borealis Industrier AB for undisclosed terms.
Based in Gothenburg, Sweden, Borealis Industrier manufacturers instrument panels, door panels, climate systems, exterior trim and various other components for the European car and truck industry.
Borealis Industrier had 1995 sales of about $230 million and owns five plants in Sweden that employ about 1,800 people.
Primary customers for the business include Swedish carmakers AB Volvo and Saab Automobile AB and truckmaker Scania AB.
Borealis Holding is owned by Finnish state-controlled oil and energy group Neste Oy and Norwegian state-owned oil group Statoil AS.
Completion of the transaction is subject to approval by the Swedish competition authority and other conditions.
Lear said the acquisition supports its strategy of having in-house capability to provide total automotive interior systems, including instrument panels.
"Not only does this acquisition strengthen relations with our European customers, but it positions Lear as the only independent automotive supplier in the world with in-house capabilities in all five interior systems -- broadening the appeal of our already strong one-stop-shopping competitive advantage," Lear Chairman Kenneth Way said in a statement.
The deal is the latest of a series of consolidation moves in the automotive interior market. Lear earlier this year purchased carpet and floor-mat maker Masland Corp. for $384 million, and last year bought door panel and console maker Automotive Industries Inc for $626 million.
Lear's U.S. operations include the manufacturing of a wide range of automotive interior components.
The company's stock was unchanged Friday at $38 a share on the New York Stock Exchange.
Lear's competitors are also pursuing the same acquisition strategy.
Johnson Controls Inc., which has a strong seating business, recently acquired interior parts maker Prince Automotive, based in Holland Mich., for $1.35 billion in cash.
Canada's Magna International Inc., one of the "Big Three" automotive interior firms along with Lear and Johnson Controls, recently acquired seat maker Douglas &amp; Lomason Co. for $135 million.
The United Auto Workers union is discussing the possibility of an extended five- or six-year contract with the nation's largest automakers, UAW and company officials said Monday.
The union is open to the idea of a contract longer than the typical three-year pact if it offers significant job security guarantees, officials said.
"It has surfaced in the subcommittees," said Carl Dowell, president of UAW Local 862 in Louisville, Ky. "There was no problem with a longer-term agreement if it's fruitful for our people. Job security is the key."
Contract talks with General Motors Corp., Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. resumed Monday after meetings late last week between UAW President Stephen Yokich and the automakers' chairmen.
The UAW has not yet chosen which company it will negotiate a pattern agreement with. Yokich said last week that he delayed the union's traditional choice of a "strike target" to allow the negotiating progress to continue at all three companies.
A UAW spokesman said no decision on a target company is expected this week.
Traditionally, the target is threatened with a national strike on the contract expiration date if no agreement is reached by then. The current pact, covering about 400,000 U.S. hourly workers at the three automakers, expires September 14.
Ford spokesman Jon Harmon said the automaker suggested to the UAW about three weeks ago that both sides should examine possibly negotiating a longer-term contract.
He said a longer agreement would stabilise Ford's future costs, allowing it to evaluate future product and investment decisions more accurately. "It gives you more of a known quantity," he said.
Yokich has said he would be open to a longer contract if the automakers "want to buy it."
However, many UAW officials remain sceptical about a longer-term pact and say that removal of a strike threat every three years could invite abuses by the automakers.
"The question is how can GM live up to a five-year agreement when they can't live up to a three-year agreement?" said Ed McNulty, president of UAW Local 14 at GM's Toledo, Ohio, truck transmission plant.
Such an agreement would have to provide a mechanism for enforcement of the contract and for revisions to resolve local issues over sourcing and staffing levels that are sure to arise over the life of the contract, he said.
GM has been hit by several strikes at individual plants over the current three-year contract over sourcing and jobs.
"You're going to have to have some good job security and outsourcing provisions for the membership to go for it," McNulty said.
With a contentious, 20-day strike by the Canadian Auto Workers now behind it, General Motors Corp. could reach a U.S. labor agreement with the United Auto Workers in a matter of days, union officials said Wednesday.
The UAW talks, which affect some 215,000 hourly workers, were moving quickly when the strike in Canada started on October 2 and stole the spotlight.  
"I think without question they would have settled by now, but the UAW did not want to undermine the Canadian union's negotiating stance," said Harley Shaiken, a professor of labor relations at the University of California-Berkeley. "The (UAW) negotiations will move very quickly."
UAW president Stephen Yokich remains directly involved in the talks, and major unresolved issues are much the same as those that sparked the walkout in Canada: the shifting of work to outside suppliers, the sale of several parts plants and the UAW's demands for job guarantees for 95 percent of GM's workers.  
Sources close to the talks said they believe GM will agree to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of its workforce -- nominally the same terms that rivals Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. agreed to -- but that level may exclude certain plants and may contain other exceptions.
In addition to the two parts plants GM won the right to sell in Canada are two U.S. parts plants on the sale block.
The automaker wants to sell a door hardware plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., which together employ 2,100 UAW members.  
UAW officials have identified the buyer for all four of the U.S. and Canadian plants as Joseph, Littlejohn and Levy, a New York-based investment firm that owns other auto parts companies.
But GM also wants to sell other components factories. Its Delphi Automotive Systems division has about 12 plants that it considers "troubled."
And the automaker in August disclosed that was evaluating restructuring plans for parts plants other than the four now on the sale block.  
A GM spokesman declined to discuss the talks, other than to say that GM and UAW negotiators were meeting Wednesday, as they have each weekday during the Canadian strike.
"We reamin hopeful we can get this resolved as soon as possible," UAW spokesman Reg McGhee said Wednesday.
Shaiken said he believes that the GM-UAW agreement will largely continue the tradition of pattern bargaining for each of Detroit's Big Three automakers. Many analysts and even Yokich had downplayed the importance of maintaining a strict pattern for all three companies.
"What we're seeing is the continuation of pattern bargaining, and nonetheless, GM will be able to compete effectively under the agreement," Shaiken said.
Adding to the controversy over the safety of automobile air bags, the federal government's auto safety agency said Thursday it was stepping up an investigation into spontaneous air bag deployments in several General Motors Corp. cars.
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said it has received five reports of air bags deploying without a collision in 1996-model GM mid-size sedans, due to corrosion in the air bag sensing and diagnostic module. In each case, water was spilled or leaked onto the floor of the vehicle.
The probe involves 395,994 cars currently on the road, including the 1996 Chevrolet Lumina and Monte Carlo, Buick Regal, Pontiac Grand Prix and Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme.
In its monthly defect investigation report, NHTSA said three of the "inappropriate deployments" resulted in injuries, but none resulted in death. Four of the five cars were travelling between 10 and 40 mph when the bags inflated.
News of the probe comes as the NHTSA is fielding growing numbers of calls from consumers worried about reports of child deaths caused by air bags.
Air bags have saved the lives of more than 1,136 adults since 1986, said NHTSA spokeswoman Liz Neblett. But with inflation speeds of up to 200 mph, they also have killed 28 children since 1990.
Earlier this week, NHTSA Executive Director Ricardo Martinez said the the agency advised that all children under the age of 12 should ride in the back seats of cars and trucks equipped with dual front air bags.
The agency raised that age after 5-year-old Frances Ambrose was killed by an air bag in a Nashville, Tenn., crash despite properly wearing lap and shoulder belts.
The NHTSA is now considering several remedies to the situation, including an auto industry request to reduce the inflation pressure of passenger air bags.
Other alternatives include requiring "smart" air bag systems that have the ability to detect the size and weight of the occupant and adjust inflation accordingly.
In the probe of the GM cars, NHTSA said all of the vehicles use an air bag sensing and diagnostic module that is located underneath the front passenger seat on top of the carpeting. It is not sealed, making it susceptible to moisture intrusion.
NHTSA said owners of the vehicles reported that they:
-- Spilled a glass of water on the vehicle floor.
-- Drove through a car wash.
-- Spilled a bucket of water on the vehicle floor.
-- Spilled soapy water on the vehicle floor.
-- Discovered a trunk leak in the vehicle.
In addition, the agency said it was investigating two other instances of unexplained air bag deployment, one when a driver was backing out of a driveway and another when the car was driving at 20 mph.
A GM spokesman said the automaker was cooperating with the probe.
The company also uses the same air bag sensor on 1994 and 1995 model versions of the same cars, but reported only two instances of airbag deployments due to corrosion.
In one case, GM said the vehicle was apparently flooded by an ocean tide, and in another case, the entire rear end of the vehicle was severely corroded.
The investigation was upgraded to an engineering analysis, in which the agency will examine and physically test the components in question.
Boosting the pressure on General Motors Corp. for a new labor agreement, the United Auto Workers union Friday set a Sunday night deadline for a strike against the world's largest automaker.
UAW President Stephen Yokich said in a statment that union negotiators were not optimistic that a new contract deal could be reached by the deadline of 11:59 p.m. EST Sunday (0459 GMT Monday).
While he did not say if the union's 215,000 GM hourly workers would actually strike, Yokich said the UAW had notified GM that it will terminate its extended 1993 contract with the automaker if the deadline passes with no agreement. The union typically does not work without a contract.
"UAW members have been advised to continue to work unless notified by their local union," Yokich said.
"The UAW bargaining team will continue to make serious efforts to achieve a new agreement. While we are not optimistic, we remain hopeful that this can be accomplished prior to the expiration of the current contract at 11:59 p.m. on Sunday," he added.
The move comes just three days after GM settled a contentious, 20-day strike with the Canadian Auto Workers union that caused parts shortages that are still forcing the auto giant to shut down some U.S. assembly plants.
Although the UAW talks had been moving quickly before the strike in Canada, people close to the negotiations said the two sides remain at odds over the union's demand for employment guarantees and GM's desire for flexibility to shift more parts work to outside, usually non-union suppliers.
Both Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have agreed to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of their current work forces over the next three years. GM has resisted the pattern, saying it wants to exclude certain components plants from the employment guarantees.
A GM spokesman said full-scale UAW negotiations at GM's Detroit headquarters will continue throughout the weekend for the first time since the strike in Canada began on Oct. 2.
In a statement, GM chief negotiator Gerald Knechtel said, "We remain committed to entering into agreement that balances the needs of our employees and the UAW with the flexibility GM needs to continue to improve our competitiveness."
"We've had open and constructive dialogue with the UAW since the talks began and we're hopeful we can focus with the UAW on concluding these negotiations as soon as possible."
Meanwhile, GM continued to run out of Canadian-made parts at U.S. assembly plants. In Flint, Mich., local UAW officials said GM told more than 6,600 workers not to report to work at the automaker's massive Buick City complex on Monday.
The facility makes Buick LeSabre, Oldsmobile 88 and Pontiac Bonneville sedans, as well as V-6 engines and other components.
Buick City is the largest of several facilities to cut back production due to shortages of parts following the end of the Canadian Auto Workers' strike this week.
On Thursday, GM laid off about 5,000 workers at its Lordstown, Ohio, assembly plant in a shutdown that will last two weeks. The plant builds the popular Chevrolet Cavalier and Pontiac Sunfire small cars.
Also on Friday, GM notified some of the 2,926 workers at the nearby Lordstown metal stamping plant they would be idled next week. Another 474 workers at a components plant in Vandalia, Ohio, will be idled next week, GM said.
Excluding the layoffs that will start next week, GM said it had a total of 23,340 workers idled in the United States and Mexico on Friday.
GM's 26,000 Canadian Auto Workers members began returning to work on Wednesday after they ratified a new contract that puts some limits GM's ability to shift work to outside suppliers but allows the automaker to sell two contested parts plants.
Boosting the pressure on General Motors Corp. for a new labour agreement, the United Auto Workers union Friday set a Sunday night deadline for a strike against the world's largest automaker.
UAW President Stephen Yokich said in a statment that union negotiators were not optimistic that a new contract deal could be reached by the deadline of 11:59 p.m. EST Sunday (0459 GMT Monday).
While he did not say if the union's 215,000 GM hourly workers would actually strike, Yokich said the UAW had notified GM that it will terminate its extended 1993 contract with the automaker if the deadline passes with no agreement. The union typically does not work without a contract.
"UAW members have been advised to continue to work unless notified by their local union," Yokich said.
"The UAW bargaining team will continue to make serious efforts to achieve a new agreement. While we are not optimistic, we remain hopeful that this can be accomplished prior to the expiration of the current contract at 11:59 p.m. on Sunday," he added.
The move comes just three days after GM settled a contentious, 20-day strike with the Canadian Auto Workers union that caused parts shortages that are still forcing the auto giant to shut down some U.S. assembly plants.
Although the UAW talks had been moving quickly before the strike in Canada, people close to the negotiations said the two sides remain at odds over the union's demand for employment guarantees and GM's desire for flexibility to shift more parts work to outside, usually non-union suppliers.
Both Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have agreed to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of their current work forces over the next three years. GM has resisted the pattern, saying it wants to exclude certain components plants from the employment guarantees.
A GM spokesman said full-scale UAW negotiations at GM's Detroit headquarters will continue throughout the weekend for the first time since the strike in Canada began on Oct. 2.
In a statement, GM chief negotiator Gerald Knechtel said, "We remain committed to entering into agreement that balances the needs of our employees and the UAW with the flexibility GM needs to continue to improve our competitiveness."
"We've had open and constructive dialogue with the UAW since the talks began and we're hopeful we can focus with the UAW on concluding these negotiations as soon as possible."
Meanwhile, GM continued to run out of Canadian-made parts at U.S. assembly plants. In Flint, Mich., local UAW officials said GM told more than 6,600 workers not to report to work at the automaker's massive Buick City complex on Monday.
The facility makes Buick LeSabre, Oldsmobile 88 and Pontiac Bonneville sedans, as well as V-6 engines and other components.
Buick City is the largest of several facilities to cut back production due to shortages of parts following the end of the Canadian Auto Workers' strike this week.
On Thursday, GM laid off about 5,000 workers at its Lordstown, Ohio, assembly plant in a shutdown that will last two weeks. The plant builds the popular Chevrolet Cavalier and Pontiac Sunfire small cars.
Also on Friday, GM notified some of the 2,926 workers at the nearby Lordstown metal stamping plant they would be idled next week. Another 474 workers at a components plant in Vandalia, Ohio, will be idled next week, GM said.
Excluding the layoffs that will start next week, GM said it had a total of 23,340 workers idled in the United States and Mexico on Friday.
GM's 26,000 Canadian Auto Workers members began returning to work on Wednesday after they ratified a new contract that puts some limits GM's ability to shift work to outside suppliers but allows the automaker to sell two contested parts plants.
Adding to the controversy over the safety of automobile air bags, the federal government's auto safety agency said Thursday it was stepping up an investigation into spontaneous air bag deployments in several General Motors Corp. cars.
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said it has received five reports of air bags deploying without a collision in 1996-model GM mid-size sedans, due to corrosion in the air bag sensing and diagnostic module. In each case, water was spilled or leaked onto the floor of the vehicle.
The probe involves 395,994 cars currently on the road, including the 1996 Chevrolet Lumina and Monte Carlo, Buick Regal, Pontiac Grand Prix and Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme.
In its monthly defect investigation report, NHTSA said three of the "inappropriate deployments" resulted in injuries, but none resulted in death. Four of the five cars were traveling between 10 and 40 mph when the bags inflated.
News of the probe comes as the NHTSA is fielding growing numbers of calls from consumers worried about reports of  child deaths caused by air bags.
Air bags have saved the lives of more than 1,136 adults since 1986, said NHTSA spokeswoman Liz Neblett. But with inflation speeds of up to 200 mph, they also have killed 28 children since 1990.
Earlier this week, NHTSA Executive Director Ricardo Martinez said the the agency advised that all children under the age of 12 should ride in the back seats of cars and trucks equipped with dual front air bags.
The agency raised that age after 5-year-old Frances Ambrose was killed by an air bag in a Nashville, Tenn., crash despite properly wearing lap and shoulder belts.
The NHTSA is now considering several remedies to the situation, including an auto industry request to reduce the inflation pressure of passenger air bags.
Other alternatives include requiring "smart" air bag systems that have the ability to detect the size and weight of the occupant and adjust inflation accordingly.
In the probe of the GM cars, NHTSA said all of the vehicles use an air bag sensing and diagnostic module that is located underneath the front passenger seat on top of the carpeting. It is not sealed, making it susceptible to moisture intrusion.
NHTSA said owners of the vehicles reported that they:
-- Spilled a glass of water on the vehicle floor.
-- Drove through a car wash.
-- Spilled a bucket of water on the vehicle floor.
-- Spilled soapy water on the vehicle floor.
-- Discovered a trunk leak in the vehicle.
In addition, the agency said it was investigating two other instances of unexplained air bag deployment, one when a driver was backing out of a driveway and another when the car was driving at 20 mph.
A GM spokesman said the automaker was cooperating with the probe.
The company also uses the same air bag sensor on 1994 and 1995 model versions of the same cars, but reported only two instances of airbag deployments due to corrosion.
In one case, GM said the vehicle was apparently flooded by an ocean tide, and in another case, the entire rear end of the vehicle was severely corroded.
The investigation was upgraded to an engineering analysis, in which the agency will examine and physically test the components in question.
Negotiators for General Motors Corp. and the United Auto Workers union were back at the bargaining table on Saturday in an effort to reach a new national labor agreement before a Sunday night strike deadline.
Bargainers, led by UAW President Stephen Yokich, reconvened about 8 a.m. (noon GMT) at GM's Detroit headquarters following a night off after the union's decision late on Friday to cancel its contract with the automaker at 11:59 p.m. EST Sunday (0459 GMT Monday).
The deadline marks the first time the UAW threatened a strike in its 1996 negotiations with Detroit's Big Three automakers, which up to now have been marked by an unusually conciliatory tone and extremely secretive discussions.
It also came days after GM's 26,000 Canadian Auto Workers members began returning to work on Wednesday following a three-week strike against the automaker's Canadian operations.
In the U.S. talks the two sides were at odds over the same issues that caused the walkout in Canada -- the union's demand for job security and GM's desire to sell several parts plants and maintain flexibility to shift components work to outside suppliers, a practice known as outsourcing.
In the U.S. negotiations GM wanted to modify the UAW contract pattern set by Ford   Motor Co. and Chrysler
Corp., which agreed to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of their UAW  workforces over the next three years.
GM, the least efficient U.S. automaker, wanted to exclude certain components plants from the employment guarantees, including a door-hardware plant in Flint, Michigan, and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Michigan.
Ford and Chrysler buy more of their parts from outside suppliers than GM does, often from firms that paid their workers significantly less than the $19-an-hour base wage paid in Big Three factories.
Yokich said in a statment Friday that he was not optimistic that a deal could be reached before the deadline, but told workers to remain on the job until further notice.
On Saturday UAW spokesman Reg McGhee declined to say whether the union was still pessimistic about the talks.
"That was yesterday's statement," McGhee said. "We're just saying that the talks are continuing and we're not characterizing the progress."
GM spokesman Charles Licari said the automaker was prepared for round-the-clock negotiations, but declined to provide further details of the talks.
GM's chief negotiator, Gerald Knechtel, said Friday that the automaker was "committed to entering into agreement that balances the needs of our employees and the UAW with the flexibility GM needs to continue to improve our competitiveness."
GM flush with $14 billion in cash on its balance sheet and operating earnings that more than doubled in the third quarter to $1 billion, showed much willingness this year to sustain costly strikes in its continued quest for competitiveness.
Industry analysts estimated the cost of the Canadian strike at $150 million to $450 million, while a 17-day strike at two Dayton, Ohio, brake plants in March reduced GM's first quarter profit by $900 million.
In Dayton, GM preserved its right to buy a future brake system from an outside supplier, while in Canada, GM won the right to sell two parts plants in return for recognizing some limits on outsourcing.
But the effects of the Canadian strike continued to linger last week, as more of GM's U.S. assembly plants plants ran out of Canadian-made parts.
In Flint, Michigan, local UAW officials said GM told more than 6,600 workers not to report to work at the automaker's massive Buick City complex on Monday.
The facility makes Buick LeSabre, Oldsmobile 88 and Pontiac Bonneville sedans, as well as V-6 engines and other components.
On Thursday GM laid off about 5,000 workers at its Lordstown, Ohio, assembly plant in a shutdown scheduled to last two weeks. The plant builds the popular Chevrolet Cavalier and Pontiac Sunfire small cars.
Also on Friday GM notified some of the 2,926 workers at the nearby Lordstown metal stamping plant they would be idled next week. Another 474 workers at a components plant in Vandalia, Ohio, will be idled next week, GM said.
Excluding the layoffs that will start next week, GM said it had a total of 23,340 workers idled in the United States and Mexico on Friday.
Negotiators for General Motors Corp. and the United Auto Workers adjourned their talks on Saturday evening with less than 30 hours to go before a midnight Sunday strike deadline.
Bargainers, led by UAW President Stephen Yokich, took their second consecutive night off since the union announced on Friday that it will cancel its contract with the automaker at 11:59 p.m. EST Sunday (0359 GMT on Monday).
GM spokesman Charles Licari declined to say whether the adjournment was a sign of poor progress in the talks aimed at a new national labour agreement covering the automaker's 215,000 UAW workers. Typically bargaining runs around the clock when a settlement is near.
The deadline marks the first time the UAW has threatened a strike in its 1996 negotiations with Detroit's Big Three automakers, which up to now have been marked by an unusually conciliatory tone and extremely secretive discussions.
It also came two days after GM's 26,000 Canadian Auto Workers members began returning to work on Wednesday after a three-week strike against the automaker's Canadian operations.
In the U.S. talks, the two sides are still at odds over the same issues that caused the walkout in Canada -- the union's demand for job security and GM's desire to sell several parts plants and maintain flexibility to shift components work to outside suppliers, a practice known as outsourcing.
GM wants to modify the UAW contract pattern set by Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp., which have agreed to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of their current UAW work forces over the next three years.
GM, the least efficient U.S. automaker, wants to exclude certain components plants from the employment guarantees, including a door hardware plant in Flint, Michigan and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Michigan.
Ford and Chrysler buy more of their parts from outside suppliers than GM does, often from firms that pay their workers significantly less than the $19-an-hour base wage paid in Big Three factories.
Yokich said in a statement on Friday that he was not optimistic that a deal could be reached before the deadline but told workers to remain on the job until further notice.
On Saturday UAW spokesman Reg McGhee declined to say whether the union was still pessimistic about the talks.
"That was yesterday's statement," McGhee said. "We're just saying that the talks are continuing and we're not characterising the progress."
GM spokesman Charles Licari said the automaker was prepared for round-the-clock negotiations, but declined to provide further details of the talks.
GM, flush with $14 billion in cash on its balance sheet and operating earnings that more than doubled in the third quarter to $1 billion, has shown willingness to sustain costly strikes to continue its quest for competitiveness.
Industry analysts estimate the cost of the Canadian strike at $150 million to $450 million, while a 17-day strike at two Dayton, Ohio, brake plants in March reduced GM's first quarter profit by $900 million.
But the effects of the Canadian strike continued to linger last week, as more of GM's U.S. assembly plants plants ran out of Canadian-made parts.
Negotiators for General Motors Corp. and the United Auto Workers adjourned their talks on Saturday evening with less than 30 hours to go before a midnight Sunday strike deadline.
Bargainers, led by UAW President Stephen Yokich, took their second consecutive night off since the union announced on Friday that it will cancel its contract with the automaker at 11:59 p.m. EST Sunday (0359 GMT on Monday).
GM spokesman Charles Licari declined to say whether the adjournment was a sign of poor progress in the talks aimed at a new national labor agreement covering the automaker's 215,000 UAW workers. Typically bargaining runs around the clock when a settlement is near.
The deadline marks the first time the UAW has threatened a strike in its 1996 negotiations with Detroit's Big Three automakers, which up to now have been marked by an unusually conciliatory tone and extremely secretive discussions.
It also came two days after GM's 26,000 Canadian Auto Workers members began returning to work on Wednesday after a three-week strike against the automaker's Canadian operations.
In the U.S. talks, the two sides are still at odds over the same issues that caused the walkout in Canada -- the union's demand for job security and GM's desire to sell several parts plants and maintain flexibility to shift components work to outside suppliers, a practice known as outsourcing.
GM wants to modify the UAW contract pattern set by Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp., which have agreed to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of their current UAW work forces over the next three years.
GM, the least efficient U.S. automaker, wants to exclude certain components plants from the employment guarantees, including a door hardware plant in Flint, Michigan and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Michigan.
Ford and Chrysler buy more of their parts from outside suppliers than GM does, often from firms that pay their workers significantly less than the $19-an-hour base wage paid in Big Three factories.
Yokich said in a statement on Friday that he was not optimistic that a deal could be reached before the deadline but told workers to remain on the job until further notice.
On Saturday UAW spokesman Reg McGhee declined to say whether the union was still pessimistic about the talks.
"That was yesterday's statement," McGhee said. "We're just saying that the talks are continuing and we're not characterizing the progress."
GM spokesman Charles Licari said the automaker was prepared for round-the-clock negotiations, but declined to provide further details of the talks.
GM's chief negotiator, Gerald Knechtel, said on Friday that the automaker was "committed to entering into agreement that balances the needs of our employees and the UAW with the flexibility GM needs to continue to improve our competitiveness."
GM, flush with $14 billion in cash on its balance sheet and operating earnings that more than doubled in the third quarter to $1 billion, has shown willingness to sustain costly strikes to continue its quest for competitiveness.
Industry analysts estimate the cost of the Canadian strike at $150 million to $450 million, while a 17-day strike at two Dayton, Ohio, brake plants in March reduced GM's first quarter profit by $900 million.
But the effects of the Canadian strike continued to linger last week, as more of GM's U.S. assembly plants plants ran out of Canadian-made parts.
In Flint, local UAW officials said GM told more than 6,600 workers not to report to work at the automaker's massive Buick City complex on Monday.
General Motors Co. and the United Auto Workers recessed contract negotiations early Monday, several hours after their existing contract expired, but union officials said talks were likely to resume later in the day.
Union members continued working despite the impasse and UAW President Stephen Yokich said the union and GM officials planned to resume their talks, possibly later Monday.
Bargaining between the two sides recessed about 3 a.m. EST after the contract expired. The pact covers 215,000 UAW members who work at GM's U.S. facilities.
At a news conference Monday, Yokich made no mention of possible selective strikes at some GM plants, as had been speculated Sunday.
"We hope that everyone understands that we can't do it in the street. It isn't weakness -- we have to do it at the bargaining table," he said.
Yokich said a small number of bargainers may return to GM later Monday. Negotiators talked for about 17 hours Sunday and early Monday morning trying to reach a new agreement.
In a written statement in response to Yokich's comments, GM vice president of personnel Gerald Knechtel said the talks have been constructive.
"We have had open and constructive dialogue with the UAW since these talks began and have made significant progress on many of the issues," Knechtel said.
The UAW has already reached a new three-year contract with Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. covering about 171,000 UAW members in the United States.
Ford and Chrysler both agreed to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of their current UAW workforces. Forcing GM to accept that pattern has been a sticking point for the UAW. The world's largest automaker has said it needs to shed about 12 North American parts plants that it says are uncompetitive, and wants to exclude those plants from any job guarantee pledges.
There was speculation Sunday the UAW may hit GM with selective strikes at plants that build GM's high-profit full-size pickup trucks and sport/utility vehicles, including facilities in Janesville, Wis., Pontiac and Flint, Mich., and Fort Wayne, Ind.
Yokich, who said he is disappointed with the progress of the talks, said some of the UAW's locals have "sticky" issues that are not yet resolved.
"We decided that some of these locals need to work on these issues probably before we can ever get a settlement," he said, declining to identify the locals.
The previous national labor agreement expired Sept. 14, but the UAW said in September it would extend the contract. Last week Yokich said the contract extension for GM would end at midnight Sunday.
Yokich defended his tactics against critics who say the union, which is facing a shrinking membership base, has not been tough enough on the Big Three automakers, whose profits and sales are both increasing.
GM has 12 parts plants that it considers uncompetitive and wants to exclude several of those facilities from the job guarantee, including a door hardware plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., that it wants to sell.
GM's stock slipped 12.5 cents to $54 in morning trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
A midnight Sunday strike deadline for General Motors Corp expired without a walkout as talks between the car maker and the United Auto Workers continued into the early morning hours on Monday.
A GM spokesman declined to provide further details of the negotiations, saying the automaker would make a more detailed statement later on Monday morning.
"They're still on the job," said Norman Harp, a union commiteeman for UAW Local 14 at GM's Toledo, Ohio, transmission plant, which started its third shift shortly before midnight Sunday.
"The deadline's here and gone and they're still talking," Harp said of the negotiators at GM's Detroit headquarters.
Local UAW officials at other GM plants also said they were told to stand by for further instructions.
The UAW cancelled its national contract covering 215,000 GM hourly workers one minute before midnight Sunday in a move to increase pressure on GM for tentative agreement.
However, there was speculation among UAW officials late Sunday that instead of a national strike, the union could strike selected plants that make GM's high-profit light trucks. Top on the list of such facilities were GM's Janesville, Wis., plant, which makes Chevrolet Tahoe and GMC Yukon and Suburban full-size sport/utility vehicles, and the Pontiac, Mich., plant, which makes GM's popular full-size pickup trucks with extended cabs.
A selective strike at those facilities would inflict pain on GM while minimizing the drain on the UAW's strike fund, which pays each UAW worker $150 a week. It also would blunt some of the political fallout from a massive strike close to the U.S. presidential election.
UAW officials say the two sides remain at odds over the union's demand that GM follow the pattern set at Ford Motor Co and Chrysler Corp by guaranteeing employment for 95 percent of its current UAW workforce.
GM, which has 12 parts plants that it considers uncompetitive, wants to exclude several of those facilities from the guarantee, including a door hardware plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., that it wants to sell.
In settling the Canadian strike last week, GM was able to secure a deal that included the selling of two parts plants in Windsor and Oshawa, Ontario and retained some flexibility to outsource more products. However, GM agreed to guarantee pensions for workers in the two plants or up to nine years and to allow them to transfer back to jobs that open up in other GM facilities.
GM still has more than 20,000 workers in the United States and Mexico idled because of lingering parts shortages associated with the Canadian strike.
General Motors Corp. workers remained on the job without a contract Monday as United Auto Workers President Stephen Yokich refrained -- for now -- from calling a strike against the auto giant.
Negotiations on a new national labor contract covering GM's 215,000 UAW hourly workers recessed early Monday after a midnight strike deadline passed. Yokich said some bargainers would resume talks later in the day.
"The only place you can settle these agreements is at the bargaining table," Yokich told a news conference early Monday. "We feel that with or without a contract in place, we can continue (working). It's open-ended."
The union plans to bring its plant-level leaders to Detroit for a meeting on the talks on Saturday, a move that typically comes after a tentative agreement is reached.
Although Yokich played down the threat of a strike on Monday, he said some of the more than 100 local unions at GM plants may resort to walkouts unless the automaker meets union demands in separate negtiations for local labor agreements.
The local talks have become a sticking point for the national negotiations, Yokich said, because only a few of the locals have signed agreements with GM.
The local pacts typically cover plant-specific issues such as work rules and health and safety standards, while the national contract covers wages, benefits, job security and other common issues.
"We decided that some of these locals need to work on these issues probably before we can ever get a settlement," Yokich said, declining to identify specific plants or issues.
Nevertheless, he urged anxious UAW members who watched their Canadian counterparts strike for three weeks this month to stay on the job for the time being.
"We hope that everyone understands that we can't do it in the street. It isn't weakness -- we have to do it at the bargaining table," he said.
Negotiations at GM's headquarters building here continued for 17 hours until about 2 a.m. EST on Monday, when bargainers began leaving, carrying their overnight bags.
Although some talks were scheduled to resume Monday afternoon, Yokich and other top UAW officers do not plan to return to the bargaining table until Tuesday morning.
In a written statement in response to Yokich's comments, GM Vice President of Personnel Gerald Knechtel said the talks have been constructive.
"We have had open and constructive dialogue with the UAW since these talks began and have made significant progress on many of the issues," Knechtel said.
Yokich chided GM's hard-headed negotiating style as "typical GM," and noted that the union has consistently had a better relationship with Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp.
The UAW wants GM to agree to the same job guarantees granted by Ford and Chrysler, which call for the two companies to guarantee employment for 95 percent of their combined 171,000 UAW members in the United States.
GM has 12 North American parts plants that it considers uncompetitive and wants to exclude several of those facilities from the job guarantee pledges, including a door hardware plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., that it wants to sell.
Although GM is viewed as the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three automakers, Yokich insisted that the auto giant can live with the pattern.
"I think Ford and Chrysler understood when we said we're preparing ourselves and our union to enter the 21st Century with you as partners in the corporation," he said. "I'm not too sure GM understands that. They've always been late bloomers. Maybe they'll get the message sooner or later."
The UAW's strike threat comes less than a week after GM settled a 20-day strike by the independent Canadian Auto Workers union. The CAW struck over many of the same issues -- job security and shifting jobs to outside suppliers.
UAW Vice President Richard Shoemaker said the U.S. union did not feel pressure to get the exact same provisions that GM agreed to in Canada.
GM's stock slipped 12.5 cents to $54 in early afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
General Motors Co. and the United Auto Workers recessed contract negotiations early Monday, several hours after their existing contract expired, but union officials said talks were likely to resume later in the day.
Union members continued working despite the impasse and UAW President Stephen Yokich said the union and GM officials planned to resume their talks, possibly later Monday.
Bargaining between the two sides recessed about 3 a.m. EST after the contract expired. The pact covers 215,000 UAW members who work at GM's U.S. facilities.
At a news conference Monday, Yokich made no mention of possible selective strikes at some GM plants, as had been speculated Sunday.
"We hope that everyone understands that we can't do it in the street. It isn't weakness -- we have to do it at the bargaining table," he said.
Yokich said a small number of bargainers may return to GM later Monday. Negotiators talked for about 17 hours Sunday and early Monday morning trying to reach a new agreement.
In a written statement in response to Yokich's comments, GM vice president of personnel Gerald Knechtel said the talks have been constructive.
"We have had open and constructive dialogue with the UAW since these talks began and have made significant progress on many of the issues," Knechtel said.
The UAW has already reached a new three-year contract with Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. covering about 171,000 UAW members in the United States.
Ford and Chrysler both agreed to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of their current UAW workforces. Forcing GM to accept that pattern has been a sticking point for the UAW. The world's largest automaker has said it needs to shed about 12 North American parts plants that it says are uncompetitive, and wants to exclude those plants from any job guarantee pledges.
There was speculation Sunday the UAW may hit GM with selective strikes at plants that build GM's high-profit full-size pickup trucks and sport/utility vehicles, including facilities in Janesville, Wis., Pontiac and Flint, Mich., and Fort Wayne, Ind.
Yokich, who said he is disappointed with the progress of the talks, said some of the UAW's locals have "sticky" issues that are not yet resolved.
"We decided that some of these locals need to work on these issues probably before we can ever get a settlement," he said, declining to identify the locals.
The previous national labour agreement expired Sept. 14, but the UAW said in September it would extend the contract. Last week Yokich said the contract extension for GM would end at midnight Sunday.
Yokich defended his tactics against critics who say the union, which is facing a shrinking membership base, has not been tough enough on the Big Three automakers, whose profits and sales are both increasing.
GM has 12 parts plants that it considers uncompetitive and wants to exclude several of those facilities from the job guarantee, including a door hardware plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., that it wants to sell.
GM's stock slipped 12.5 cents to $54 in morning trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
United Auto Workers bargainers reconvened at General Motors Corp.'s headquarters Tuesday following a day off Monday, but talks between the two sides maintained a low profile, UAW and company spokesmen said.
UAW workers continued to report to their jobs at GM's U.S. factories, despite the expiration of their national labour agreement with the automaker at 11:59 p.m. EST Sunday.
GM spokesman Charles Licari said there were no major "main-table" meetings scheduled Tuesday, but key negotiators were communicating in small groups and by telephone.
"Discussions are taking place, but there is no set timetable regarding the negotiations," Licari said, adding that such communications still may prove fruitful.
A person close to the talks said, however, that he did not expect the situation to change much before Saturday, when the union's key local GM plant-level leaders are scheduled to meet in Detroit.
UAW President Stephen Yokich recessed the talks on Monday and expressed disappointment with the lack of progress toward a settlement, but he refrained from calling a strike against the world's largest automaker.
Still, Yokich said some of the union's GM locals may resort to strikes if progress in local negotiations does not improve. In addition to the national contract, GM is negotiating with more than 100 UAW locals for pacts that cover plant-specific issues.
In New York on Tuesday, GM Chairman Jack Smith said little about the UAW negotiations, but told reporters that he hoped there would be no local strikes.
The threat of additional strikes comes less than a week after Canadian Auto Workers members returned to work following a three-week walkout over the issues of job security and outsourcing, or the shifting of work to outside contractors.
Smith, speaking at a news conference on alternative fuel vehicles, declined to specify the dollar cost of the strike.
"We lost quite a few cars," he said.
GM said Tuesday that 22,913 workers in its U.S. assembly, powertrain and stamping operations remained idle because of lingering shortages of Canadian-made parts.
The automaker said it laid off an additional 465 workers at its Lordstown, Ohio, metal stamping plant Tuesday, one of four such plants affected.
GM's nearby Lordstown, Ohio, assembly plant remains completely idled, as does its Buick City assembly plant in Flint, Mich. Five other assembly plants remain partially idled, bringing GM's laid off assembly workers to 15,284.
GM has 5,702 engine and transmission workers laid off, with six such powertrain plants partially idled.
In the UAW talks, which cover a total of 215,000 U.S. hourly workers, GM has resisted the union's demand that it follow a pattern set by Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. and guarantee jobs for 95 percent of current work force over the next three years.
GM wants to exclude from the guarantee several parts plants that it wants to sell. The automaker has identified 12 facilities that it considers uncompetitive.
GM's stock gained 50 cents to $54.375 in afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
General Motors Corp. and the United Auto Workers resumed contract negotiations Wednesday under the threat of additional strikes as local walkouts continued in Wisconsin and Indiana.
Bargainers reconvened at GM's headquarters here Wednesday morning but GM spokesman Charles Licari declined to say if GM Chairman Jack Smith was directly involved in the talks.
"Talks are taking place at all levels," Licari said.
About 2,750 members of United Auto Workers Local 23 struck GM's Indianapolis metal stamping plant Tuesday night and 4,800 workers also walked off the job at GM's Janesville, Wis., truck assembly plant.
UAW spokesman Reg McGhee said no other local strikes had started as of Wednesday morning, but said the union was not ruling out other actions. UAW President Stephen Yokich raised the threat of local strikes on Monday after the union's national contract with GM expired.
"Steve made it clear that without a national contract, the locals are on their own," McGhee said, noting that they do not have to provide GM with the typical five-day notice before a walkout.
Although UAW officials said the strikes were called over local issues, the actions increased pressure on GM for a national agreement by threatening to paralyse much of the lucrative light truck operations at the world's largest automaker.
The local walkouts thus may nudge GM into a tentative national agreement before Saturday, when the UAW's 250-member National GM Council is scheduled to meet in Detroit. The council, made up of plant-level leaders, would have to approve any agreement.
A major sticking point in the national talks covering 215,000 workers is the future of 12 domestic parts plants GM considers uncompetitive. GM wants to exclude several of the plants from union demands that it guarantee employment for 95 percent of UAW workers over the next three years.
Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have already granted such guarantees, but GM, the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three automakers, wants changes to the pattern to allow it to cut costs.
A national agreement probably would also require the signatures of Smith and Yokich. McGhee said Yokich was not at GM headquarters Wednesday morning but was involved in the talks. "His physical presence is not demanded for every meeting we have with GM," McGhee said.
Workers at all of GM's truck and truck parts plants have been working heavy overtime in recent months, putting a strain on workers and leading to union demands for relief. For example, at the Janesville plant, which makes the Chevrolet Tahoe, Suburban and GMC Yukon sport utility vehicles, UAW Local 95 has pressed GM to hire a third shift of workers.
The Indianapolis plant supplies doors, fenders, hoods and other parts to nine of the automaker's 11 North American truck assembly plants. At least some of those plants likely will have to halt operations within days due to parts shortages.
Only a handful of GM's 123 local units have signed new local contracts with the automaker. The pacts typically cover items such as work rules, staffing levels and health and safety standards, while the national agreement covers wages, benefits, job security and other broad issues.
While GM has refused to identify the plants it wants to sell, the list includes a door hinge plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., officials said. Together, the plants employ 2,100 UAW members.
The local strikes mark a departure in Yokich's bargaining strategy, which until last week had been marked by unusually conciliatory remarks and virtually no strike threats.
The walkouts also came less than a week after Canadian Auto Workers members returned to work following a three-week strike over the issues of job security and shifting work to outside contractors.
The United Auto Workers union unleashed two local strikes against General Motors Corp.'s truck operations Tuesday night in bids to boost pressure on the automaker for new national and local labor agreements.
About 2,750 members of UAW Local 23 walked off the job at GM's Indianapolis metal stamping plant at about 6 p.m. EST, followed an hour later by 4,800 workers who struck the automaker's Janesville, Wis., truck assembly plant.
The negotiations at GM's Detroit headquarters were scheduled to resume Wednesday morning after adjourning for the night around 9 p.m. EST Tuesday.
GM spokesman Jerry Holmes said the automaker had no formal response to the walkouts, which threaten to paralyze much of GM's light truck production, the automaker's biggest source of profits.
The Janesville plant builds GM's popular Chevrolet Tahoe, Suburban and GMC Yukon sport utility vehicles. The Indianapolis plant supplies doors, fenders, hoods and other sheet-metal stampings to nine of the automaker's North American truck assembly plants.
All of GM's truck-related plants have been working heavy overtime in recent months, and the increasing workload has put a strain on workers.
UAW President Stephen Yokich had raised the threat of local strikes Monday after intense negotiations over the weekend failed to produce an agreement. He also chided GM for a lack of progress in local negotiations at individual plants.
He said the expiration of GM's national contract covering 215,000 UAW workers Sunday meant that local units were free to strike to get local issues resolved.
Union officials also said there could be other local walkouts in the near future.
"I'm the one who called this strike," Ron Gettelfinger, UAW regional director, said of the Indianapolis walkout. He added that the action was aimed solely at resolving local issues, which he refused to identify.
In Janesville, UAW Local 95 said in a statement that it, too, struck over local issues because 44 bargaining sessions failed to produce an agreement with the automaker.
Only a handful of GM's 123 local units have signed new local contracts with the automaker. The pacts typically cover items like work rules, staffing levels and health and safety standards, while the national agreement covers wages, benefits, job security and other broad issues.
Bargainers in the national talks reconvened at GM's headquarters here Tuesday after a day off Monday. Still on the table is the future of 12 U.S. parts plants that GM considers uncompetitive, the company's top components executive confirmed Tuesday.
J.T. Battenberg, president of GM's Delphi Automotive Systems division, told reporters at an automotive supplier conference here that none of the 12 factories have improved their performance enough in recent months to be dropped from the company's list of troubled facilities.
GM has refused to identify the plants, but the list includes a door hinge plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., that the automaker intends to sell. Together, the plants employ 2,100 UAW members.
The automaker wants to exclude several of the plants from the union's demand that it guarantee employment for 95 percent of its UAW workforce over the next three years.
Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have already granted such guarantees, but GM, the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three automakers, wants changes to the pattern that allow it to cut costs.
The strikes mark a major departure in Yokich's bargaining strategy, which until last week had been marked by unusual conciliation and virtually no strike threats.
The walkouts could help pressure GM into a tentative national agreement before Saturday, when the UAW's 250-member National GM Council is scheduled to meet in Detroit. The council, made up of plant-level leaders, would have to approve a plant.
The walkouts also came less than a week after Canadian Auto Workers members returned to work following a three-week strike over the issues of job security and outsourcing, or the shifting of work to outside contractors.
GM also said Tuesday that 22,913 workers in its U.S. assembly, powertrain and stamping operations remained idle because of lingering shortages of Canadian-made parts.
The automaker said it laid off an additional 465 workers at its Lordstown, Ohio, metal stamping plant Tuesday, one of four such plants still affected by shortages.
The United Auto Workers union unleashed two local strikes against General Motors Corp.'s truck operations Tuesday night in a bid to increase pressure for new national and local labor agreements.
About 2,750 members of UAW Local 23 walked off the job at GM's Indianapolis metal stamping plant at about 6 p.m. EST, followed an hour later by 4,800 workers who struck the automaker's Janesville, Wis., truck assembly plant.
The strikes threaten to paralyze much of GM's light truck production, the automaker's biggest source of profits.
The Janesville plant builds GM's popular Chevrolet Tahoe, Suburban and GMC Yukon sport utility vehicles. The Indianapolis plant supplies doors, fenders, hoods and other sheet-metal stampings to nine North American truck assembly plants.
GM spokesman Jerry Holmes said the automaker had no formal response to the walkouts, but said negotiations were continuing Tuesday night.
UAW President Stephen Yokich raised the threat of local strikes on Monday after intense negotiations over the weekend failed to produce an agreement. He also chided GM for a lack of progress in local negotiations at individual plants.
The expiration of the GM's national contract covering 215,000 UAW workers on Sunday meant that UAW locals were free to resort to strikes to get local issues resolved, Yokich said.
"I'm the one who called this strike," UAW regional director Ron Gettelfinger said of the Indianapolis strike. He added that the walkout was aimed solely at resolving local issues, which he refused to identify.
All of GM's truck-related plants heen working heavy overtime in recent months, which has put a strain on workers.
"General Motors are hard people to deal with," said Henry Summerville, a worker at the plant. "They don't like to give up anything."
In Janesville, UAW Local 95 said in a statement that it also struck over local issues because 44 bargaining sessions failed to produce an agreement.
Only a handful of GM's 123 locals have signed new local contracts with the automaker. The pacts typically cover items like work rules, staffing levels and health and safety standards, while the national agreement covers wages, benefits, job security and other broad issues.
Bargainers in the national talks reconvened at GM's headquarters here Tuesday after a day off Monday.
Still on the table in the talks is the future of 12 U.S. parts plants that GM considers uncompetitive, the company's top components executive confirmed Tuesday.
"We're talking about them in negotiations and I really don't want to talk about any labor issues at this time," said J.T. Battenberg, president of GM's Delphi Automotive Systems division.
Battenberg told reporters at an automotive supplier conference here that none of the 12 factories have improved their performance enough in recent months to be dropped from the company's list of troubled facilities.
GM has refused to identify the plants, but the list includes a door hinge and hardware plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., that the automaker intends to sell. Together, the plants employ 2,100 people.
The automaker wants to exclude several of the plants from the union's demand for employment guarantees. The UAW wants GM to follow a pattern set by Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. and guarantee jobs for 95 percent of its UAW work force over the next three years.
The strikes mark a major departure in Yokich's bargaining strategy, which until last week had been marked by unusual conciliation and virtually no threats of strikes.
The walkouts could help pressure GM into a tentative national agreement before Saturday, when the UAW's National GM Council is scheduled to meet in Detroit. The 250-member council is made up of the top local officials from each GM local and plant bargaining unit.
Earlier Tuesday in New York, GM Chairman Jack Smith told reporters that he hoped there would be no local strikes.
The walkouts also came less than a week after Canadian Auto Workers members returned to work following a three-week strike over the issues of job security and outsourcing, or the shifting of work to outside contractors.
GM said Tuesday that 22,913 workers in its U.S. assembly, powertrain and stamping operations remained idle because of lingering shortages of Canadian-made parts.
The automaker said it laid off an additional 465 workers at its Lordstown, Ohio, metal stamping plant Tuesday, one of four such plants affected.
General Motors Corp.  has packed its new EV1 electric vehicle with exotic materials and sophisticated, unproven technology, but is taking a cautious approach to introducing it to the public.
GM officials said Tuesday they plan to offer the two-seat car only on three-year leases and will hold the customer's hand virtually every step of the way.
"Our total focus is to provide a hassle-free experience and comprehensive customer care," said Joseph Kennedy, vice president of sales and marketing for GM's Saturn unit, which will sell the EV1 under the GM nameplate.
The first modern production car designed from the ground up to be an electric vehicle, the EV1 will roll into Saturn dealerships sometime this fall in the Los Angeles, San Diego, Phoenix and Tucson, Ariz., areas. Colder climates would shorten the vehicles' already limited range, which is a maximum of 70 to 90 miles under ideal conditions, GM says.
California, which recently eased its 1998 mandate for electric vehicles, is expected to offer consumer incentives for the vehicle.
Depending on such incentives, monthly lease payments on the car will probably fall between $400 and $500, about the same as a $30,000 luxury car, GM officials said at a news briefing.
Customers will have to add another $50 a month or so to lease a 220-volt charging unit and pay to have it mounted in their garage. But the electricity to run the EV1 is a bargain -- about a penny a mile, versus gasoline costs of four to five cents a mile for an average normal car.
GM executives will not discuss production plans or sales targets for the vehicle and say they plan to let market dictate demand. But Kennedy said he expects the initial demand to outstrip supply due to the vehicle's novelty.
So far, about 1,000 people have called a toll-free telephone number, and dealers have taken names of 300 serious customers, including Tonight Show host Jay Leno, he said.
Customers who want performance won't be disappointed with the EV1. The whisper-quiet vehicle offers neck-snapping acceleration and sports-car like handling, although a heavy foot will quickly drain the battery, requiring a three- to four-hour recharge.
"We can keep up with a Nissan 300ZX from zero to 30" miles an hour, said Sean McNamara, marketing manager for GM's Advanced Technology Vehicles group.
The car's aerodynamic tear-drop shape, considerably narrower in the rear than in the front, slips through the wind easily and looks unlike anything else on the road.
GM could have built a spartan small boxy car but wanted its first electric vehicle to have some flair, said Robert Purcell, general manager of GM Advanced Technology Vehicles.
"This is the car that gets the market started," he said. "We wanted to put out a car that was very exciting so that people would fall in love with it."
The sporty configuration was aimed at highly educated customers with incomes of $125,000 a year who like high technology, GM said. The customers also likely own two other vehicles for longer trips or heavy hauling.
Saturn, which won't necessarily sell all future GM electric vehicles, plans to emphasise its customer-friendly sales practices more heavily for the EV1.
The decision to lease the vehicle was made in part to protect consumers from the inevitable march of technology. The automaker does not want EV1 customers to be stuck with obsolete cars in a few years, as personal computer owners often are.
At the end of the lease, GM is considering refitting the plastic and aluminum-bodied cars with newer technology and leasing them again, Purcell said.
The division also is training about 14 EV1 "product specialists" to handle sales of the vehicle at 26 designated dealerships in California and Arizona.
The specialists will come to a prospective customer's home, office, or elsewhere to explain the details of the car and the charging unit.
They'll work with the utility companies and arrange municipal permits for the installations, Kennedy said, adding that it will probably take about a week to set up a customer with a car and charger.
GM has invested $350 million in developing the EV1, which it does not expect to recoup through sales of the first generation vehicle, Purcell said. But the car does pioneer a wide range of exotic materials and new technology that could find its way to other GM vehicles.
Magnesium and other lightweight materials counteract the weight of batteries, and the cars have braking systems that transfer power back to the battery.
Despite the technology, the cars are largely hand-built at a Lansing, Mich., plant that produced the now-defunct Buick Reatta in the late 1980s. The operation employs 54 production workers but could be expanded quickly, GM officials said.
Negotiators from General Motors Corp. and the United Auto Workers union appeared to be grinding toward a national contract deal Thursday as a local strike at a metal stamping plant threatened the automaker with As a marathon bargaining session that started at 10 a.m. EST Wednesday wore on, UAW officials said the two sides were closer to an agreement, but disagreements over job guarantees and plants on the selling block remained an obstacle.
UAW President Stephen Yokich was meeting in Detroit Thursday with members of the union's executive board, a body that would have to approve any deal. He was expected to return to the talks at GM's headquarters later Thursday.
"The feeling I had around here this morning was that there was some progress made last night," said UAW spokesman Reg McGhee. He declined to characterise the pace of talks Thursday afternoon.
Meanwhile, plant-level union officials said the number of workers idled by local strikes in Indianapolis and Janesville, Wis., could reach nearly 21,000 by Saturday.
GM truck plants in Moraine, Ohio, and Flint, Mich., were expected to run out of fenders, hoods, and other sheet-metal parts from GM's strikebound Indianapolis stamping plant by late Thursday night, officials at the plants said.
Flint employs about 2,000 workers and builds crew-cab and heavy-duty full-size pickup trucks, while Moraine employs about 4,000 and builds Chevrolet Blazer and GMC Jimmy compact sport/utility vehicles.
"B-crew will come in tonight and that'll be it," said George Dunaway, vice president of International Union of Electronics Workers Local 801 in Moraine. Although his union is not involved in the UAW talks, he supports the strikers in Indianapolis and Janesville, Wis.
"A lot of their concerns are our concerns," he said.
The remainder of the nine GM truck plants fed by Indianapolis are expected to halt operations soon. GM's Shreveport, La., compact pickup truck plant is scheduled to shut down during the day Friday, idling 2,500 workers, and the Linden, N.J. plant, which employs 2,500 and builds both compact pickups and sport/utility vehicles, will shut down Friday night.
GM's Fort Wayne plant laid off about 2,250 of its 2,600 workers as it halted production of GM's popular full-size Chevrolet and GMC pickup trucks Wednesday night. GM's other full-size truck plants in Pontiac, Mich., Oshawa, Ontario, and Silao, Mexico, are expected to follow close behind.
The strikes on Tuesday by 2,750 workers at Indianapolis and 4,800 workers in Janesville, Wis., have formed a two-pronged effort to squeeze GM's highly profitable light truck operations, increasing pressure for national and local settlements.
The shutdown of the Janesville plant alone could cost GM $50 million a week in pre-tax profits, adding to pressure on the automaker for national and local contract settlements, said David Healy, an auto analyst with Burnham Securities.
The southern Wisconsin factory is the sole source for GM's popular four-door, full-size Chevrolet Tahoe and Suburban and GMC Yukon sport utility vehicles. Analysts estimate that GM makes an average of $9,000 in variable profits on each of the trucks.
Meanwhile, other UAW locals sought to join the Indianapolis and Janesville walkouts. GM's Kokomo, Ind., electronics plant requested permission to send about 5,500 workers out on strike.
A walkout at that facility would be particularly damaging to GM because it supplies all of the automaker's North American assembly plants with engine electronics, audio systems and other parts.
The future of 12 domestic parts plants that GM considers uncompetitive remained a major sticking point in the negotiations. GM wants to exclude several of the plants from union demands that it guarantee employment for 95 percent of UAW workers over the next three years.
Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have already granted such guarantees, but GM, the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three automakers, wants changes to the pattern to allow it to cut costs..
GM's stock gained 50 cents to close at $53.875 on the New York Stock Exchange.
A strike at General Motors Corp.'s Indianapolis metal stamping plant is expected to force two more GM truck assembly plants to shut down Thursday night, ratcheting up the United Auto Workers union's bargaining pressure on the automaker.
A GM source said the two truck plants will run out of parts from Indianapolis late Thursday night during their second production shifts, joining a plant in Fort Wayne, Ind., that shut down Wednesday night.
The Fort Wayne plant laid off about 2,250 of its 2,600 workers as it halted production of GM's popular full-size Chevrolet and GMC pickup trucks.
The official declined to identify the plants, but said they will be among several still-operating truck facilities that receive hoods, fenders and other large body panels from Indianapolis, including Pontiac and Flint, Mich.; Oshawa, Ontario; Linden, N.J.; Shreveport, La.; Moraine, Ohio; and Silao, Mexico.
The strike by 2,750 workers at Indianapolis and a second walkout by 4,800 workers in Janesville, Wis., have formed a two-pronged effort to squeeze GM's highly profitable light truck operations.
Meanwhile, GM and the UAW continued a more than 24-hour bargaining session Thursday in an effort to hammer out a new national labour contract covering 215,000 GM hourly workers.
The marathon session, which started at about 10 a.m. EST, was the longest so far between the union and the world's largest automaker, said GM spokesman Charles Licari.
He declined to comment on any progress being made.
Typically, negotiators in labour contract talks for Detroit's Big Three automakers meet for long periods to work out final details just before reaching a tentative agreement.
But analysts say the dollar cost of lost truck production due to the Indianapolis and Janesville strikes could mount quickly, shutting off GM's biggest source of profits.
The shutdown of the Janesville plant alone could cost GM $50 million a week in pre-tax profits, adding to pressure on GM for national and local contract settlements, said David Healy, an auto analyst with Burnham Securities.
The southern Wisconsin factory is the sole source for GM's popular four-door, full-size Chevrolet Tahoe and Suburban and GMC Yukon sport utility vehicles. Analysts estimate that GM makes an average of $9,000 in variable profits on each of the trucks.
As its truck operations grind toward a halt, the company's U.S. car assembly plants affected by a three-week strike in Canada earlier this month are starting to come back to life.
GM said Thursday that 4,200 idled workers returned to their jobs at car plants in Flint, Mich., and Fairfax, Kansas, cutting the total number of U.S. workers laid off due to the Canadian Auto Workers walkout to 19,958.
The future of 12 domestic parts plants that GM considers uncompetitive has been a major sticking point in the negotiations. GM wants to exclude several of the plants from union demands that it guarantee employment for 95 percent of UAW workers over the next three years.
Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have already granted such guarantees, but GM, the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three automakers, wants changes to the pattern to allow it to cut costs.
GM has already put two of the 12 plants on the sale block -- a door hinge plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., that together employ 2,100 workers.
GM's stock was off 50 cents at $52.875 in midday trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Local strikes in Wisconsin and Indiana began taking a larger toll on General Motors Corp. truck operations Wednesday, increasing pressure on the automaker for a new national contract with the United Auo Workers union.
GM said the walkout that started Tuesday night at its Indianapolis metal stamping plant forced the company to lay off 2,250 workers at its Fort Wayne, Ind., plant and halt production of full-size Chevrolet and GMC pickup trucks.
The plant ran out of hoods, doors, fenders and other major body panels made by striking workers in Indianapolis, said GM spokesman Jeffrey Kuhlman.
No other plants were in immediate danger of halting production Wednesday night, but the strikebound Indianapolis plant has stopped shipments to nine of GM's 11 North American truck assembly plants, threatening more shutdowns within days.
Meanwhile talks between GM and UAW bargainers continued late into the night Wednesday in an effort to reach a new national agreement covering 215,000 GM hourly workers. Company officials declined to comment on progress of the negotiations.
Analysts said Wednesday the cost of the strikes by 2,750 workers in Indianapolis and 4,800 workers at its Janesville, Wis., truck assembly plant could mount quickly, eating into profits from GM's lucrative light truck operations.
The shutdown of the Janesville plant alone could cost GM $50 million a week in pre-tax profits, said David Healy, an auto analyst with Burnham Securities.
The southern Wisconsin factory, which employs 4,800 workers, is the sole source for GM's popular four-door, full-size Chevrolet Tahoe and Suburban and GMC Yukon sport utility vehicles. Analysts estimate that GM makes about $9,000 in variable profits on each of the trucks.
In addition to Janesville and Fort Wayne, the Indianapolis plant supplies facilities in Pontiac and Flint, Mich.; Oshawa, Ontario; Linden, N.J.; Shreveport, La.; Moraine, Ohio, and Silao, Mexico.
"It really starts to add up quickly when you add in all of the other big C/K pickups they can lose," said Lehman Brothers analyst Joseph Phillippi.
The UAW strikes came as GM continued to stagger from a three-week strike in Canada that curtailed production at a number of U.S. plants and may cost up to $450 million.
On Wednesday GM said it still had 23,158 U.S. workers idled due to shortages of Canadian-made parts, but added that 3,200 workers at its Buick City assembly plant in Flint, Mich., were scheduled to return to work on Thursday.
No other UAW strikes had started on Wednesday, but UAW spokesman Reg McGhee said the union was not ruling out other walkouts. UAW President Stephen Yokich raised the threat of local strikes on Monday after GM's national contract covering 215,000 UAW workers expired.
"Steve made it clear that without a national contract, the locals are on their own," McGhee said, noting that they do not have to provide GM with the typical five-day notice before a walkout.
Some UAW officials speculated that other stamping and parts plants may also be struck but others expressed concern that widespread walkouts so close to next week's national election would hurt Democratic candidates.
Although UAW officials said the strikes were called over local issues, analysts said it was clear that the actions were aimed at pushing GM into a tentative national agreement.
That may take place before Saturday, when about 250 UAW leaders from GM plants across the nation are scheduled to meet in Detroit to discuss the status of the talks.
The future of 12 domestic parts plants that GM considers uncompetitive remained a major sticking point in the negotiations Wednesday. GM wants to exclude several of the plants from union demands that it guarantee employment for 95 percent of UAW workers over the next three years.
Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have already granted such guarantees, but GM, the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three automakers, wants changes to the pattern to allow it to cut costs.
GM has already put two of the 12 plants on the sale block -- a door hinge plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., that together employ 2,100 workers.
"We know the sale is going to happen. We're concerned about what's going to happen to us," said Whitey Hale, president of UAW Local 326 in Flint.
Local strikes in Wisconsin and Indiana began taking their toll on the rest of General Motors Corp.'s truck production Wednesday, clouding the automaker's national contract talks with the United Auto Workers.
GM said the day-old walkout at its Indianapolis metal stamping plant would force it to halt production of full-size Chevrolet and GMC pickup trucks at its Fort Wayne, Ind., assembly plant Wednesday night.
The Indianapolis walkout on Tuesday has halted shipments of major steel body panels to nine of GM's 11 North American truck assembly plants, threatening to shut them down within days.
Analysts said Wednesday the cost of the strikes by 2,750 workers in Indianapolis and 4,800 workers at its Janesville, Wis., truck assembly plant could mount quickly, eating into profits from GM's lucrative light truck operations.
The shutdown of the Janesville plant alone could cost GM $50 million a week in pre-tax profits, said David Healy, an auto analyst with Burnham Securities.
The southern Wisconsin factory, which employs 4,800 workers, is the sole source for GM's popular four-door, full-size Chevrolet Tahoe and Suburban and GMC Yukon sport utility vehicles. Analysts estimate that GM makes about $9,000 in variable profits on each of the trucks.
In addition to Janesville and Fort Wayne, the Indianapolis plant supplies facilities in Pontiac and Flint, Mich.; Oshawa, Ontario; Linden, N.J.; Shreveport, La.; Moraine, Ohio, and Silao, Mexico.
"It really starts to add up quickly when you add in all of the other big C/K pickups they can lose," said Lehman Brothers analyst Joseph Phillippi.
The UAW strikes came as GM is still staggering from a three-week strike in Canada that curtailed production at a number of U.S. plants and may cost up to $450 million.
On Wednesday, GM said it still had 23,158 U.S. workers idled due to shortages of Canadian-made parts, but added that 3,200 workers at its Buick City assembly plant in Flint, Mich., were scheduled to return to work on Thursday.
No other UAW strikes had started on Wednesday, but UAW spokesman Reg McGhee said the union was not ruling out other walkouts. UAW President Stephen Yokich raised the threat of local strikes on Monday after GM's national contract covering 215,000 UAW workers expired.
"Steve made it clear that without a national contract, the locals are on their own," McGhee said, noting that they do not have to provide GM with the typical five-day notice before a walkout.
Some UAW officials speculated that other stamping and parts plants may also be struck, because they would force shutdowns at other facilities.
National contract talks continued Wednesday at GM's Detroit headquarters, but officials declined to say whether progress was being made.
"Talks are taking place at all levels," said GM spokesman Charles Licari.
Although UAW officials said the strikes were called over local issues, analysts said it was clear that the actions were aimed at pushing GM into a tentative national agreement.
That may take place before Saturday, when about 250 UAW leaders from GM plants across the nation are scheduled to meet in Detroit to discuss the status of the talks.
The future of 12 domestic parts plants that GM considers uncompetitive remained a major sticking point in the negotiations Wednesday. GM wants to exclude several of the plants from union demands that it guarantee employment for 95 percent of UAW workers over the next three years.
Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have already granted such guarantees, but GM, the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three automakers, wants changes to the pattern to allow it to cut costs.
GM has already put two of the 12 plants on the sale block -- a door hinge plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., that together employ 2,100 workers.
"We know the sale is going to happen. We're concerned about what's going to happen to us," said Whitey Hale, president of UAW Local 326 in Flint.
General Motors Corp.'s board of directors will likely delay an increase in the company's quarterly common stock dividend if it fails to reach a contract deal with the United Auto Workers union before Monday, analysts said Friday.
GM's board is scheduled to meet on Monday and will consider the automaker's fourth quarter dividend, but Dean Witter analyst Ron Glantz said an increase will send the wrong message to the union.  
"Unless a settlement is reached by Sunday, the board is not going to throw gasoline onto the fire," said Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. auto analyst Ron Glantz.
A dividend hike now could jeopardize the long-running UAW talks because the automaker is trying to win concessions aimed at cutting costs and allowing it sell off unprofitable parts plants. The two sides are crafting a complicated agreement that is expected to maintain job guarantees set by Ford Motor Co and Chrysler Corp, but may exclude a number of GM facilities.  
Nevertheless, analysts say GM is due for an increase because of the company's improving cash position and stronger earnings.
The quarterly payout rate on GM's $1-2/3 par-value stock has been unchanged since February, when it was raised to $0.40 a share from $0.30.
Glantz's anticipation of an increase in the dividend and a possible share buyback program was predicated upon having an agreement in hand.
Lehman Brothers analyst Joseph Phillippi agreed but he noted that GM needs to increase its payout to improve its dividend yield. GM's yield is now 2.98 percent, compared with 4.93 percent for Ford Motor Co and 4.16 percent for Chrysler Corp.
"Shareholders might be better served by letting that sleeping dog lie," Phillippi said of a possible dividend increase.
He added that he expects shareholders to remain patient with GM, because the automaker has more to gain by negotiating a UAW contract that allows it reduce its cost disadvantage compared with Ford and Chrysler.
Once a contract is signed, Phillippi said he is looking for GM to raise its dividend by 50 percent, or $0.20 a share, in two increments.
GM shares were up 1/8 at 54.
In a sign that agreement on a labour contract between General Motors Corp. and the United Auto Workers may still have significant hurdles, the union said Friday it cancelled a meeting of its National GM Council that was scheduled here for Saturday.
The council, made up of about 250 plant-level leaders at GM locals across the country, was expected to vote on a tentative agreement covering GM's 215,000 UAW workers.
UAW spokesman Reg McGhee declined to give a reason for the cancellation, but said the council will meet instead on Wednesday, Nov. 6, in Chicago, if the union reaches an agreement with GM in the next few days.
One official close to the talks said the meeting was cancelled because the union did not reach a deal in time to print up summaries for the GM council members to review on Saturday. He did not rule out reaching an agreement on Friday.
"They're working on trying to resolve the final issues," GM spokesman Gerry Holmes said.
Still, the cancellation was viewed as a negative sign for the GM contract talks, which had resumed Friday after bargainers rested up before making another push for a tentative agreement. They bargained for 32 hours on Wednesday and Thursday, fuelling optimism that a settlement was near.
The two sides have been haggling over the total number of hourly workers that GM will guarantee to maintain over the next three years.
Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have agreed to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of their current hourly workforces, but GM wants to exclude several parts plants from the guarantees.
GM, the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three, wants changes to the pattern to allow it to cut costs and shift more parts work to outside suppliers.
GM is expected to match the Ford and Chrysler wage package, which calls for a $2,000 bonus in the first year, and 3 percent base wage increases in the second and third years.
Meanwhile, the toll of lost profits and idled workers from local strikes in Janesville, Wis., and Indianapolis continued to mount for GM.
Including 2,750 strikers at the Indianapolis metal stamping plant and 4,809 at the Janesville truck assembly plant, GM said the walkouts had idled a total of 13,309 workers by midday Friday.
Another 2,400 were scheduled to be sent home from GM's Shreveport, La., plant later Friday afternoon, and up to 2,500 workers in Linden, N.J., were told not to report to work on Monday.
The two factories are among nine GM truck plants in North America that receive fenders, hoods, roofs and other major body panels from Indianapolis.
Michael Ward, an auto analyst at Paine Webber, said the Janesville, Fort Wayne and Moraine shutdowns alone will cost GM $10 million a day in after-tax lost profits.
"We're looking at $10 million a day right now, and that could easily expand to $20 million by Monday," Ward said.
About 3,500 workers were idled at GM's Moraine, Ohio, compact sport utility vehicle plant Thursday night, while 2,250 workers were laid off at GM's Fort Wayne, Ind., full-size pickup truck assembly plant on Wednesday night.
In addition, 900 workers who build V-8 engines for trucks assembled in Janesville and Fort Wayne were idled on Friday.
A full-size truck plant in Flint, Mich., had been expected to be idled Thursday night, but union officials said GM diverted enough parts to keep it running several more days.
"GM'll start funnelling the parts around to the plants that they want to keep going," said Doug Bellamy, vice president of UAW Local 598 in Flint.
Layoffs from the UAW strikes are increasing as GM's U.S. car operations are still staggering from the effects of the three-week Canadian Auto Workers strike, which ended Oct. 23.
GM said it still had 18,958 workers idled by continuing shortages of Canadian-made parts at six car assembly plants, six engine and transmission plants and four metal stamping facilities.
After meeting for nearly 32 hours, most bargainers for General Motors Corp. and the United Auto Workers union adjourned talks without a national contract deal Thursday night as several more truck plants headed for strike-related shutdowns.
"Talks in several specific areas will continue tonight," said GM spokesman Charles Licari. "Full negotiations will resume Friday morning as bargainers continue their efforts to reach a tentative agreement."
He declined to identify the areas to be discussed Thursday night.
Talks "have snagged several times in the past week," said Harley Shaiken, a professor of labor relations at the University of California-Berkeley. "The pressure's been increased considerably by the two plants that are out on strike."
Indeed, plant-level union officials said the number of workers idled by local strikes in Indianapolis and Janesville, Wis., could reach nearly 21,000 by Saturday.
GM truck plants in Moraine, Ohio, and Flint, Mich., were expected to run out of fenders, hoods, and other sheet-metal parts from GM's strikebound Indianapolis stamping plant by late Thursday night, officials at the plants said.
Flint employs about 2,000 workers and builds crew-cab and heavy-duty, full-size pickup trucks, while Moraine employs about 4,000 and builds Chevrolet Blazer and GMC Jimmy compact sport utility vehicles.
"B-crew will come in tonight and that'll be it," said George Dunaway, vice president of International Union of Electronics Workers Local 801 in Moraine. Although his union is not involved in the UAW talks, he supports the strikers in Indianapolis and Janesville, Wis.
"A lot of their concerns are our concerns," he said.
Some states may determine that the laid-off workers won't be eligible for state unemployment benefits because they were idled by a strike.
The remainder of the nine GM truck plants fed by Indianapolis are expected to halt operations soon.
GM's Shreveport, La., compact pickup truck plant is scheduled to shut down Friday, idling 2,500 workers, and the Linden, N.J. plant, which employs 2,500 and builds both compact pickups and sport utility vehicles, will shut down Friday night.
GM's Fort Wayne plant laid off about 2,250 of its 2,600 workers as it halted production of GM's popular full-size Chevrolet and GMC pickup trucks Wednesday night. GM's other full-size truck plants in Pontiac, Mich., Oshawa, Ontario, and Silao, Mexico, are expected to follow close behind.
The strikes on Tuesday by 2,750 workers at Indianapolis and 4,800 workers in Janesville, Wis., have formed a two-pronged effort to squeeze GM's highly profitable light truck operations, increasing pressure for national and local settlements.
The shutdown of the Janesville plant alone could cost GM $50 million a week in pre-tax profits, adding to pressure on the automaker for national and local contract settlements, said David Healy, an auto analyst with Burnham Securities.
Meanwhile, other UAW locals sought to join the Indianapolis and Janesville walkouts. GM's Kokomo, Ind., electronics plant requested permission to send about 5,500 workers out on strike.
A walkout at that facility would be particularly damaging to GM because it supplies all of the automaker's North American assembly plants with engine electronics, audio systems and other parts.
The future of 12 domestic parts plants that GM considers uncompetitive remained a major sticking point in the negotiations. GM wants to exclude several of the plants from union demands that it guarantee employment for 95 percent of UAW workers over the next three years.
Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have already granted such guarantees, but GM, the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three automakers, wants changes to the pattern to allow it to cut costs..
GM's stock gained 37.5 cents to close at $53.625 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Rested negotiators for General Motors Corp. and the United Auto Workers met again Friday to make another push for agreement on a new national labour contract before a Saturday meeting of UAW leaders.
The bargainers went home without a deal Thursday night after meeting for nearly 32 hours, although some officials said the talks were grinding toward a settlement.
The negotiating session on Wednesday and Thursday was the longest since talks began between the automaker and union in June. Bargainers typically meet for long periods just prior to a tentative agreement.
"They're working on trying to resolve the final issues," GM spokesman Gerry Holmes said Friday.
Talks "have snagged several times in the past week," said Harley Shaiken, a professor of labour relations at the University of California-Berkeley. "The pressure's been increased considerably by the two plants that are out on strike."
The toll from local strikes in Janesville, Wis., and Indianapolis continued to mount as more plants shut down because of parts shortages.
GM's compact sport/utility plant in Moraine, Ohio, halted operations late Thursday night, idling 4,000 workers.
Seven other GM truck plants were expected to run out of doors, fenders and hoods made at the Indianapolis plant in the next few days. They include plants in Flint and Pontiac, Mich.; Shreveport, La.; Linden, N.J., Oshawa, Ontario, and Silao, Mexico.
Some states may determine that the laid-off workers will not be eligible for state unemployment benefits because they were idled by a strike.
The strikes on Tuesday by 2,750 workers at Indianapolis and 4,800 workers in Janesville, Wis., have formed a two-pronged effort to squeeze GM's highly profitable light truck operations, increasing pressure for national and local settlements.
Meanwhile, other UAW locals sought to join the Indianapolis and Janesville walkouts. GM's Kokomo, Ind., electronics plant requested permission to send about 5,500 workers out on strike.
A walkout at that facility would be particularly damaging to GM because it supplies all of the automaker's North American assembly plants with engine electronics, audio systems and other parts.
The future of 12 domestic parts plants that GM considers uncompetitive remained a major sticking point in the negotiations. GM wants to exclude several of the plants from union demands that it guarantee employment for 95 percent of UAW workers over the next three years.
Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have already granted such guarantees, but GM, the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three automakers, wants changes to the pattern to allow it to cut costs.
General Motors Corp. and the United Auto Workers union reached a tentative agreement early on Saturday for a new national labor contract, ending months of contentious bargaining.
"I think we said back in June that it would be a difficult negotiation, and I think we fulfilled that expectation," said a visibly tired GM Chairman Jack Smith. "Like any negotiation, you never get everything you want."
The three-year deal, which covers 215,000 hourly UAW workers, will not end local strikes that started on Tuesday night in Indiana and Wisconsin, where local grievances remain unresolved, UAW President Stephen Yokich said.
He also held out the threat of additional strikes among GM's 123 UAW locals that have not yet reached plant-specific agreements with the automaker.
"I would suggest that the company work hard and get their locals cleaned up," Yokich said. "Quite frankly the two that walked out have a heavy agenda on the table and they have a lot of work."
Yokich declined to say when the agreement would go to rank-and-file members for ratification, but about 250 local leaders from GM plants around the country would meet in Chicago on Wednesday Nov. 6 to consider the pact.
Instead of the traditional joint statements and handshakes between company and union officials, Yokich insisted that the two sides hold separate news conferences to announce the agreement shortly after 2 a.m. CST (0700 GMT) Saturday.
Details of the agreement were not released, but Gerald Knechtel, vice president of personnel, said it fits within the pattern that the UAW set at Ford Motor Co and Chrysler Corp.
Both of those companies agreed to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of their current hourly workforces.
"The UAW presented its objectives to us and we talked about the objectives that we had and we found a way to address those within the pattern that was so important to the UAW," he said, adding that the deal allows GM to make competitive improvements.
The talks were said to hit several snags over the past week over several plants that GM wanted to exclude from the 95 percent employment guarantees. Among those were a door hinge plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., that GM has put on the sale block.
The proposed exceptions to the pattern were aimed at allowing GM, the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three automakers, to cut costs and boost productivity.
Although all three of the companies pay a base wage of about $19 an hour, Ford and Chrysler buy more of their parts from lower-cost outside suppliers than GM does. GM wanted the ability to "outsource" more of its parts work.
Economic provisions of the GM contract were expected to follow those at Ford and Chrysler, offering workers a $2,000 bonus in the first year of the contract, followed by 3 percent increases in base wages during the second and third years.
The deal came as GM's production losses due to strikes at a metal stamping plant in Indianapolis and a truck plant in Janesville, Wis., mounted on Friday.
By late Friday, more than 19,000 workers at seven plants were idled, including 2,750 strikers in Indianapolis and 4,800 in Janesville.
General Motors Corp. and the United Auto Workers union reached a tentative deal for a job-preserving labour contract early Saturday, but the accord failed to halt costly local strikes in Wisconsin and Indiana.
The three-year national agreement, which covers wages, benefits and job security for GM's 215,000 hourly UAW workers, did little to resolve contentious plant-specific issues that remain unresolved at most of the carmaker's 123 locals.
UAW President Stephen Yokich, announcing the pact at a 2 a.m. EST (0700 GMT) news conference, held out the threat of "We can't tell you what's going to happen in the other locals," Yokich said. "I would suggest that the company work very hard and get their locals cleaned up."
President Clinton applauded the agreement. "I am very hopeful that the tentative agreement will be ratified, and that the outstanding local issues will quickly be resolved so that everyone can get back to work," he said.
On Tuesday night, about 2,750 workers walked off the job at GM's Indianapolis metal stamping plant and 4,800 struck the company's Janesville, Wisconsin, truck assembly plant over local grievances, including demands for more workers to deal with increasing workloads.
The strike at Indianapolis cut off supplies of fenders, hoods, roofs and other steel body panels to nine GM North American truck plants. It threatened to paralyse much of GM's highly profitable light truck operations by early next week.
On Saturday, more than 19,000 workers at seven GM assembly and components plants were idled because of the two strikes. That comes on top of 18,958 U.S. workers still on layoff status because of lingering parts shortages from a three-week Canadian Auto Workers strike that ended Oct. 23.
Analysts estimate the UAW-related shutdowns will cost the carmaker $20 million a day in lost profits, on top of a $350 million loss from the Canadian walkout.
But the national UAW accord Saturday appeared to push negotiations in Janesville and Indianapolis forward. "I think they've intensified their talks a bit," said an official at UAW Local 95 in Janesville.
UAW Local 292 officials also reported progress in local talks at GM's 5,500-employee Delco Electronics plant in Kokomo, Indiana. On Thursday, the unit sought Yokich's permission to join the other locals on strike.
The UAW-GM national agreement will be submitted to rank-and-file members for ratification after about 250 UAW leaders meet to consider the pact on Wednesday in Chicago.
The deal was unanimously approved by the union's national GM bargaining council.
Details of the pact were not released Saturday, but Gerald Knechtel, GM vice president of personnel, said it fits within the pattern that the UAW set at Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp.
Both of those companies agreed to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of their current hourly workforces and will give workers a $2,000 bonus in the first year of the contract, followed by three percent raises in the second and third years of the contract.
Knechtel said GM will depend on its UAW workforce to gain efficiencies over the next three years. The company had been seeking the flexibility to shift more work to lower-cost outside suppliers.
"We feel we have the ability to make competitive improvements in the company. We will need to do that with the UAW," he said.
In a sign that contentious issues remain, company and union officials did not announce the pact in a joint news conference with the traditional handshakes and smiles. Instead, they held made grim-faced separate statements to reporters gathered at GM's Detroit headquarters building.
"I think we said back in June that it would be a difficult negotiation, and I think we fulfilled that expectation," said a visibly tired GM Chairman Jack Smith. "Like any negotiation, you never get everything you want."
The talks were said to hit several snags during the past week over plants that GM wanted to exclude from the 95 percent employment guarantees. Among those were a door hinge plant in Flint, Michigan, and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Michigan, that the company has put on the sale block.
The proposed exceptions to the pattern were aimed at allowing GM, the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three automakers, to cut costs and boost productivity.
Although all three of the companies pay a base wage of about $19 an hour, Ford and Chrysler buy more of their parts from lower-cost outside suppliers than GM does.
Strike-fueled production losses mounted for General Motors Corp. Friday as the United Auto Workers signaled a snag in labor contract talks by canceling a Saturday meeting of plant-level leaders here.
The UAW said its 250-member National GM Council was now scheduled to meet Wednesday, Nov. 6, in Chicago if the union reaches a tentative agreement covering 215,000 GM workers in the next few days.
Although GM officials declined to rule out an agreement on Friday, the UAW's move was viewed as a negative sign for the talks because it buys more time. The council, made up of local leaders from across the country, must approve any contract deal.
Meanwhile, pressure from local strikes in Indiana and Wisconsin mounted Friday as the number of workers idled by the walkouts exceeded 19,000.
In a two-pronged effort to deprive GM of profits from its light truck operations, 2,750 workers walked off the job at the company's Indianapolis metal stamping plant and 4,809 struck the Janesville, Wis., truck assembly plant Tuesday.
The Indianapolis plant feeds fenders, doors, hoods and other major body panels to nine of GM's 11 North American light truck plants, five of which are now idle, including Janesville.
GM's Shreveport, La., compact pickup truck plant shut down Friday, idling 2,400 workers, while GM's Linden, N.J., plant, which employs about 2,500 workers, was expected to run out of parts Friday night. Linden produces Chevrolet and GMC compact pickups and sport utility vehicles.
About 3,500 workers were idled at GM's Moraine, Ohio, compact sport utility vehicle plant Thursday night, while 2,250 workers were laid off at GM's Fort Wayne, Ind., full-size pickup truck assembly plant on Wednesday night.
In addition, 900 workers who build V-8 engines for trucks assembled in Janesville and Fort Wayne were idled on Friday.
Michael Ward, an auto analyst at Paine Webber, said the Janesville, Fort Wayne and Moraine shutdowns alone will cost GM $10 million a day in after-tax lost profits.
"We're looking at $10 million a day right now, and that could easily expand to $20 million by Monday," Ward said.
GM's board of directors on Monday is expected to delay an anticipated increase in the company's quarterly common stock dividend if a deal is not reached soon. The company's quarterly payout rate of 40 cents a share is unchanged since February, despite strong profits.
Rewarding shareholders could jeopardize the talks, especially when GM is seeking concessions that would allow it to cut costs and sell off unprofitable plants, said Dean Witter Reynolds auto analyst Ronald Glantz.
"Unless a settlement is reached by Sunday, the board is not going to throw gasoline into the fire," Glantz said.
Full-size pickup truck plants in Flint and Pontiac, Mich., Oshawa, Ontario could run out of parts within the next several days, while a GM truck plant in Silao, Mexico, was believed to have a greater supply of parts on hand.
Layoffs from the UAW strikes are increasing as GM's U.S. car operations are still staggering from the effects of the three-week Canadian Auto Workers strike, which ended Oct. 23 and is estimated to cost the automaker $350 million to $375 million.
GM said it still had 18,958 workers idled by continuing shortages of Canadian-made parts at six car assembly plants, six engine and transmission plants and four metal stamping facilities.
The two sides have been haggling over the total number of hourly workers that GM will guarantee to maintain over the next three years.
Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have agreed to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of their current hourly workforces, but GM wants to exclude several parts plants from the guarantees.
GM, the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three, wants changes to the pattern to allow it to cut costs and shift more parts work to outside suppliers.
GM is expected to match the Ford and Chrysler wage package, which calls for a $2,000 bonus in the first year, and 3 percent base wage increases in the second and third years.
Labor negotiations between General Motors Corp. and the United Auto Workers went around the clock into early Saturday morning as pressure from strike-related production losses mounted on the world's largest car maker.
Bargainers at GM's world headquarters were said to be haggling over a list of plants that GM wants to exclude from employment guarantees in the three-year national contract covering 215,000 hourly workers.
Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have already agreed to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of their current hourly work forces, but GM wants to exclude several parts plants from the guarantees, including a door hinge plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., now on the sale block.
"It ain't done yet," one union negotiator at GM's Detroit headquarters said on Friday night.
GM spokesman Gerry Holmes declined to rule out a settlement early on Saturday, but would not characterize the progress of the discussions.
Bargainers struggled for nearly 45 hours from Wednesday through Friday over the proposed exceptions to the pattern, which was aimed at allowing GM, the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three automakers, to cut costs and boost productivity.
Although all three of the companies pay a base wage of about $19 an hour, Ford and Chrysler buy more of their parts from lower-cost outside suppliers than GM does.
On Friday, the UAW signaled that the talks had hit a snag when it canceled a Saturday meeting of plant-level leaders here.
The UAW said its 250-member National GM Council is now scheduled to meet on Wednesday, Nov. 6, in Chicago if the union reaches a tentative agreement in the next few days. The cancellation was viewed as a negative sign for a quick settlement because it buys significantly more time to craft a deal.
Meanwhile, pressure from local strikes in Indiana and Wisconsin mounted early Saturday as the number of workers idled by the walkouts exceeded 19,000.
By late in the evening, workers at seven plants were idled, including 2,750 strikers in Indianapolis and 4,800 in Janesville, Wis.
The Indianapolis plant feeds fenders, doors, hoods and other steel body panels to nine of GM's 11 North American light truck plants, including Janesville.
GM's Shreveport, La., compact pickup truck plant also shut down Friday, idling 2,400 workers, while GM's Linden, N.J., plant, which employs about 2,500 workers, was expected to run out of parts Friday night. Linden produces Chevrolet and GMC compact pickups and sport utility vehicles.
About 3,500 workers were idled at GM's Moraine, Ohio, compact sport utility vehicle plant Thursday night, while 2,250 workers were laid off at GM's Fort Wayne, Ind., full-size pickup truck assembly plant on Wednesday night.
In addition, 900 workers who build V-8 engines for trucks assembled in Janesville and Fort Wayne were idled on Friday.
Michael Ward, an auto analyst at Paine Webber, said the Janesville, Fort Wayne and Moraine shutdowns alone will cost GM $10 million a day in after-tax lost profits.
"We're looking at $10 million a day right now, and that could easily expand to $20 million by Monday," Ward said.
Full-size pickup truck plants in Flint and Pontiac, Mich., and Oshawa, Ontario, could run out of parts within the next several days, while a GM truck plant in Silao, Mexico, was believed to have a greater supply of parts on hand.
Layoffs from the UAW strikes were increasing as GM's U.S. car operations are still staggering from the effects of the three-week Canadian Auto Workers strike, which ended Oct. 23.
GM said it still had 18,958 workers idled by continuing shortages of Canadian-made parts at six car assembly plants, six engine and transmission plants and four metal stamping facilities. Lost profits associated with the Canadian walkout are estimated at more than $350 million.
General Motors Corp cut a deal to end a costly strike at an Indianapolis metal stamping plant on Saturday, about 14 hours after it announced a tentative national contract agreement with the United Auto Workers union.
The five-day Indianapolis strike had threatened to paralyze most of GM's North American light truck production by early next week. Along with a second, still-unresolved walkout at GM's Janesville, Wisconsin, truck plant, the dispute was responsible for the idling of more than 19,000 workers.
But the 2,750 Indianapolis strikers could be back on the job stamping out fenders, doors, hoods and other truck body parts by Sunday night following a ratification vote scheduled for Sunday morning, said Patrick Morrissey, a spokesman for GM's Metal Fabricating Division.
However, GM's full-size pickup truck plant in Pontiac, Michigan, may still shut down on Monday due to shortages of Indianapolis-made parts, joining four other idled truck plants and an crippled engine plant.
Ronald Gettelfinger, UAW regional director in Indianapolis, said the new local labor agreement, reached at about 6:15 p.m. EST (2315 GMT) on Saturday, was not influenced by the national GM-UAW labor accord, which covers 215,000 U.S. hourly workers.
The national contract defines wages, benefits, job security and other broad issues, while local pacts cover plant specific issues like work rules and staffing levels.
"We've got great negotiators at the top," Gettelfinger said. "This was local issues."
He declined to discuss the grievances that sparked the strike. They were believed to include demands for more jobs to cope with an increasing workload and protections for skilled trades workers.
UAW President Stephen Yokich, who announced the national pact at a 2 a.m. EST (0700 GMT) news conference, held out the threat of more local strikes to keep GM from dragging its feet in negotiations with its 123 locals.
"We can't tell you what's going to happen in the other locals," Yokich said. "I would suggest that the company work very hard and get their locals cleaned up."
President Bill Clinton applauded UAW-GM agreement on Saturday. "I am very hopeful that the tentative agreement will be ratified and that the outstanding local issues will quickly be resolved so that everyone can get back to work," he said.
About 4,800 workers in Janesville remain on strike, although UAW Local 95 officials said local talks intensified on Saturday. The plant, which builds GM's popular Chevrolet Tahoe, Suburban and GMC Yukon sport-utility vehicles, is one of the automaker's most profitable factories.
Analysts estimate the UAW-related shutdowns will cost the carmaker up to $20 million a day in lost profits, on top of an estimated $350 million loss from a Canadian walkout that ended on Oct. 23.
The UAW-GM national agreement will be submitted to rank-and-file members for ratification after about 250 UAW leaders meet to consider the pact on Wednesday in Chicago. The deal was unanimously approved by the union's national GM bargaining council.
Details of the pact were not released on Saturday, but Gerald Knechtel, GM vice president of personnel, said it fits within the pattern that the UAW set at Ford Motor Co and Chrysler Corp
Both of those companies agreed to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of their current hourly workforces and will give workers a $2,000 bonus in the first year of the contract, followed by 3 percent raises in the second and third years of the contract.
One union official said the pact maintains the 95 percent job guarantee but allows GM some flexibility to exit certain unprofitable businesses and to allow employment at some factories to fall below that threshold.
In a sign that contentious issues remain, company and union officials did not announce the pact in a joint news conference with the traditional handshakes and smiles. Instead, they made grim-faced separate statements to reporters gathered at GM's Detroit headquarters building.
"I think we said back in June that it would be a difficult negotiation, and I think we fulfilled that expectation," said a visibly tired GM Chairman Jack Smith. "Like any negotiation, you never get everything you want."
Workers at a key General Motors Corp. metal stamping plant in Indianapolis began returning to work on Sunday after ratifying a deal to end a five-day strike that threatened to paralyze most of the automaker's light truck production.
But a similar settlement eluded negotiators at GM's Janesville, Wis., truck assembly plant, where a strike over local issues by 4,800 workers entered its sixth day.
Janesville, which builds GM's popular Chevrolet Tahoe, Suburban and GMC Yukon sport/utility vehicles, is one of the automaker's most profitable factories.
The deal for 2,750 workers in Indianapolis, which came hours after GM and the UAW announced a tentative agrement for a new national labor contract early Saturday morning, calls for the hiring of 200 new workers at the plant.
It also leaves seniority rules for skilled trades workers intact and provides thousands of dollars in back pay for workers to settle grievances.
"I regret we did have to call a strike here," said UAW regional director Ron Gettlefinger in Indianapolis. "I'm hoping other General Motors plants I'm responsible for will heed the seriousness of local agreements."
The Indianapolis strike shut off shipments of fenders, doors, hoods and oher steel body panels to nine of GM's North American light truck plants. By the weekend, parts shortages due to the strike had caused GM to shut down truck plants in Fort Wayne, Ind., Shreveport, La., Moraine, Ohio and Linden, N.J.
Including the strikers at Janesville and Indianapolis, the UAW walkouts had idled over 19,000 workers, in addition to 18,858 GM workers still on layoff because of lingering parts shortages from a three-week Canadian Auto Workers strike that ended Oct. 23.
UAW officials said stamping operations would resume Sunday night, with the plant back to full production by Monday, but that may not prove soon enough to keep other plants from running out of parts, including GM's full-size pickup truck plant in Pontiac, Mich., which employs nearly 6,000 people.
Other threatened plants that receive parts from Indianapolis are located in Flint, Mich., Oshawa, Ontario and Silao, Mexico.
On Saturday, UAW President Stephen Yokich put GM on notice that some of the automaker's GM's 123 other locals may go on strike over lack of progress in local negotiations.
A clearer picture of the UAW-GM national agreement, which covers some 215,000 U.S. hourly workers, began to emerge Sunday. The contract meets the pattern set by Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. on most major issues, including a guarantee that GM will maintain jobs for 95 percent of its current hourly work force.
But the pact contains exceptions that will allow GM to sell some unprofitable parts plants, including a door hinge plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich.
On economics, the pact gives wokers a $2,000 bonus in the first year of the contract, followed by 3 percent raises in the second and third years of the contract. It also provides generous gains in pension benefits, including the elimination of a cap on outside earnings for retirees, which is viewed as a major incentive for older workers to leave the company.
Like Ford and Chrysler, GM will be able to pay workers in new auto parts businesses that it enters a lower wage than the standard $19 an hour paid by the Big Three.
GM has been trying to shed parts businesses as it tries to catch up to Chrysler's and Ford's efficiency levels. But analysts say the pact could slow GM's progress in trying to shrink its work force through attrition.
"GM is not going to get the competitive lift from labor in this contract," said Eugene Jennings, a retired Michigan State University professor of management who is close to Detroit's Big Three automakers. "They have to find  enough efficiencies to support excess labor."
Investors pushed General Motors Corp. shares higher Monday, a sign that Wall Street is pleased that the auto giant signed a new national labour agreement that allows it to shed some workers.
GM's shares traded up $1.50 at $55.50 in late trading on the New York Stock Exchange after the company signed the tentative agreement with the United Auto Workers union early Saturday morning.
"The Wall Street reaction reflects some belief that GM didn't cave in," said Burnham Securities auto analyst David Healy. "GM appears to have retained its right to manage and indulge in some outsourcing."
Analysts said the pact will allow GM to reduce its 215,000-member hourly work force by 30,000 or more during the next three years through normal retirements.
The pact contains a nominal guarantee that GM maintain employment of about 95 percent of its current work force -- a pattern set in the Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. agreements -- but it also allows GM to exit some unprofitable parts businesses and sell certain components plants.
David Cole, director of the University of Michigan's Office for the Study of Automotive Transportation, said he believes the pact will help GM to to boost efficiency.
"GM can use attrition to shrink its work force and take advantage of productivity improvements," Cole said. "The UAW has as much interest in a competitive General Motors as the shareholders do."
But the positive reaction was tempered by a continuing strike at GM's Janesville, Wis., truck assembly plant, where 4,809 workers walked off the job Oct. 29 over demands for more jobs.
The plant makes the Chevrolet Tahoe, Suburban and GMC Yukon sport/utilities, which are among GM's most popular -- and most profitable -- vehicles. UAW Local 95 wants GM to hire more workers in Janesville to reduce the strain of heavy overtime and an increasing workload.
On Sunday, members of UAW Local 23 returned to work at a key metal stamping plant in Indianapolis after ratifying a settlement on a new local contract.
The union members had struck for five days, shutting off shipments of fenders, doors, hoods and other steel body panels to nine of GM's 11 North American light truck assembly plants.
By the weekend, strike-caused parts shortages forced GM to shut down factories in Fort Wayne, Ind., Shreveport, La., Moraine, Ohio, and Linden, N.J.
GM said the Fort Wayne and Moraine plants are scheduled to resume normal operations Tuesday, while Shreveport and Linden will be running again by Thursday.
Last week, the UAW walkouts and lingering parts shortages from last month's Canadian Auto Workers strike had idled nearly 38,000 GM workers in the United States.
GM did not say how many workers were still idle, but added that four car plants stricken by the CAW strike will be back to full production by Tuesday, including Detroit; Lordstown, Ohio; and Lake Orion and Lansing, Mich.
Healy estimated that between the two walkouts, GM's production losses will total 175,000 cars and trucks, which will slash the company's fourth-quarter profits by $600 million to $650 million.
In contrast to the tense atmosphere that continues to surround the GM labour situation, UAW President Stephen Yokich and Chrysler Chairman Robert Eaton signed a new three-year contract in an historic ceremony at the union's Detroit headquarters.
The signing marked the first time that a Big Three automaker has signed a new labour accord at the UAW's Solidarity House.
Yokich and Eaton were in a jovial mood as they signed the pact -- a stark contrast to the separate, grim-faced news conferences where the UAW and GM announced their deal early Saturday morning.
Yokich told reporters the Chrysler signing "shows that this company recognises the union and wants to work with them."
Meanwhile, GM declared an unchanged quarterly dividend of 40 cents a share on its $1-2/3 par value common stock.
Some analysts had expected GM's board of directors to increase the annual payout to $2 a share from $1.60 because of its growing cash pile. But Lehman Brothers analyst Joseph Phillippi said the board did not want to disrupt the UAW pact's ratification by giving more cash to shareholders.
Workers at a key General Motors Corp. metal stamping plant in Indianapolis began returning to work on Sunday after ratifying a deal to end a five-day strike that threatened to paralyze most of the automaker's light truck production.
But a similar settlement eluded negotiators at GM's Janesville, Wis., truck assembly plant, where a strike over local issues by 4,800 workers entered its sixth day. Janesville, which builds GM's popular Chevrolet Tahoe, Suburban and GMC Yukon sport/utility vehicles, is one of the automaker's most profitable factories.
The deal for 2,750 workers in Indianapolis, which came hours after GM and the UAW announced a tentative agreement for a new national labor contract early Saturday morning, calls for the hiring of 200 new workers at the plant.
Due to strong demand for GM's trucks, the plant has been working heavy overtime, which has put a strain on workers, causing them to seek relief.
GM also dropped its plans to change job classifications and seniority rules for skilled trades workers and will pay thousands of dollars to workers to settle grievances.
"I regret we did have to call a strike here," said UAW regional director Ron Gettlefinger in Indianapolis. "I'm hoping other General Motors plants I'm responsible for will heed the seriousness of local agreements."
The Indianapolis strike shut off shipments of fenders, doors,hoods and other steel body panels to nine of GM's North American light truck assembly plants. By the weekend, strike-caused parts shortages forced GM to shut down factories in Fort Wayne, Ind., Shreveport, La., Moraine, Ohio and Linden, N.J.
Including the strikers at Janesville and Indianapolis, the UAW walkouts had idled over 19,000 workers, in addition to 18,958 GM workers still on layoff because of lingering parts shortages from a three-week Canadian Auto Workers strike, which ended Oct. 23.
UAW officials said stamping operations would resume Sunday night, with the plant back to full production by Monday. But that may not prove soon enough to keep other plants from running out of parts, including GM's full-size pickup truck plant in Pontiac, Mich., which employs nearly 6,000 people.
Other plants that receive parts from Indianapolis are located in Flint, Mich.; Oshawa, Ontario; and Silao, Mexico.
On Saturday, UAW President Stephen Yokich put GM on notice that some of the automaker's GM's 123 other locals may go on strike over lack of progress in local negotiations.
A clearer picture of the UAW-GM national agreement, which covers some 215,000 U.S. hourly workers, began to emerge Sunday. The contract meets the pattern set by Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. on most major issues, including a guarantee that GM will maintain jobs for 95 percent of its current hourly workforce.
But the pact contains exceptions that will allow GM to sell some unprofitable parts plants, including a door hinge plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich.
The pact also is believed to contain complicated formulas that allow GM to shrink employment in certain businesses as workers retire.
"On the surface, it looks as though as it ought to be viewed by the investor community in a positive light." said Lehman Brothers auto analyst Joseph Phillippi. "GM's primary focus was to gain the ability to ride the attrition curve."
On economics, the pact gives wokers a $2,000 bonus in the first year of the contract, followed by 2 percent raises in the second and third years of the contract. It also provides generous gains in pension benefits, including the elimination of a cap on outside earnings for retirees, which is viewed as a major incentive for older workers to leave the company.
Like Ford and Chrysler, GM will be able to trim jobs when it makes productivity improvements, and can pay workers in new auto parts businesses that it enters a lower wage than the standard $19 an hour paid by the Big Three.
GM has been trying to shed parts businesses as it tries to catch up to Chrysler's and Ford's efficiency levels. But the contract probably will not allow GM to shrink employment as much as it would like, said Eugene Jennings, a retired Michigan State University professor of management who is close to Detroit's Big Three automakers.
"GM is not going to get the competitive lift from labor in this contract," he said.
General Motors Corp. Tuesday  reached a tentative deal to end a week-long strike at its truck plant in Janesville, Wis., the last of a recent wave of local walkouts against the automaker.
About 4,809 members of United Auto Workers Local 95 were scheduled to vote on the tentative local labor agreement at a 1 p.m. EST Wednesday meeting.
Production of Chevrolet Tahoe and Suburban and GMC Yukon full-size sport-utility vehicles at the Janesvillle plant could resume shortly thereafter if the deal is ratified, said GM spokesman Thomas Beaman. The trucks are among GM's most popular and profitable vehicles.
The resumption would mean that by Thursday, all of GM's North American car and truck operations would be operating normally for the first time since Oct. 3, when about 26,000 members of the Canadian Auto Workers went on strike.
GM was still reeling from the Canadian strike when workers at Janesville and GM's Indianapolis metal stamping plant walked off the job last week. By last weekend, the auto giant had nearly 40,000 U.S. workers idled by the two local UAW strikes and lingering Canadian parts shortages.
However, the UAW has threatened GM with additional local walkouts if the automaker drags its feet in plant-specific negotiations with the rest of its 123 locals.
Neither GM nor officials for Local 95 would discuss details of the agreement. The union's members walked off the job Oct. 29 over plant-specific issues, including demands for more workers to ease the burdens of heavy overtime and an increasing production rate.
"We're confident we've got a fair and equitable agreement for our membership," said Buford Beleau, a spokesman for Local 95 in Janesville. "We just want to get back to work building trucks and provide for our families, like everybody else."
To settle the Indianapolis strike, GM agreed to hire 200 more workers, pay thousands of dollars in back pay to workers and drop plans to change job classifications for skilled trades workers.
GM truck plants in Shreveport, La., and Linden, N.J., which were shut down by a lack of fenders, doors, and other steel body panels from Indianapolis, will be back to their normal work schedules by Thursday.
But the automaker's Wentzville, Mo., plants which halted one of two production shifts because of the Canadian strike, will keep 1,100 workers on temporary layoff for nearly two more weeks. The extended layoff is aimed at reducing dealer inventories of GM's all-new, full-size vans, Beaman said.
Despite an all-new design for 1997 and a complete renovation of the Wentzville factory, he said the new Chevrolet Express and GMC Savana were falling victim to lower demand for all full-size vans.
Also on Wednesday, about 250 UAW local leaders from plants around the country will meet in Chicago to review details of the union's tentative, three year national contract with GM. They must approve the pact to send it to GM's 215,000 U.S. hourly workers for ratification.
The contract is expected to give GM flexibility to exit some unprofitable parts businesses and reduce its workforce through attrition and early retirements, while nominally guaranteeing that the automaker will maintain hourly employment at 95 percent of its current level.
The 95 percent job guarantee was a cornerstone of the UAW's contracts with Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp., which also offered workers a $2,000 bonus in the first year of the pact, follwed by 3 percent raises in the second and third years.
General Motors Corp. can shrink its workforce under a United Auto Workers pact that differs significantly from contracts with Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp., the union disclosed Wednesday.
But the three-year GM agreement also contains tougher restrictions on using outside companies for parts, aimed at curbing job losses to lower-cost outside suppliers.
Following a unanimous approval by about 250 plant-level leaders gathered here Wednesday, GM's 215,000 rank-and-file UAW members are expected to ratify the pact by Nov. 17.
Despite the differences, most local officials said they were pleased with the pact.
"This agreement definitely sells itself," said Duane Zuckschwerdt, president of UAW Local 659 in Flint, Mich. "I don't foresee a problem with ratification."
In documents distributed to the leaders, the union said the contract calls for GM to follow Ford and Chrysler in maintaining employment at 95 percent of current levels, but contains certain key exceptions.
The pact allows GM to halt replacements of retiring workers when it makes efficiency gains in its factories -- a point that will be especially helpful to the automaker as it introduces new cars and trucks that can be built with fewer workers over the next several years.
Another provision allows GM to adjust workforces in plants and business lines located in larger geographic groupings than at Ford and Chrysler.
For example, GM's 13 factories in Flint, Mich., which employ nearly 28,000 workers, constitute a single grouping. As such, GM does not have to guarantee 95 percent of the jobs in each facility, only 95 percent of the total, which would allow the automaker to exit certain uncompetitive businesses.
Some plants in the Flint grouping remain at risk. GM's V-8 engine plant there is still scheduled to close in the third quarter of 1999, and the contract did not address the future of the Buick City assembly plant, which has been assigned no new product beyond the 1999 model year.
UAW officials say they hope to persuade GM to commit to new products to those plants.
GM wants to exit such labor-intensive businesses such as "cut-and-sew" interior trim operations because it maintains it cannot be competitive at base wage rates that will reach $21.59 an hour for the average assembly and parts worker by the end of the contract. Including benefits, GM's hourly labor costs exceed $43 per worker.
GM is currently negotiating to sell an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., and a door hinge plant in Flint, but UAW Vice President Richard Shoemaker said the contract gives no consent to the sale and does not exclude any other plants.
"We have not agreed they can sell those plants," he said. "If they do sell them, there isn't any question that they're covered by the GM national agreement."
However, Jim Macbride, a UAW international representative, warned that Livonia is among several plants that may wage local strikes against GM. "There's going to be a line in the sand drawn somewhere," he said.
Workers at GM's Janesville, Wis., truck plant began returning to work on Wednesday after a ratifying a deal to end a week-long strike. Most of GM's 123 locals are still in contentious negotiations over local agreements.
To help cushion the blow for workers that may be idled by productivity improvements and discontinued businesses, the UAW said GM has pledged to spend up to $3.75 billion to pay idled workers -- a $400 million increase over the company's committment under the previous contract.
Chrysler agreed to increase its income security committment by $200 million to a total of $551 million, while Ford did not add to its $1.156 billion income security fund.
GM faces more stringent outsourcing restrictions than Ford and Chrysler do. For example, when GM is contemplating a decision to put a product up for bid by outside firms, it must notify the union sooner in the process.
If GM selects an outside supplier to make the part, it must give the UAW at least 30 additional days to match the supplier bid. And the company also will now povide the union with a quarterly master list of parts made by outside firms.
Most other provisions in the agreement are identical to the Ford and Chrysler contracts. The pact calls for workers to receive $2,000 in the first year, followed by base wage increases of 3 percent in the second and third years.
The pact also includes a 13 percent increase in pension payments for workers under 62 with 30 years of service who retire during the agreement. Elimination of a cap on outside income earned by retirees is viewed as an incentive for older workers to retire.
