Imperial Tobacco Group will split from conglomerate Hanson Plc on Oct. 1 as one of the most efficient players in its sector, but while its new chief talks of export-led growth, the outlook is clouded by the threat of litigation against tobacco firms.
Imperial is Britain's second-biggest tobacco firm after B.A.T Industries. Its brands include Embassy, John Player Special and Superkings cigarettes as well as Panama and Castella cigars.
It is one of four arms of the mighty Hanson conglomerate being spun off into separate companies.
In the 10 years since Hanson took over Imperial, it has slashed costs, cut its brands to 33 from 150 and raised productivity by 195 percent. Its 1995 profits were 348 million pounds ($538.9 million) on 3.6 billion ($5.6 billion) of sales.
But analysts fear that despite Imperial's impressive track record, its shares could face a rough ride once listed in London.
This week saw tobacco stocks hit by a backlash in the United States, with fresh litigation plus tough new curbs from President Clinton to regulate the industry.
So far, BAT Industries has borne the brunt. But some analysts believe it is only a matter of time before the U.S. scenario widens its impact and is repeated across the Atlantic.
"If it happens in the United States, it's subsequently followed in other countries," said Zafar Khan, analyst at Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull.
"Imperial could have been a ripe international takeover candidate. But the litigation threat means a group buying a tobacco company would have a tough time selling the idea to shareholders now," he said.
UBS analysts agree that the threat of legal action is enough to dampen the company's outlook.
But they warn of another possible dampener on the stock when Imperial starts trading -- its heavy reliance on Britain, largely seen as a mature market. Britain accounts for 87 percent of profits, say analysts.
Imperial has already committed itself to overseas expansion, but there are fears it will have a tough time muscling in on the U.S. giants, which have already made inroads into the markets of tomorrow - India, China and the Far East.
Gareth Davis, Imperial's chief executive, told the London-based Evening Standard newspaper earlier this week that he believed the group would continue to build up exports to Europe and the Asia-Pacific region.
"Worldwide this industry is buoyant," he said.
Imperial Tobacco Group will split from conglomerate Hanson Plc on October 1 as one of the most efficient players in its sector, but while the new chief talks of export-led growth, the outlook is clouded by the threat of litigation against tobacco firms.
Imperial is Britain's second biggest tobacco firm after B.A.T Industries and its brands include Embassy, John Player Special and Superkings cigarettes as well as Panama and Castella cigars.
It is one of four arms of the mighty Hanson conglomerate being spun off into separate floated companies to unlock value.
In the ten years since Hanson took over Imperial, it has slashed costs, cut its brands to 33 from 150 and raised productivity by 195 percent. 1995 profits were 348 million pounds on 3.6 billion of sales.
But analysts fear that despite Imperial's impressive track record, marking it as the comeback kid of the tobbaco industry, its shares could face a rough ride once listed in London.
This week saw tobacco stocks hit by a backlash in the United States, with fresh litigation plus tough new curbs from U.S. President Bill Clinton to regulate the industry.
So far, BAT Industries has borne the brunt. But some analysts believe it is only a matter of time before the U.S. scenario widens its impact and is repeated across the Atlantic.
"If it happens in the U.S. it's subsequently followed in other countries," said Zafar Khan, analyst at Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull.
"Imperial could have been a ripe international takeover candidate. But the litigation threat means a group buying a tobacco company would have a tough time selling the idea to shareholders now," he said.
UBS analysts agree that the threat of legal action is enough to dampen the company's outlook.
But they warn of another possible dampener on the stock when Imperial starts trading - its heavy reliance on Britain, largely seen as a mature market. Britain accounts for 87 percent of profits, say analysts.
Imperial has already committed itself to overseas expansion, but there are fears that it will have a tough time muscling in on the U.S. giants which have already made inroads into the markets of tomorrow - India, China and the Far East.
"We see investor concerns on litigation risk combined with the uncertain outlook in the key UK market as implying a 20-30 percent PE (price earnings) discount to the UK average." This assumes a prospective PE of 9.9 times, UBS said in a note.
It has given Hanson a total break-up value of 164 pence, in a market range of 150 to 200 pence per share. Hanson shares were down 2 1/2 pence at 159 1/2 by 1033 GMT Friday.
UBS specifically values the Imperial constituent at 39 pence per share or 2.03 billion pounds ($3.14 billion).
However, another investment analyst who declined to be named, said he was more upbeat on Imperial's prospects.
"It's a clean business. It could become a takeover target and it's also very cash generative," he said.
He values Imperial at 37 pence in a total Hanson break-up valuation of 187 pence per share.
There is some upside to the Imperial story. Apart from being viewed as a highly efficient player and being the second biggest UK tobacco company with 38 percent of the market, it is also poised to try and tap the vast emerging markets.
Gareth Davis (corrects from Nigel Davis), Imperial's chief executive who joined the company straight from university, told the London-based Evening Standard newspaper earlier this week that he believed the group would continue to build up exports to Europe and the Asia-Pacific region.
"Worldwide this industry is buoyant," he said.
Imperial has said in earlier mission statements that it will expand abroad through "organic growth and acquisition."
But with 1.1 billion pounds in debt as part of its Hanson inheritance, industry watchers wonder just how it will finance its much needed expansion. ($1=.6458 Pound)
Two of the biggest names in the British motor industry, Rover and Vauxhall, kicked off the British International Motor Show on Tuesday by unveiling big new investments to fuel their drive for more exports.
Rover, owned by Germany's BMW, said it planned to launch a new four-wheel drive "baby Land Rover" to take on Japanese rivals in Britain and world export markets.
The new vehicle, due to go on sale in 1998, is part of Rover's rolling 3.0 billion pound ($4.75 billion) investment programme.
Rover will in addition inject 3.5 billion pounds of new business into the components industry. This will go mainly to British firms and safeguard tens of thousands of jobs at Rover and its supplier firms.
Vauxhall, owned by General Motors of the United States.S., also guaranteed 4,200 existing jobs at its Ellesmere Port complex in northwest England with the announcement of a 300 million pound investment to modernise the plant.
Efforts by both companies to gear up to expand foreign sales come as the British market is witnessing sluggish sales, with most growth stemming from sales to company car fleets.
The Birmingham-based motor show, following the recent Paris showcase, saw motor companies banging the sales drum, seeking to gloss over their problems with glitz and new gizmos to tempt customers into buying. But exports remain key.
Rover's new chief executive, Dr Walter Hasselkus, said: "The baby Land Rover is very much an export product," adding that he hoped its export sales would account for 70 percent of production and boost sales in 1998.
Vauxhall Motors chairman and managing director Nick Reilly said while the British and European markets remained difficult, he saw opportunities for sales of the five-year old Astra model to grow quite significantly in Asia Pacific and Latin America.
Most industry leaders agree that Europe is likely to remain a cut-throat place to do business, with over-capacity squeezing margins.
Ian McAllister, head of Ford Motors in Britain, told Reuters that the six percent growth levels seen in Europe was distorted by factors like discounting and the French government offering incentives for customers to buy new cars.
Some analysts put underlying European growth as low as two percent, after stripping out factors like those cited by Ford.
McAllister blamed poor consumer interest in Britain on the "feeling-not-so-good" factor and predicted no turnaround until consumers were cured of their recessionary hangover.
The Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders industry group admitted that a turnaround depended on persuading "Joe Public to visit showrooms" again and the first test is tomorrow when the show opens to consumers. ($1=.6317 Pound)
Ford Motor Company Ltd, the U.S. carmaker's U.K. arm, said on Tuesday that the British sales outlook for 1997 looked pretty flat as customers suffered from a "feeling-not-so-good" factor.
Ian McAllister, chairman and managing director of Ford U.K., told Reuters in an interview at the British International Motor Show that weak sentiment was the primary reason for sluggish interest among UK consumers in the last three years.
"People were badly bitten by the recession and have become cautious about their own personal balance sheets," he said.
He added that it would require an end to consumer worries, like house owners' negative equity, and a cure for the recessionary hangover before the private car market took off.
Industry analysts have said that most of the growth in the UK car market has been due to companies buying cars, rather than the man on the street snapping up new models.
McAllister said company fleet sales would remain a priority for Ford in the coming year but said, "We will reduce our exposure to the heavily discounted rental market."
The UK chief agreed that the slight growth in sales across the wider European car market so far in 1996 had been distorted by government incentives in countries like France to trade in fuel guzzling old cars for new models, as well as heavy discounting by most car makers.
The underlying picture for the European car industry has been less promising, he acknowleged, agreeing that excess market capacity in Europe had fuelled downward pressure on margins for players across the board.
-- London newsroom +44 171 542 7717
Wickes Plc, the British Do-It-Yourself retailer rocked by accounting irregularities this summer, said on Wednesday the first cost was a 51 million pounds ($80.84 million) write-off for which its ex-chairman accepted responsibility.
The retailer said the problems had resulted in profits being overstated by 51 million pounds ($80.8 million) over recent years and that amount will be wiped off shareholder funds.
The restatement of the accounts will result in a reduction of 26 million pounds in operating profit for 1995, 14 million pounds for 1994 and 11 million pounds for earlier years.
Profits for 1995 will also be hit by a two million pounds charge against shareholder funds relating to European businesses and a 10 million pounds charge stemming from property interests.
But the cost does not end there. Finance director Bill Hoskins, brought in after the purge which saw former chairman and chief executive Henry Sweetbaum resign, told Reuters he expected another one-off charge against 1996 results.
This relates to restructuring and the costs of the investigation into the accounting problems uncovered in June. Hoskins told Reuters: "Taking the two together, the cost won't be tens of millions, but around 10 million."
The company will now undergo a refinancing rights issue. Hoskin said 30 million pounds would be "a good starting point" and be used to cut gearing (the debt-to-equity ratio) which remains "pretty horrid."
The new chairman Michael von Brentano said in a letter to shareholders his predecessor Sweetbaum accepted "ultimate responsibility" and would repay his 1.2 million pounds in bonus payments including tax.
Former finance director Trefor Llewellyn has agreed to repay his 485,000 pounds bonus for 1995.
The group is seeking a new chief executive and said it also intends to strengthen non-executive representation on its board.
Disciplinary action has been taken against two Wickes directors with responsibility for the buying department, both of whom have resigned. Further action against other middle ranking executives and more junior employees will be taken in due course, the company said.
Wickes will replace auditors Arthur Andersen once the work is completed on revisions, but it reserved the right to take action against it.
"I appreciate that much of what I have written will be very disappointing to you," von Brentano's letter said. "But now my principal concern is to secure the company's future, define the appropriate cost base and reassert the group's market strengths," he said.
Hoskins also spoke of a new start, telling Reuters "We want to make a clear distinction between the past and the future. It is essential that we draw a line in the sand."
But the path to profitability still looks rocky. Nick Bubb, analyst at MeesPierson said there were two disappointments: "The company is losing money this year, admittedly partly because of large exceptional items, and the fact that the debt is as high as it is at 65 million pounds - that is a big increase and I can see why a rights issue is needed."
But he added that 30 million pounds was seen as the bare minimum. This would cut gearing to just 70 percent. "It may need to raise as much as 40 or 50 million and that won't be easy," said Bubb.
Wickes shares remain suspended at 69 pence, frozen at that level since the problems were uncovered in June. They will not resume trading until early 1997. ($1=.6309 Pound)
Wickes Plc, the British Do-It-Yourself retailer hit by accounting irregularities that led to an overstating of profits, said on Wednesday its ex-chairman had accepted responsibility and the cost would be a 51 million pounds write-off.
The retailer said the problems had resulted in profits being overstated by 51 million pounds ($80.8 million) over recent years and that amount would be written off shareholder funds.
Restatement of the accounts will result in a reduction of 26 million pounds in operating profit for 1995, 14 million pounds for 1994 and 11 million pounds for earlier years.
Profits for 1995 will also be hit by a two million pounds charge against shareholder funds relating to European businesses and a 10 million pounds charge stemming from property interests.
In a letter to shareholders, new chairman Michael von Brentano said the group had recorded an operating loss for the nine months so far this year but pledged that its objective was a return to profits in 1997.
"A new business plan...will be finalised once the negotiations with suppliers are substantially complete. This provides for a substantial reduction in costs, improved marketing initiatives and efficient administrative procedures," he said.
Wickes also plans a refinancing involving a rights issue of new shares to restore its gearing to a "more suitable level". Group net debt averaged 65 million in the second half of the year.
Wickes said it would not seek a relisting of its shares, which were suspended in June, until the new rights shares were issued. A prospectus in connection with the issue was expected to be issued in December, with the new shares being issued following shareholder approval in early 1997.
"I appreciate that much of what I have written will be very disappointing to you," he said. "But now my principal concern is to secure the company's future, define the appropriate cost base and reassert the group's market strengths."
Von Brentano said his predecessor, Henry Sweetbaum, who resigned in June, had now accepted "ultimate responsibility" for overstating profits.
Sweetbaum will repay 1.2 million pounds in bonus payments, including tax, and former finance director Trefor Llewellyn has agreed to repay his 485,000 pounds bonus for 1995.
The group is seeking a new chief executive and said it also intended to strengthen non-executive representation on its board.
Disciplinary action has been taken against two Wickes directors with responsibility for the buying department, both of whom have resigned. Further action will be taken against other middle ranking executives and more junior employees.
The news ends months of waiting for shareholders which saw the shares in limbo at 69 pence after suspension, compared with a year high of 142.
The chairman said it was now important to look to the future and offered some good news, saying that sales in the Wickes stores had been up 8.9 percent on a comparable-store basis in the third quarter, recovering from a 9.7 percent slump seen in the first three months of the year. ($1=.6309 Pound)
Wickes Plc, the Do-It-Yourself retailer hit by accounting discrepencies dating back five years, told Reuters on Wednesday it planned another one-off charge against 1996 results of around 10 million stg.
The charge will relate to restructuring and the costs of the investigation into the accounting problems revealed in June. Finance director Bill Hoskins told Reuters in an interview: "Taking the two together, the cost won't be tens of millions, but around 10 million." He also said that under plans for a rights issue 30 million stg would be "a good starting point."  
The charge cited by the finance chief will be in addition to charges announced by the chairman Michael von Brentano earlier on Wednesday.
Von Brentano had said there would be a 51 million stg write-off against shareholder funds to cover the profit overstatements for recent years, due to misleading accounting.
There is also a separate 10 million stg charge relating to property interests.
Wickes said it planned to explore all avenues to boost its finances before going to shareholders, with a 30 million cash call seen as possible.  
Details of the refinancing are due in December, said Wickes, when it will reveal more about how it plans to turn the group round to profitability by 1997.
Hoskins described the current level of gearing as "pretty horrid." Net debt has averaged at 65 million in the second half.
Talking about the timetable for change, he said "Hopefully the plans will be approved in January and the share relisting will be in early 1997."
Shares are currently suspended, frozen at 69 pence.
The company aims to cut costs and "establish a proper cost base" to make its accounting transparent in the future.
Hoskins concluded that the company wanted to make a clean break from its past troubles. "We want to make a clear distinction between the past and the future. It is essential that we draw a line in the sand and where we have to face up to our responsibilities we will."
The chairman told Reuters "We're in negotiations with all our suppliers and we hope our negotiations will be concluded by the end of the month."
He added that next year would start with a clean slate, with no more charges expected.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
Japanese car giant Nissan Motor Co is expected to make a decision on whether to go ahead with building a new medium-sized vehicle for the European market in spring 1997, according to the head of its UK operations.
Ian Gibson, managing director of Nissan Motor UK and vice-president of Nissan Europe, said in an interview with Reuters he would be presenting his plan to the Nissan board in Tokyo next spring.
But he added that the investment size, design details and production were yet to be thrashed out. Gibson said it was still an open verdict on whether the plan would go ahead.
Speaking from the British Internaitonal Motor Show in Birmingham, he said the new car would be between its small Micra and larger Primera, based on the Almeira model which is currently manufactured in Japan and shipped to Europe.
"If we build the car in Europe, the design and develoment is purely for a model destined for Europe, not one that has to include a number of viewpoints for world export."
"We will do it from scratch if it goes ahead," said Gibson.
But he added that if the decision is given the go-ahead next year it would mean moving up to 100,000 units of capacity from Japan into Europe.
"The question is what opportunities are there for Japan to use that excess capacity for something else?"
Gibson said this was part of the equation in the decision but refused to outline what options the Japan headquarters were looking at in terms of "new models and new markets."
If Nissan does decide to build the new model in Europe it would be manufactured in the UK or Spain.
Gibson was circumspect about the cost of developing and putting the new model on sale, saying "I can't see it happening for less than 200 million (stg). But that's the absolute minimum.
He refused to cite a top end figure, but separately spoke of the general industry cost of building and marketing a new vehicle, estimating it at between one and three billion stg.
On Nissan's European sales for 1996, Gibson said there would be a modest rise, predicting three percent sales growth for 1997.
British building group AMEC Plc said on Friday it was exploring a possible investment in France's Spie Batignolle's electrical and construction businesses with the aim of widening its international exposure.
AMEC said it had been in talks with Spie management about taking an unquantified minority stake which could be raised to a majority stake from the current parent group Schneider SA.
If clinched, the deal would create a major European player with around five billion pounds ($7.9 billion) in sales, with 40 percent exposure in Britain, 30 percent in France and the rest worldwide.
Peter Mason, AMEC's chief executive, told Reuters: "One important concept is that there is little overlap between the two groups."
He admitted that AMEC's possible greater exposure to France came as the market was suffering from very tough conditions but he said that AMEC was "buying at the bottom, not at the top" and foresaw a turnaround.
The new deal could act as a springboard for AMEC into new markets including oil and gas and pharmaceuticals and new regions including Indonesia, Latin America and South Africa, Mason said.
At present 70 percent of its sales are in Britain.
Mason told Reuters that the two parties were at the due diligence stage and expected more details by November, with completion in December.
The initial stake will be funded from AMEC's existing cash reserves and will give it access to Spie's international network of regional bases offering partnership opportunities on a cost-efficient basis.
The decision to raise the stake to a majority holding would be taken in "a number of years' time and I'm not talking one or two years".
AMEC and Spie management envisage a possible flotation of the French operation.
"There will be negotiations between the management and us on how much we will retain and what to float. It will also depend on the state of the (stock) market at the time," the AMEC chief said.
"I have been most impressed with Spie's management team and the progress they have made in revitalising Spie," he added.
Spie has 28,000 employees and operates in 290 locations. In its 1995 results after restructuring it reported turnover of 17 billion francs ($3.26 billion) and an operating profit of 34 million francs. ($1=.6298 Pound) ($1=5.211 French Franc)
UK building bosses and health insiders have warned of dying confidence in privately financed health projects, unless there is rapid acceleration in the number of contracts awarded in the next few months.
This industry crisis of confidence comes ahead of Monday's annual Private Finance Panel conference on Monday, which will be addressed by the Chancellor of the Exchequer Kenneth Clarke and health secretary Stephen Dorrell.  
This week the government provided a glimmer of hope, however, giving the go-ahead to a 280 million pounds east London hospital project won by a venture led by AMEC Plc.
But of all the problems in the Conservative government's flagship private finance initiative (PFI) -- aimed at attracting private sector cash for public infrastructure projects -- health has proved to be the biggest headache of all.
The Treasury set Health Secretary Stephen Dorrell a target of 500 million pounds of projects by April.  
The likelihood of that target being reached looked slim until this week, when the government sought to temporarily silence its critics with its announcement of the first major private finance health project -- the east London hospital.
Before that, building firms and National Health Service (NHS) leaders had been apportioning blame for delays on each other and the government as it tried to referee both sides.
British junior health minister John Horam defended his department's record in a recent interview with Reuters.  
"We are confident of getting 500 million pounds by April. If we are able to bring in a 170 million project and a 30 million one in the next few months then we are almost there," he said.
But some construction industry leaders remain downbeat, privately hinting the biggest players in the business will shun future projects for fear of tying up further millions in a sector which is taking too long to deliver the goods.
"I've heard that around 20 companies are not going to go forward with new bids," one industry leader said.
Also, some leading National Health Service (NHS) figures have questioned the value of the policy itself.  
Gordon Best, a leading adviser to chief executives of NHS Trusts told Reuters the policy was "a dead duck" in health and said the government would have to push one or two schemes through just to "save face." He said PFI had resulted in projects which the NHS could not afford and failed its needs.
Another construction industry leader summed up the crisis of confidence among builders: "Companies are frustrated with the whole negotiating approach -- I wouldn't say it should be abandoned but the whole process needs radical surgery."
Graham Watts, chief executive of the Construction Industry Council was also pessimistic.  
"The big companies have basically had enough. They've spent a lot of money so far and there is resentment that they're being used to pioneer a system which is not working at a time when an industry is still locked in recession."
PFI has been very slow getting off the ground, both due to red tape and having the Treasury as an "out-of-the-room negotiator' for many of the projects, industry sources said.
Business has been feeding through in other sectors like roads and prisons, but health has proved slow to take off.  
One positive factor is that PFI does have the backing of the opposition Labour Party, so industry figures are talking to Labour about their problems. A general election is due by May 1997, with Labour currently leading in opinion polls.
In the meantime, the health sector problems remain. Another issue dogging confidence in the building sector is the fear that building firms could be saddled with liabilities if an NHS Trust defaults on repayments over the 30-year term.
But minister Horam told Reuters the government had changed the law to underwrite that risk. "This is one reason why these projects have taken so long. We got Royal Assent on this in June and it makes that commitment inescapable."
He dimissed claims of disillusion: "The big boys are competing in PFI. No single project has been left without a bidder."
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
AMEC Plc, the British building group, said late on Friday that expected to issue details of its possible investment in France's Spie Batignolle by November, predicting it would be wrapped up by the end of the year.
Peter Mason, chief executive, said an envisaged initial stake would probably be followed by a decision to take on a larger controlling share "in a number of years time, and I'm not talking one or two years."
Spie Batignolles is a currently a unit of holding company Schneider SA.  
That would be followed by a decision on whether to float part of it off. The amount to be floated would depend on various factors, he said.
"There will be negotiations between the management and us on how much we will retain and what to float. It will also depend on the state of the (stock) market at the time," said AMEC's chief executive.
He said the deal had been under discussion for some months and represented a good fit. An eventual combined group would have 5.0 billion stg of sales and give AMEC access to key new markets in areas like oil and gas and pharmaceuticals.  
It will also act as a springboard for AMEC into new regions, notably Indonesia, South America and South Africa.
"At present 70 percent of our business is in the UK," said Mason. But the new deal will mean that the combined group has 40 percent U.K. exposure, 30 percent French exposure with the remainder in world sales.
"One important concept is that there is little overlap between the two groups," Mason added.
He admitted that the greater exposure to France came as the market was suffering from very tough conditions, but he said that AMEC was "buying at the bottom, not at the top."
The deal is currently at due diligence stage.
--London newsroom +44 171 5427717
Wolseley Plc, the British building materials giant, is seen reporting slightly lower year pretax profits next Tuesday as expected, but reporting a rise in its dividend payout.
Wolseley was one of many in the sector to issue a profit warning earlier this year when it said that year profits for the period to July 31 would not match 1995.  
But the group is seen turning in a more solid performance for the year than rivals including Redland Plc and RMC Group Plc who have been hit by their heavy exposure to the German market.
Analysts forecasts for Wolseley's year profits ranged from 230 million stg to 240 million, with an average prediction of 234.9 million against 245.4 million last year.
The dividend is expected to come out between 10.3 pence and 10.5 pence, with analysts predicting an average payout of 10.3 pence against 9.8 pence last year.  
A key reason for its relatively better performance compared to sector rivals is that that 50 percent of Wolseley's revenues stemmed from the U.S. market, an analyst said.
"The U.S. may have its regional differences but nationally the economy is doing well," he said.
He added, however, that the UK market remained difficult and France continued to be "dreadful."
France is expected to continue to be difficult, while in the UK a recent uptick in the housing market may have fed through to materials firms -- but this remains to be seen.  
With a recent changeover of top management, market watchers will also be looking for evidence of any tinkering with the group strategy.
Wolseley's existing strategy is seen as sound and analysts may be perturbed if there is evidence of it being radically altered, said one.
No exceptionals are anticipated in the results.
--Edna Fernandes, London newsroom +44 171 5427717
British building materials company Wolseley Plc reported a one percent slip in year pretax profits on Tuesday, but despite topping analysts' forecasts in a tough market shares slid on the poor outlook for mainland Europe.
Pretax profits for the year ended July 31 fell to 242.9 million pounds ($387 million) from 245.4 million. But sales rose to 4.31 billion from 3.78 billion pounds and the dividend was raised to 10.35 pence from 9.80 last year.
The fallback in profits had been flagged in a profit warning earlier this year.
But Wolseley survived the difficult conditions better than others partly thanks to its lower European exposure. The group has 50 percent of its sales in the U.S.
Chairman Richard Ireland reported organic sales growth across all three divisions blaming the lower profits on "poor economic conditions in mainland Europe and volatile lumber prices in the U.S."
"The results for 1996 should be set against the background of economic difficulties in France and Austria and a flat home (UK) market," he said.
But in an interview with Reuters chief financial controller Stephen Webster said "I do not see an upturn in the next 12 months in France, Austria or Germany."
He denied it would seriously dampen profits this coming year, explaining that conditions remain stable.
The UK market showed a glimmer of recovery, with spending on repair and maintenance of homes moving ahead.
But Webster said the housebuilding sector had seen companies using up existing stock so there has been little feed-through to companies like Wolseley. He predicted it would be spring before the industry felt the benefits.
The finance chief also expressed concern about the threat of an interest rate hike in the U.S. "A half a percent would not be a big deal but one percent could damage confidence."
The caution in all its markets was enough to push shares lower. By 1045 GMT they were down 13 pence at 494.
The new chief executive John Young did not signal any departure from the group's existing strategy.
But Webster signalled the possibility of some change "We are keen to keep the good things. If anything it may mean a change of style. "But there are no sacred cows in Wolseley. We will take difficult decisions if needed."
Young said in the interim statement he wanted to look to expansion into new regions and products. With gearing at a low 7.7 percent, there is scope to raise it to around 30 percent if a big acquisition comes along, said Webster.
$1=.6270 Pound)
UK leisure group Conrad Plc is seen sealing its proposed takeover of Sheffield United Football Club in three to four weeks, when details will be sent to shareholders after due diligence is complete, a senior source close to the company told Reuters.
Conrad confirmed earlier on Tuesday it was in talks with the UK soccer club about the acquisition which is expected to take the form of a reversed takeover with Sheffield floating on the London Stock Exchange. The source said: "Conrad will pay a figure approaching 10 million, but it'll be under 10 million."
Smiths Industries Plc said on Wednesday that its $30 million acquisition of Leland Electrosystems Inc of the U.S. offered a perfect product fit and access to major military aircraft supply contracts.
Leland is an electrical power generator manufacturer for military and civil aircraft. It has a key U.S. position to supply the F18 military aircraft which is the principal U.S. fighter jet.
It has also secured an order to supply the new version of the F18, involving 1,000 aircraft.  
Russell Plumley, director of public affairs, told Reuters in an interview that Leland's contract for these military aircraft alone involved "very substantial sums. Tens of millions of dollars over a five to six year period."
The smaller civil aviation side of the business includes a contract to provide generators for the 777 commercial aircraft. Smiths also services the F18 and 777 aircraft in other product areas, he said.
The Leland deal will be earnings enhancing in the first full year after acquisition. But Smiths said it would not be implementing job cuts or cost cutting.
Britain's second biggest bus company Cowie Group said on Thursday it had been approached by a defence vehicle manufacturer about forming a leasing joint venture targeting clients including the Ministry of Defence.
Cowie told Reuters that the tentative approach was made this year and added it was open to considering new options for business.
But the bus and vehicle leasing giant played down a report by The Times newspaper which said the firm was pitching specifically to buy and lease battle tanks, saying such a move was "highly speculative at this stage."
Cowie conceded, however, that it had received an approach to form a leasing venture for military transportation equipment.
Robert Blower, a Cowie spokesman, told Reuters: "A UK defence equipment supplier has approached us. Their idea was for Cowie to come in as player in the consortium, with our leasing expertise. We will assess each new idea on its merit."
He said any move into military vehicles would have to be cleared with shareholders first, "...for ethical as well as commercial reasons," he said.
On the subject of leasing out frontline tanks, Cowie was more cautious, admitting that there had been "No talks with the MOD. But it has said that under PFI (private finance initiative) there aren't any no-go areas," said Blower.
The PFI scheme, applied across all government departments, aims to bring private cash into public spending projects including the option of the government leasing equipment. But an MOD spokesman was highly sceptical. Asked whether the MOD would put out a PFI project for tank leasing, he said
"Emphatically not. In broad terms the PFI rules nothing out and nothing in. Cowie has won a contract (with us) for forklift trucks and that is not. There is nothing else on the cards, let alone tanks."
Cowie announced on Wednesday it had won a material handling equipment leasing contract with the MOD.
Tank and transportation equipment manufacturers like Vickers Plc were sceptical about reports of expanding leasing to military vehicles.
A Vickers spokeswoman told Reuters it did not approach Cowie and described the idea of leasing battle tanks as "fairly off the wall. Leasing trucks is one things, but a battle tank is quite another," she said.
But GKN was more circumspect. Asked whether it had approached anyone about the idea of forming a leasing venture to supply the MOD or other markets, a spokeswoman said "There are no discussions at this stage."
U.S. giants have already caught onto the concept, with world leaders like Lockheed Martin and McDonald Douglas exploring the possibility of leasing military aircraft to Eastern European countries.
At 1159 GMT Cowie shares were down nearly two pence at 372-3/4p in a generally weaker British stock market.
Millennium Chemicals, to be spun off from the mighty Hanson conglomerate in an October flotation, has already had to rebuff would-be suitors, chief executive of the soon-to-be independent company said on Tuesday.
William Landuyt, who is also chairman of Millennium, also unveiled his strategic blueprint in an interview with Reuters, including plans for a share buyback by 2000 after cutting debt and implementing post-demerger investment plans.
Millennium had 1995 sales of two billion pounds ($3.12 billion) and profits of 588 million pounds.
"We are not a dividend yield stock. We are a growth company," Landuyt said, warning investors of a tight dividend policy.
The demerger of Hanson Plc will create four companies - Millennium, Imperial Tobacco, Energy Group and the rump building firm which will retain the famous Hanson name.
As investors await details of the float of the first two divisions - Millennium and Imperial - Landuyt said there had been takeover interest in all four companies including his own empire.
"We've had interest for every business in Hanson." He said "expressions of interest" included those for whole divisions as well as individual companies within each of the four divisions to be floated off.
Millennium itself received approaches for all three of its units - Quantum, SCM and Glidco. All approaches were rebuffed.
Hanson's chemicals arm had been widely tipped as a takeover candidate by analysts in recent months, but Hanson's group share price recently took a hit after it was revealed that Millennium had built in a "poison pill" to deter predators.
The move led to a downgrading in the Hanson break-up value by analysts including BZW which pared back to 193 from 207 pence per share. The market valuation range spreads from 150 pence to 200 pence per share. Hanson's shares stand at 162 1/4, up 2 3/4 pence.
One analyst said of the poison pill episode "It was quite disgusting. Here is a predatory company which has spoken out against such tactics and has installed a poison pill itself."
But Landuyt said it was vital to prevent a predator buying up shares on the cheap and launching an undervalued bid.
"We do expect selling pressure (for Millennium shares) for at least the first six months. We don't want a temporary drop in the share price to allow someone to get a commanding position and launch a bid which does not offer full value."
Under law in the U.S. state of Delaware, a company gaining a 15 percent stake in Millennium would see those shares become worthless. They would carry no vote or liquidation value unless the board had been approached first.
But the poison pill clause ends after one year, said the chemicals company chief, freeing the way for a possible bid.
Another factor which has damped Millennium's core valuation has been poor trading which has dogged the chemicals market leading to plant closures and asset writedowns of $60 million at SCM. Landuyt said that a further $15 million charge still had to be levied.
He said the impact on trading profits would be neutral and also said signs of an uptick remain.
He expected SCM to be able to make its October price increases stick after heavy destocking by customers.
Quantum's recently reported improvement in pricing and demand also continues, he said.
($1=.6415 Pound)
Ecological warfare has broken out across the British construction industry, striking some of the biggest corporates as activists give up peaceful protests and seek to hit builders where it hurts -- their profit margins.
Described by one British company as "eco-terrorism", it is seen as the new business risk of the 1990s.
Famous names like Tarmac Plc, Costain Group Plc and ARC, a unit of conglomerate Hanson Plc, have all been targeted.
Activist groups are no longer seen by British firms as a harmless, badly organised ragbag of students and hippies.
"You only have to see them in action at protests," said David Harding, spokesman at ARC, Hanson's aggregates company. "They walk around with mobile phones and camera equipment, they communicate and gather support for demos via the Internet -- we're talking about a highly sophisticated organisation."
One road protestor under the codename Steady Eddie told construction journal "Building" earlier this year, "If it comes down to full-scale economic warfare, we will aim to drive them out of business."
As well as financial threats, companies also emphasise the "terror" tactics used.
Costain's contract to build the controversial Newbury bypass, which runs through a conservation area, has led to violent protests delaying building, bomb threats, staff intimidation and picketing of chief executive Alan Lovell's home.
A Costain spokesman told Reuters:"We've had all sorts of protests at the head office and the chief executive's house. But it's when it gets to the (employee) families -- that it goes across the line."
Tactics used by some underground groups including the cryptic Berkshire Wood Elves, which distribute leaflets with instructions on home-made explosives, are now the subject of a police investigation.
Other larger activist groups include Earth First, The Land is Ours, Alarm UK and Road Alert.
The groups have targeted specific projects like the Newbury bypass and the M3 motorway through Twyford Down in the southern county of Hampshire.
But they are also campaigning on broader issue such as stopping the government road building programme and out-of-town superstores which they say create more traffic, pollution and damage local communities.
The government has slashed its road-building spending. Although protests may have contributed to the decision it has been seen primarily as economic rather than ecological.
Graham Watts, chief executive of the Construction Industry Council, said :"I don't think many firms involved in tendering for sensitive projects realise the impact environmental activity has on the cost of running a project.
"But they are more alert than they were 3-4 years ago. There's no doubt it's a big issue now."
He says the damage comes in two forms: "Tangible -- in the form of extra costs, additional security, threats to staff and the more intangible damage caused by negative publicity."
Watts said the cost of protesting can be heavy once the company is locked into a contract.
"I do often hear on the industry circuit of tales where the company tenders at low margins and the demonstrations which follow means they are running the project at a loss."
ARC says it's not just contractors in the front line but also suppliers like itself.
Its own quarries came under attack after it emerged that it may be a supplier for the Newbury bypass.
"It was called the "First Battle of the Newbury bypass'," said ARC's Harding.
"We had 300 Earth First protestors invade and occupy our site. Hundreds of thousands of pounds (dollars) of damage was done in one day. Plus there was the knock-on cost of lost production and extra security in future."
Simon Brown, analyst at investement bank UBS, said this new phenomenon has led to a change in the way the industry evaluates project risk.
"When talking to Tarmac about the M3 link (through Twyford Down) they made it fairly clear that their risk assessment methods have been changed and now involve a very clear environmental risk analysis."
Harding says others have done the same. "As a result of eco-terrorism we are looking at controversial jobs more closely to see if the profit margins are wide enough to cover things like extra security."
For an industry already suffering from razor-thin margins, overcapacity and stagnant demand, eco-terrorism is the latest bizarre twist in the construction sector's tale of woe.
Millennium Chemicals - the Hanson Plc company which is due to be floated off in New York on October 1 - said on Tuesday it planned a share buyback by the year 2000 after completing debt cutting and investment plans.
Millennium chairman and chief executive William Landuyt told Reuters in an interview on Tuesday that he also planned a low-yielding dividend policy as he saw the company as a growth stock.  
Millennium net debt levels are seen around $2.0 billion. Landuyt said the chemcials company would initiate a buyback by 2000 after reducing debt, implementing its capital expenditure plans and using proceeds from its steady cash generation.
Investment plans include continued expansion in the speciality products and regions including Asia-Pacific and Western Australia.
On dividend policy, Landuyt said the payout would not be high bearing in mind the need for investment and cutting debt. "Our payout will be around 60 cents a year or 15 cents a quarter."  
"We are not a dividend yield stock. We are a growth company," he concluded.
On trading, Landuyt said he expected SCM to be able to make its October price increases stick after heavy destocking by customers.
Quantum's recently reported improvement in pricing and demand also continues, he said.
He added that the recent plant closure at SCM would have a neutral trading profit impact because the plants were not profitable and had been replaced by new more efficient plant capacity.  
The closure had already resulted in $60 million of charges to write-off fixed assets, he said. But he revealed that a further $15 million charge still has to be levied.
--London newsroom +44 171 5427717
All four Hanson companies - due to be spun off as part of the demerger process - had received takeover approaches for part or all of the units in the chemicals, tobacco, building and energy sectors.
William Landuyt, chairman and chief executive of Millennium Chemicals and a Hanson group board member, told Reuters in an interview on Tuesday "We've had interest for every business in Hanson." He said the "expressions of interest" included possible offers for whole divisions as well as individual companies within each of the four divisions to be floated separately.  
Landuyt, who will head up the U.S. chemicals giant Millennium which had 1995 sales of more than two billion stg and 588 million stg in operating profit, told Reuters his own empire had received approaches for all three of its units - Quantum, SCM and Glidco.
But he said that the board had decided against pursuing any of the approaches.
Landuyt also defended Millennium's decision to incorporate a so-called "poison pill" clause to protect it from a hostile takeover. He said it was necessary to prevent a predator buying up shares on the cheap and launching an undervalued bid.  
"We do expect selling pressure (for Millennium shares) for at least the first six months," said Landuyt who predicted selling pressure from UK investors.
"We don't want a temporary drop in the shareprice to allow someone to get a commanding position and launch a bid which does not offer full value."
He said the poison-pill arrangement, which under law in the U.S. state of Delaware means that a company gaining a 15 percent stake in Millennium would see those shares become worthless. They would carry no vote or liquidation value unless the board had been approached first.  
However, the poison pill clause ends after one year, said the chemicals company chief, freeing the way for a possible bid.
He said if a full-value bid was launched before then, the board would be under a duty to examine it.
-- London newsroom +44 171 5427717
Imperial Tobacco Group Plc, fresh from its demerger from Hanson Plc in October, said on Monday it was capable of cutting back debt levels and investing in further export growth as a dual policy.
Gareth Davis, chief executive, told Reuters in an interview that the two could be achieved "in parallel" because of the group's strong cash generation.
In particular, Davis said Imperial was in talks with a Japanese company about entering the Japanese market for the first time. He also said the group would keep open the option of a share buyback in the future.
Imperial inherited around 1.1 billion pounds ($1.8 billion) of debt as its legacy from the Hanson family break-up. But Davis said this did not hamper the group's plans to seek distribution deals or joint ventures in the overseas cigarette markets and possibly examine small acquisition deals in the fragmented cigar market.
He added that, if an important larger-sized acquisition opportunity arose, he would be prepared to raise debt levels, but for the moment "the priority is to get it down. Our situation, our ability to generate cash means we can do things in parallel - pay down debt and pay for acquisitions...Bolt-on acquisitions are more likely in the cigar area", he added.
On the Japanese market in particular, Davis told Reuters "We are looking to do something in Japan. We are actively considering this. In one way or another we will establish a presence in that market," admitting that talks were under way with one party.
But he sought to reassure shareholders that Imperial would not squander its sound financial inheritance in its bid to catch up in the overseas field. "In our international expansion plans I would not dream of being a balance sheet wrecker," he said. If Imperial failed to find the right deals, it would be prepared to conside other options to return value, he said.
If a possible acquisition fails to offer sufficient rates of return "we would say: what would a share buyback do to enhance shareholder value, rather than a potential acquisition?"
"A buyback is something we'd never rule out. Given our cash flow characteristics people tend to say "What are you going to do with all that cash.'"
Imperial reports its first set of results since the Hanson demerger on December 5 when it will give a trading update of the first few months since its split.
Davis said he expected the British market to continue to decline at around two percent next year.
But the international business, accounting for 17 percent of profits in the first eight months of the year, is expected to show continued rapid growth.
"I would be very disappointed if it wasn't 25 percent by 2000." The last two years have seen overseas sales double, but Davis drew the line at hitting his target by 1997.
"That would be overstating it (our confidence). But the signs are the business is showing strong growth."
Despite his caution, Davis has said that the company has already clinched a deal with unions to add a third shift from May 1997 which has the potential to raise capacity at its Nottingham factory  by one third.
Imperial says if a number of overseas deals start feeding through it will be ready to meet the surge in demand.
The third shift could, in theory, raise Imperial's total cigarette production to 53 billion from the existing 37 billion mark. ($1=.6069 Pound)
Imperial Tobacco Group Plc, fresh from its demerger from Hanson Plc in October, said on Monday it was capable of cutting back debt levels and investing in further export growth as a dual policy.
Gareth Davis, chief executive, told Reuters in an interview that the two could be achieved "in parallel" because of the group's strong cash generation. In particular, Davis revealed Imperial was in talks with a Japanese company about entering the market for the first time. He also said the group would keep open the option of a share buyback in the future.  
Imperial inherited around 1.1 billion stg of debt as its legacy from the Hanson family break-up. But Davis said this did not hamper the group's plans to seek distribution deals or joint ventures in the overseas cigarette markets and possibly examine small acquisition deals in the fragmented cigar market.
He added that if an important larger-sized acquisition opportunity came up he would be prepared to raise debt levels, but for the moment "the priority is to get it down. Our situation, our ability to generate cash means we can do things in parallel - pay down debt and pay for acquisitions...Bolt-on acquisitions are more likely in the cigar area," he added.  
On the Japanese market in particular, Davis told Reuters "We are looking to do something in Japan. We are actively considering this. In one way or another we will establish a presence in that market," admitting that talks were underway with one party.
But he sought to reassure shareholders that Imperial would not squander its sound financial inheritance in its bid to catch up in the overseas field. "In our international expansion plans I would not dream of being a balance sheet wrecker," he said. If Imperial failed to find the right deals, it would be prepared to conside other options to return value, he said.  
If a possible acquisition fails to offer sufficient rates of return "we would say: what would a share buyback do to enhance shareholder value, rather than a potential acquisition?"
"A buyback is something we'd never rule out. Given our cash flow characteristics people tend to say "What are you going to do with all that cash.'"
Imperial reports its first set of results since the Hanson demerger on December 5 when it will give a trading update of the first few months since its split.
Davis said he expected the UK market to continue to decline at around 2 percent next year.  
But the international business, accounting for 17 percent of profits in the first eight months of the year, s expected to show continued rapid growth.
"I would be very disappointed if it wasn't 25 percent by 2,000." The last two years have seen overseas sales double, but Davis drew the line at hitting his target by 1997.
"That would be overstating it (our confidence). But the signs are the business is showing strong growth."
Despite his caution, Davis has said that the company has already clinched a deal with unions to add a third shift from May 1997 which has the potential to raise capacity at its Nottingham factory  by one third.
Imperial says if a number of overseas deals start feeding through it will be ready to meet the surge in demand.
The third shift could, in theory, raise Imperial's total cigarette production to 53 billion from the existing 37 billion mark.
--London newsroom +44 171 5427717
Environmental warfare has broken out across the British construction industry, striking some of the biggest corporations as activists give up peaceful protests and seek to hit builders where it hurts -- in their profit margins.
Described by one British company as "eco-terrorism," it is seen as the new business risk of the 1990s.
Famous names like Tarmac Plc, Costain Group Plc and ARC, a unit of the conglomerate Hanson Plc, have all been targeted.
Activist groups are no longer seen by British companies as harmless, badly organised groups of students and hippies.
"You only have to see them in action at protests," said David Harding, a spokesman for ARC, a unit of Hanson which supplies construction materials.
"They walk around with mobile phones and camera equipment, they communicate and gather support for demos via the Internet -- we're talking about a highly sophisticated organisation."
One road protester, using the code name Steady Eddie, told the construction journal Building earlier this year: "If it comes down to full-scale economic warfare, we will aim to drive them out of business."
In addition to financial threats, companies say that "terror" tactics are used by the activists.
Costain's contract to build the controversial Newbury bypass, which runs through a conservation area, has led to violent protests delaying building. There have also been bomb threats, staff intimidation and picketing of Chief Executive Alan Lovell's home.
A Costain spokesman told Reuters: "We've had all sorts of protests at the head office and the chief executive's house. But it's when it gets to the (employee) families -- that it goes across the line."
Tactics used by some underground groups, including the cryptic Berkshire Wood Elves, which distributes leaflets with instructions on homemade explosives, are now the subject of a police investigation.
Larger activist groups include Earth First, The Land is Ours, Alarm UK and Road Alert.
The groups have targeted specific projects like the Newbury bypass and the M3 highway through Twyford Down in the southern county of Hampshire.
But they are also campaigning on broader issue such as stopping the government road-building programme and stopping out-of-town superstores, which they say create more traffic and pollution and damage local communities.
The government has slashed its road-building spending, but it has been seen primarily as economic rather than environmental, although protests may have contributed to the decision.
Graham Watts, chief executive of the Construction Industry Council, said, "I don't think many firms involved in tendering (bidding) for sensitive projects realise the impact environmental activity has on the cost of running a project.
"But they are more alert than they were three-four years ago. There's no doubt it's a big issue now."
He says the damage comes in two forms: "Tangible -- in the form of extra costs, additional security, threats to staff and the more intangible -- damage caused by negative publicity."
Watts said the cost of protesting can be heavy once the company is locked into a contract.
"I do often hear on the industry circuit of tales where the company tenders at low margins and the demonstrations which follow means they are running the project at a loss."
ARC says it's not just contractors in the front line that are affected but also suppliers like itself.
Its own quarries came under attack after it emerged that it may be a supplier for the Newbury bypass.
"It was called the 'First Battle of the Newbury bypass'," said ARC's Harding.
"We had 300 Earth First protestors invade and occupy our site. Hundreds of thousands of pounds (dollars) of damage was done in one day. Plus, there was the knock-on cost of lost production and extra security in future."
Simon Brown, analyst at investment bank UBS, said this new phenomenon has led to a change in the way the industry evaluates project risk.
"When talking to Tarmac about the M3 link (through Twyford Down) they made it fairly clear that their risk assessment methods have been changed and now involve a very clear environmental risk analysis."
Harding says others have done the same. "As a result of eco-terrorism, we are looking at controversial jobs more closely to see if the profit margins are wide enough to cover things like extra security."
For an industry already suffering from razor-thin margins, overcapacity and stagnant demand, eco-terrorism is the latest bizarre twist in the construction sector's tale of woe.
Imperial Tobacco Plc, fresh from its split from Hanson Plc, has admitted that its former parent group did receive a takeover approach prior to the demerger but rejected it because the price was too low.
Imperial's chief executive Gareth Davis told Reuters in an interview this week: "A phone call was made to Grosvenor Place (Hanson's headquarters) but they were talking silly prices." He confirmed that the interested party was a tobacco firm, but refused to comment on recent speculation that B.A.T. Industries Plc was a potential buyer.
Imperial Tobacco Plc spelled out its blueprint for export growth this week, seeking to silence critics of its strategy who have contributed to driving down the shareprice by 17 percent since its Oct 1 demerger from Hanson Plc.
Imperial's chain-smoking chief executive, Gareth Davis, who joined the company after graduating from Sheffield University in 1972, told Reuters in an interview that investors should not under-estimate his determination to expand exports fast.
"Admittedly we were a late entrant to international markets. But that's because we had to get our costs licked," he said.
Getting costs licked helped make Imperial one of the most efficient players in its sector in the 10 years under Hanson's ownership, with productivity raised by 195 percent in a decade.
Davis sees it continuing to grow by eight to nine percent over the next four years, he said.
But recently Imperial has seen its shares slide, partly due to concerns that most of its profits (85 percent) stem from a shrinking British market. Analysts are asking how Imperial can invest in export growth while cutting back its sizable 1.1 billion pounds ($1.8 billion) in debt.
Natwest Markets and Credit Lyonnais issued sell notes on Imperial this month. But SBC Warburg said it was undervalued, citing its efficiency and greater attraction as a bid target over Gallaher, the American Brands UK unit due to be demerged.
Davis sought to answer the critics this week. "The priority is to get it (debt) down. Our situation, our ability to generate cash means we can do things in parallel -- pay down debt and pay for acquisitions." Bolt-on acquisitions are likely in cigars.
Expanding on his growth plans, he said "We have already grown profits with little dilution of margins. Our strategy to grow is very much a multi-pronged route.
"We roll out our American brand success in France to Germany and Spain as well. We continue to follow the Brits into key holiday and work markets abroad. Keep developing the hand rolling product, seek bolt-on acquisitions and develop in selected emerging markets."
He said these key markets in Asia and China already had a preference for the Virginia style of cigarette, a plain unflavoured tobacco variety which is Imperial's strength.
"We're not a Philip Morris or B.A.T(BATS.L. We're not a major global player and we don't see this as a head-on collision. These markets are so massive that even developing a small part of it will have a big impact on our profits."
The company has already set up a base in Hong Kong, with a senior marketing recruit from Marlboro cigarettes. It is establishing four bases in China and has a technical co-operation agreement with China's state tobacco company.
It is focused on developing in Taiwan, South Korea, Malaysia and Indonesia. "More specifically, the group is in talks with one party in Japan about entering that market for the first time. This deal is likely to be a distribution agreement."
The group said it will seek joint ventures and distribution deals in these emerging markets.
Imperial is already gearing up to cope with a possible surge in production at its Nottingham plant in Britain.
Company bosses clinched a deal with unions to add a third shift from May onwards, which could allow capacity to be raised by one third to 53 billion cigarettes from 37 billion.
Davis has pledged shareholder value through expansion. But if cash builds up and there are no buying opportunities the company will consider a share buy back.
Imperial's boss is sanguine about the roller coaster ride for its shareprice since demerger. Its strong debut lit up the tobacco sector, taking Imperial to a high of 438 pence per share. But it has since fallen back to 361 1/2 pence.
He cited "overheating in the first days, with rumours of a dawn raid (on shares) that never happened." He also cited some selling of shares by U.S. retail investors, but said the holdings were eventually soaked up by US institutions.
"There'll be a wee bit of volatility for a while longer," said Davis who sees a truer value at between 390 pence and 410.
($1=.6050 Pound)
The story of Sea Launch sounds like the daring fiction of a Bond movie -- with corporate giants from Russia, the U.S., Norway and Ukraine joining forces to build the ultimate in space technology, firing satellite rockets into space from the Pacific Ocean.
The cost is 350 million pounds ($583.2 million), funded by a consortium of four firms, joining the East and West in a deal which claims it can undercut the cost of land-based launchers including the French-led Ariane, recently embarrassed by a rocket explosion, and Nasa of the U.S..
The lead Sea Launch investor is Boeing Commercial Space Co of the U.S., holding 40 percent, with  RSC-Energia of Russia taking a 25 percent slice, Norway's Kvaerner with 20 percent and  NPO-Yuzhnoye of the Ukraine holding 15 percent.
At a sneak preview in Norway on Thursday, Svein Johnsen, Sea Launch project manager from Kvaerner joked with Russian reporters that countries which had once built technology with the conflict in mind, were now united in their quest for profit.
"In the name of detente," he said.
Norway's Kvaerner is the prime contractor, building the mobile sea-borne rocket launch platform and the command ship.
It rescued the Ocean Odyssey oil rig which exploded in a fireball just after the 1988 Piper Alpha rig disaster.
Odyssey has since been stripped and reconstructed to become the floating rocket launcher which will operate under remote control from a specially built command ship.
The platform is nearing completion at Stavanger in Norway, with the command ship under construction and ready for launch next month at Govan in Scotland.
The first rocket launch will happen in June 1998. The rig and command ship will travel from the base in Long Island, California and travel to a site in the Pacific Ocean for blast off.
Satellites and rockets will be assembled on the ship for transfer to the platform which will be evacuated before lift-off.
The command ship will press the control button for firing the rocket at a distance of two or three miles. The 10,600 ton ship has the added protection of blast-proof safety glass at a cost of 2,000 pounds a pane.
The Russians will provide the Zenit rockets, chosen because they can be assembled horizontally on board the command ship.
Boeing will provide project management, marketing services and run the operation for lift-off.
Asked about the risk of explosion Johnsen says "The risk of explosion is very much related to this business. But we think that risk is very low. There are in-built safety features and it's a very sound operation from an insurance point of view."
Ignition to release of the rocket takes 4.6 seconds, with emissions from the rocket on take-off channelled sideways.
"If the emissions didn't go sideways, the pressure could shift the platform," he said, which weighs 23,000 tons.
Confidence in the system, a world-first, has been demonstrated by a rash of early contracts.
Hughes Space and Communications International Inc of Los Angeles, California has 10 launches signed. Space Systems/Lorel, also from California has five booked.
The groups involved have refused to comment on how much they will charge per launch or on potential profits, with Kvaerner's Johnson only stating that its slice will be "A good return on our investment."
It will be able to fire six to eight rockets a year. The idea was originally conceived by Boeing which had intended to fire satellites from a supertanker.
But the danger involved made the platform idea more appealing, allowing evacuation before blast off. ($ = 0.600 British Pounds)
The 350 million stg Sea Launch satellite project -- backed by firms from the U.S., Russia, Norway and Ukraine -- will fire its first satellite from a sea platform in June 1998, project contractor Kvaerner told reporters on Thursday.
Kavaerner, which also has a 20 percent stake in the project, is overseeing the construction of the launch platform and control ship, at Stavanger, Norway and Goven, Scotland.  
Boeing Commercial Space Co of the United States, Russia's RSC-Energia and the Ukraine's NPO-Yuzhnoye are also involved in the project.
As well as being a shareholder, Kavaerner is receiving a 250 million stg fee to build the ship and platform launcher.
In Stavanger, Sea Launch project manager Svein Johnsen told Reuters that launch prices would be "significantly cheaper" than those charged by land-based sites, but refused to be drawn further.
Hughes Space &amp; Communication International Inc has a contract for 10 launches and Space Systems/Lorel for five.
Sea Launch will use a converted oil rig called Odyssey to fire Russian-made Zenits rockets from a position in the Pacific.
The rockets will be transported and assembled on the control ship. The 640 feet ship, still to be named, will have blast proof safety glass. It weighs 10,600 tons and can carry 250 crew. The platform weighs 23,000 tons, is 430 feet long and has room for 20 crew members.
Britain's biggest builder Taylor Woodrow has finally got something to celebrate in 1996, its 75th anniversary year, reversing 1995's share slide to outpace the market and assuring investors that year results remain on track.
Colin Parsons, Taylor's chairman, told Reuters in an interview that the second half performance so far has been "exactly as we indicated in the half year statement," when he described the outlook as "encouraging."
Taylor's shares hit a high of 183 pence in September after those results, with profits up 81 percent at 25.4 million pounds ($42.37 million).
The shares have since edged off that five-year peak to 156 pence, but are still outperforming the Financial Times All Share index by 30 percent and the building and construction sector by 18 percent, according to Reuters Securities 3000 data.
The group has clawed its way back from a share price nadir of 53 pence in July 1991, in the depths of the building recession when the group's results slumped to a 66 million pounds loss.
Taylor Woodrow is probably most famous for its international contracting activities, with involvement in high-profile projects from the Channel Tunnel to the building of a light railway in Malaysia.
But contracting offers the lowest growth potential in future. Instead revenue growth will stem from housing and land development, property and the Greenham Trading unit in that order, with contracting lagging last.
Commenting on current trading,, Parsons said contracting remained very tough, citing in particular the expense of operating in the British Private Finance Initiative (PFI) market - aiming to get private money into public infrastructure projects.
"PFI remains a very expensive business - too expensive for an industry operating on a zero percent margin basis," he said.
The industry has often complained about the high bidding costs - sometimes running to millions of pounds and delays from red-tape adding to costs further. Parsons also says "It's not a question of allocating capital but whether we want to carry the risks associated with it."
Parsons says that does not mean Taylor Woodrow will bail out, but it will be selective. He adds that "overseas business is encouraging," however, offering higher-margin business.
Taylor Woodrow remains committed to its four-business strategy, with Parsons comparing it to "sitting on a chair instead of relying on the uncomfortable shooting stick of having one business. When the wind blows you know where you are on a chair."
He has refuted suggestions that it may bail out of constracting. But admits that money for acquisitions will be targeted at the other businesses.
Commenting on trading since the first half, Parsons said the UK housing market recovery "...has now spread into the new home market and is doing well in the second half. The first half was much slower."
"In Canada housing had a dreadful year in the worst market for 40 years, I believe."
"Australia seems to be one of the worst markets in living memory. It shows no improvement but it's happening at the same time as a relatively strong Australian economy.
He added "It will be well into next year before we see any improvement." The California and Florida markets were reported to be doing well, however.
The outlook for the group's results have brightened, with analysts' forecasts for pretax profits in the year ending 31 December 1996 seen at between 63 and 67 million, a rise of 41 percent on 1995 figures. For the year ending 1997, the forecasts range from 70 to 80 million, a rise of 16 percent.
Simon Brown, analyst at UBS said Taylor's performance turnaround was partly down to "swift and aggressive action to downsize contracting activities" into a single operation spanning Africa, Asia Pacific, Middle East and Europe.
"It's closed non-profit making areas and is now investing in areas where it can get a good return," he said. The residual contracting business remained a sound business.
UBS has the shares on hold. "It will move ahead but it will not outperform sharply," he said. ($1=.5994 Pound)
The British government on Tuesday said the design of Eurotunnel's freight trains would have to be scrutinised after a massive fire swept through one of its main tunnels, injuring eight people and causing wide damage.
British transport secretary Sir George Young told parliament he was sure the Anglo-French Channel Tunnel Safety Authority would look at the design aspects after warnings from British fire chiefs about the safety of the trains.
Any changes to the design of Eurotunnel carriages would be another costly blow to the Channel Tunnel operator which recently came back from the brink of bankruptcy after restructuring its nine billion pounds ($15 billion) in debt.
The fire, the first serious incident since the tunnel opened two years ago, halted services on Tuesday. Even if limited services resume on Wednesday, Eurotunnel warned that traffic capacity would be cut to one third of normal levels for an indefinite period.
The fire and worries about the extent of damage and a resultant safety review hit Eurotunnel shares.
In London, they closed down 4-1/2 pence at 87 pence while in Paris the stock dropped 1.28 percent to 7.65 francs per share. But trading in its debt was barely changed.
One freight customer TNT Express Worldwide said it would be relying more on ferries as a result of the fire.
Eurotunnel confirmed in a statement that 15 heavy goods vehicles and the rear locomotive had suffered "severe" damage.
The fire was reported to have started in a goods carriage carrying a truck holding flammable polystyrene but Eurotunnel said the cause had not yet been determined.
The goods vehicle shuttles have partially open sides - the safety of which had been questioned by the British fire brigade some years before.
Mike Frattini, fire officer and spokesman for the Kent Fire Brigade which helped put out the fire, told Reuters earlier: "Our chief officer warned the safety committee (for the tunnel) five years ago."
He suggested that fire fighters could raise this issue once again with the Channel Tunnel Safety Authority.
Eurotunnel's spokesman refused to comment on whether changes will need to be made to carriages, adding that: "It is a key question."
A spokesman for the Department of Transport told Reuters that past concerns about the safety of these carriages had led to Eurotunnel carrying out safety tests two years ago. "They were then approved in May 1994," he said.
Apart from possible safety changes, Eurotunnel faces other heavy costs.
The first is lost revenue due to reduced traffic. A Eurotunnel spokesman in London told Reuters "We will operate at one third of normal capacity and we will give priority to Eurostar (passenger) trains. But there will still be space for shuttle trains as well." He did not say how many Eurostar or Le Shuttle trains would be cancelled as a result of the fire.
Eurotunnel confirmed in a statement that 15 heavy goods vehicles and the rear locomotive had suffered "severe" damage. "It is a serious accident," chairman Patrick Ponsolle said.
A Eurotunnel spokesman said the cost of repairs was not yet known. "It's quite messy down there. There will be damage to the overhead powerline cables, the heat will have buckled the steel rails and the carriages involved would be very badly damaged and may need to be replaced," he said.
The cost of a new goods train is 25 million pounds, but Eurotunnel said it did not think an entire train would need replacing. It faces costs in repairing tunnel and rolling stock damage and may face compensation costs, possibly involving paying for customers to travel by ferry or air, although the company said it is heavily insured.
The fire comes just before Christmas when the tunnel was expecting a surge in holiday sales. But pre-holiday publicity now consists of media reports of choking people emerging from smoke and "blow-torch"-like heat.
Asked whether this would dampen customer demand, Eurotunnel said "We hope not. But what's happened has happened and how the fire was handled should renew confidence in our safety procedures," said the press officer. ($1=.5970 Pound)
Eurotunnel Plc, the Anglo-French Channel Tunnel operator, said on Tuesday that its traffic will be cut to one third of normal levels after a fire swept through one of its main tunnels on Monday night, injuring eight people.
Services have been terminated until the tunnel affected is cleared. A Eurotunnel spokesman in London said there was no fixed time for when services would resume or how long reduced capacity will operate once the tunnel is opened.
News of the fire and worries about the extent of damage and a resultant safety review hit Eurotunnel's shares in both London and Paris.
The fire is the latest issue to dog Eurotunnel's performance which has been plagued by negotiations to rejig nine billion pounds ($15 billion) in debt.
In London, Eurotunnel shares fell 3-1/2 pence to 88 pence while in Paris the stock was down around two percent at 7.68 francs per share. But trading in its debt was barely changed.
Commenting on the initial impact on traffic, a Eurotunnel spokesman in London said, "We will operate at one third of normal capacity and we will give priority to Eurostar (passenger) trains. But there will still be space for shuttle trains as well."
He did not say how many Eurostar or Le Shuttle trains would be cancelled as a result.
The Tunnel's operations were closed after a fire engulfed part of one of two tunnels, near to Calais where parties from France and Britain had been holding a safety conference.
The Eurotunnel spokesman said it did not yet know the full extent of damage to rolling stock or the tunnel itself or how much it could cost, but admitted it was a "very ferocious fire."
"It's quite messy down there. There will be damage to the overhead powerline cables, the heat will have buckled the steel rails and the carriages involved would be very badly damaged and may need to be replaced," he said.
The cost of a new train is 25 million pounds, but Eurotunnel did not think an entire train would need replacing. But Eurotunnel faces costs in repairing tunnel and rolling stock damage and may face compensation costs, possibly involving paying for customers to travel by ferry or air.
The company said at this stage that it does not know the cause of the fire. But unconfirmed media reports say the fire began in a truck carrying inflammable polystyrene.
The heavy goods vehicle shuttles are known to have partially open sides -- the safety of which had been questioned by the British fire brigade some years before.
Mike Frattini, fire officer and spokesman for the Kent Fire Brigade which helped put out the tunnel fire, said earlier: "Our chief officer warned the safety committee (for the tunnel) five years ago."
Fire fighters could raise this objection again as part of the investigation which will go to the Anglo-French Channel Tunnel Safety Authority.
If the current goods carriages are deemed to be hazardous in light of the accident there could be a call for changes, incurring further costs to Eurotunnel.
Eurotunnel's spokesman refused to comment on whether changes will need to be made to carriages, adding that "It is a key question."
The fire comes just before Christmas when the tunnel was expected to see a surge in holiday sales. But pre-holiday publicity now consists of media reports of choking people emerging from smoke and "blow-torch"-like heat.
Asked whether this would dampen customer demand, Eurotunnel said "We hope not. But what's happened has happened and how the fire was handled should renew confidence in our safety procedures," said the press officer.
One analyst at Natwest Securities said there should be little further impact on shares or consumer confidence.
Shares in cross-channel ferry operator P&amp;O were five pence higher at 602-1/2p.
($1=.5970 Pound)
The story of Sea Launch sounds like the daring fiction of a James Bond movie -- with corporate giants from Russia, the United States, Norway and Ukraine joining forces to build the ultimate in space technology, firing satellite rockets into space from the Pacific Ocean.
The cost is 350 million pounds ($583.2 million), funded by a consortium of four companies, joining the East and West in a deal that claims it can undercut the cost of land-based launchers including the French-led Ariane, recently embarrassed by a rocket explosion, and NASA.
The lead Sea Launch investor is Boeing Co.'s Commercial Space division, holding 40 percent, with RSC-Energia of Russia taking a 25 percent slice, Norway's Kvaerner with 20 percent and NPO-Yuzhnoye of Ukraine holding 15 percent.
At a sneak preview in Norway recently, Svein Johnsen, Sea Launch project manager from Kvaerner, joked with Russian reporters that countries that had once built technology with conflict in mind were now united in their quest for profit.
"In the name of detente," he said.
Norway's Kvaerner is the prime contractor, building the mobile seaborne rocket launch platform and the command ship.
It rescued an off-shore oil rig, which had been severely damaged in a 1988 explosion, and rebuilt it to become a floating rocket launcher that will operate under remote control from a specially built command ship.
The platform is nearing completion at Stavanger in Norway, with the command ship under construction and ready for launch next month at Govan in Scotland.
The first rocket launch is scheduled for June 1998 from a site in the Pacific Ocean.
Satellites and rockets will be assembled on the ship for transfer to the platform, which will be evacuated before liftoff.
The command ship will press the control button for firing the rocket at a distance of two or three miles. The 10,600-ton ship has the added protection of blastproof safety glass.
The Russians will provide the Zenit rockets, chosen because they can be assembled horizontally on board the command ship.
Boeing will provide project management, marketing services and run the operation for liftoff.
Asked about the risk of explosion Johnsen said, "The risk of explosion is very much related to this business. But we think that risk is very low. There are built-in safety features and it's a very sound operation from an insurance point of view."
Ignition to release of the rocket takes 4.6 seconds, with emissions from the rocket on takeoff channelled sideways.
"If the emissions didn't go sideways, the pressure could shift the platform," he said, which weighs 23,000 tons.
Confidence in the system, a world-first, has been demonstrated by a rash of early contracts.
Hughes Space and Communications International Inc. of Los Angeles has 10 launches signed. Space Systems/Loral, also from California has five booked.
The groups involved have refused to comment on how much they will charge per launch or on potential profits, with Kvaerner's Johnson only stating that its slice will be "a good return on our investment."
It will be able to fire six to eight rockets a year. The idea was originally conceived by Boeing, which had intended to fire satellites from a supertanker.
But the danger involved made the platform idea more appealing, allowing evacuation before blastoff.
Debt-laden Eurotunnel faced fresh financial pressure on Wednesday in the wake of the fire which swept through a main tunnel leaving a trail of damage, no running services and shaken consumer confidence.
Just one month after coming back from the brink of bankruptcy with a restructuring of nine billion pounds ($15 billion) of debt, the company faced uncertainy once again as one of its two rail tunnels remained shut pending a safety review.
Analysts said the modest fall in Eurotunnel shares since Monday's fire was about right, however, and few believed there would be long-term damage to customer confidence.
Eurotunnel has warned of reduced services for weeks ahead as repair work goes ahead and eats into revenues.
And one source close to Eurotunnel told Reuters that the cost of repairs may be heavier than first thought. "The cost will be millions (of pounds) and could get into double figures, it you consider the damage to the 15 wagons and a locomotive, plus severe tunnel damage."
He added that track sections may also need replacing after buckling in the intense heat.
While the tunnel remains shut, Eurotunnel is losing revenues at the rate of one million pounds a day. It also faces the cost of compensating passengers and tranferring them by air or ferry.
A Eurotunnel spokesman said all these costs should be covered by insurance, however.
"It will have very little impact," said one analyst. "Transport disasters are always newsworthy but the bad publicity will soon fade away. Eurotunnel will be financially damaged, but you have to look at it in relation to the nine billion of debt."
The ferries have been scooping up extra business from big freight customers like TNT, which said it would be using the ferries more as a result of the tunnel fire.
Andrew Darke, analyst at Williams de Broe, said "There's clearly going to be some emotional reaction, but I expect it to be short-lived. After all passenger numbers rose after the Herald of Free Enterprise (ferry) disaster nine years ago.
"Disasters don't stop people travelling. People still go shopping in London despite IRA bombs," he said.
Eurotunnel had around 45 percent of the cross-Channel ferry market before the fire -- a share won partly by waging a cut-throat price-war with the ferries, which have since proposed linking up to battle against their tunnel rival.
Swedish ferry giant Stena Line and P&amp;O agreed to merge in October and are awaiting clearance from competition bodies.
Darke said P&amp;O's chances of clearance had been boosted by the tunnel disaster. The verdict is due later this month.
"The government wants a viable alternative to the tunnel for emergencies like this. That means the ferry business has to be economically viable. So the fire has probably improved the chances of the merger being approved."
Last month Eurotunnel agreed a debt deal with its banks, giving them 45.5 percent of the company in return for wiping out one billion pounds of debt. The deal fixed and capped interest payments and the company said it would be unable to pay a dividend for 10 years as it uses cash flow to service its debt.
Some analysts, such as UBS, remain sceptical, pointing out that the tunnel's present cash flow of 150-200 million pounds per annum over its remaining 52-year concession to operate the tunnel comes in at six billion pounds, still well short of the total remaining debt.
Eurotunnel shares on Tuesday were at 86-1/2pence, down 1-1/2, compared to the 544 pence high touched on December 31 1993. In Paris, the shares were down 20 centimes at 7.5 francs.
($1=.5950 Pound)
Debt-laden Eurotunnel faced fresh financial pressure on Wednesday in the wake of the fire which swept through a main tunnel leaving a trail of damage, no running services and shaken consumer confidence.
Just one month after coming back from the brink of bankruptcy with a restructuring of nine billion pounds ($15 billion) of debt, the company faced uncertainy once again as one of its two rail tunnels remained shut pending a safety review.
Analysts said the modest fall in Eurotunnel shares since Monday's fire was about right, however, and few believed there would be long-term damage to customer confidence.
Eurotunnel has warned of reduced services for weeks ahead as repair work goes ahead and eats into revenues.
And one source close to Eurotunnel told Reuters that the cost of repairs may be heavier than first thought. "The cost will be millions (of pounds) and could get into double figures, it you consider the damage to the 15 wagons and a locomotive, plus severe tunnel damage."
He added that track sections may also need replacing after buckling in the intense heat.
While the tunnel remains shut, Eurotunnel is losing revenues at the rate of one million pounds a day. It also faces the cost of compensating passengers and tranferring them by air or ferry.
A Eurotunnel spokesman said all these costs should be covered by insurance, however.
"It will have very little impact," said one analyst. "Transport disasters are always newsworthy but the bad publicity will soon fade away. Eurotunnel will be financially damaged, but you have to look at it in relation to the nine billion of debt."
The ferries have been scooping up extra business from big freight customers like TNT, which said it would be using the ferries more as a result of the tunnel fire.
Andrew Darke, analyst at Williams de Broe, said "There's clearly going to be some emotional reaction, but I expect it to be short-lived. After all passenger numbers rose after the Herald of Free Enterprise (ferry) disaster nine years ago.
"Disasters don't stop people travelling. People still go shopping in London despite IRA bombs," he said.
Eurotunnel had around 45 percent of the cross-Channel ferry market before the fire -- a share won partly by waging a cut-throat price-war with the ferries, which have since proposed linking up to battle against their tunnel rival.
Swedish ferry giant Stena Line and P&amp;O agreed to merge in October and are awaiting clearance from competition bodies.
Darke said P&amp;O's chances of clearance had been boosted by the tunnel disaster. The verdict is due later this month.
($1=.5950 Pound)
Drugs giant Glaxo Wellcome Plc bought the remaining 50 percent of its Japanese joint venture Nippon Glaxo for 354 million pounds ($596 million) on Thursday in its quest for growth in the world's second biggest market.
Analysts in London said they had long expected the buy-out of Japanese partner Shin Nihon Jitsugyo Co Ltd, which will also get a 7.7 million pounds (1.38 billion) payout in lieu of the 1996 dividend.
Nippon Glaxo develops, produces and markets prescription medicines across Japan and has net assets of 30.7 billion yen ($275.3 million), as valued on June 30. Its post-tax profit for the six months to June 30 was 2.5 billion yen.
After setting up a series of Japanese joint ventures since the early 1980s, Glaxo has moved to take them over in a bid to carve a share in Japan's lucrative marketplace, second only to the U.S. in terms of profitability and sales to the group.
Seven percent of Glaxo Wellcome's profits stem from Japan, which represents 20 percent of the world market itself.
One London-based pharmaceuticals analyst said: "The deal will be slightly earnings enhancing as it's financed by debt and Japanese interest rates are low at half a percent."
The move to take over ventures in Japan would allow the group to accelerate growth plans by launching new products there, including its new respiratory treatments for asthma and the new herpes treatment Valtrex which replaces Zovirax.
Another analyst agreed that Japan offered a notable expansion opportunity, saying: "It's obviously one of the leading growth markets for Glaxo."
But shares in Glaxo showed little response, falling a modest 3.5 pence to 950 in London.
Under the deal, Hiroshi Konishi, president of Nippon Glaxo, and Akira Konishi, vice-president and general manager, will give up these positions but remain members of Nippon Glaxo's board, Glaxo Wellcome said.
Nippon Glaxo had net assets at June 30 of 30.7 billion yen, or 180 million pounds. Its profits after tax for the six months ended June 30 were 2.5 billion yen.
($1=.5940 Pound)
($1=111.5 Yen)
The UK construction industry expects to get the cold shoulder from the Chancellor of the Exchequer (Finance Minister)again this year, with industry leaders predicting continued cutbacks in infrastructure spending in next Tuesday's budget.
Building industry leaders say they expect no more than a few crumbs from Chancellor Kenneth Clarke next week and are forecasting even more pressure on roads spending, with some rumours that Clarke will take a further slice off the road budget this year.
"If ever there was going to be a budget with severe cuts, it's this one, which needs to make room for pre-election tax cuts," said Graham Watts, chief executive of industry lobby group the Construction Industry Council.
As far as the housing market goes, builders are unanimous in their call for no sharp shocks to disturb the market's equilibrium. That means steady inflation and interest rates, plus no more reduction in mortgage interest tax relief, groups like the Building Employers Federation say.
On the spending side, The British Road Federation, embracing builders, motor groups and oil companies, said the road budget had been cut by 25 percent in the last two years.
"We expect to see a further contraction by 200 million pounds ($337 million)," said Federation spokesman Mark Glover "It's already been cut for the last four years."
Spending on new roads and maintenance by government offshoot the Highways Agency was 2.04 billion pounds in 1994/95, falling to 1.75 billion pounds in 1995/96 and is expected to be down to 1.5 billion this financial year.
The forecast for the year 1997/98 is seen dipping again.
These cutbacks, plus reduced state investment in rail since privatisation, and the fact that hospitals are now under constrained regional budgets, have resulted in the building industry remaining in recession years after the rest of the economy moved into recovery, lobbyists claim.
Few industry leaders hope for a spending increase, but they would like to see a spending freeze at best.
The other issue on the construction industry's wish-list is for the Chancellor to break the log-jam holding up the private finance initiative (PFI) -- which aims to get private capital flowing into public sector projects.
The PFI has replaced a lot of fresh government spending, but the frequent hold-ups to project awards due to red-tape have
Christian Salvesen moved to silence critics on Monday with plans to demerge its Aggreko business and make a 150 million pound ($253 million) special payout just months after shunning a 1.1 billion hostile bid.
Chris Masters, chief executive of the transport to services group, said his plans offered much better shareholder value than a rejected cash and paper bid from Hays Plc in the summer.
Masters said the demerger of its Aggreko equipment hire business was the culmination of a six year restructuring process which was now boosting the Edinburgh-based company's results.
Earnings unveiled on Monday showed first-half pretax profits unveiled surged to 51.6 million pounds from 45.0 million. Sales rose to 383.1 million pounds from 345.9 million.
"The board intends to pay special dividends totalling 150 million pounds, to continue the process of realising non-core assets and to demerge Aggreko within the next financial year," the company said in a statement.
In addition to an ordinary dividend of 3.8 pence per share for the half year, the group intends to pay an enhanced dividend of 17 pence now at a cost of about 50 million pounds.
"A foreign income dividend of approximately 100 million pounds will be paid before the end of March 1997," it said.
"The special dividends... represent the amount which the board considers the company should prudently pay, from both a borrowing capacity and tax perspective," Salvesen concluded.
Masters said in an interview the 150 million pound special dividend and demerger plan for the Aggreko hire business compared favourably with the 390 pence a share bid from business support company Hays that was dropped in August.
Plans for the demerger and special payout had been long rumoured, although earlier estimates said the special dividend had been expected to be worth 200 million.
Press reports put the value of the Aggreko demerger at around 400 million pounds.
Salvesen is due to brief institutional investors about its plans over the next two weeks. Some investors expressed disappointment earlier this year that the Hays offer was rejected, complaining about the severe underperformance of Salvesen's shares in the run-up to the bid.
By mid-afternoon Salvesen's shares were trading at 327-1/2 pence per share, up three and a half pence but off their highs for the day of 332.
In the months to August the shares underperformed the sector by 30 percent from the start of 1996 and by 10 percent against the FT-All Share index.
Since Salvesen rejected the bid, the shares have improved significantly and are currently outperforming the sector by 34 percent and the FT-All Share by 22 percent. ($1=.5941 Pound)
Christian Salvesen, the transport to business services group which rejected a 1.1 billion pound hostile takeover from Hays, said on Monday its special dividend and power unit demerger gave "much better" shareholder value.
Chris Masters, Salvesen chief executive, told Reuters in an interview "I think this (plan) is much better" and "more in the interests of our shareholders." He said he thought the 150 million pounds special dividend and demerger plan for the Aggreko hire business compared favorably with the rejected 390 pence per share bid from Hays, ditched in August.  
Masters said the plan to spin off the fast-growing hire group Aggreko was the culmination of a six-year restructuring strategy.
He added that a review to deliver shareholder value had already been underway before the hostile Hays bid was made in the summer.
The path chosen by the board made the best financial sense in tax terms as well, he added.
He said the Aggreko business was now ready to go it alone and had strong growth prospects. "It now operates in 20 countries and is a global market leader," he said.  
The logistics business, which will remain within the Salvesen group, also offered strong growth potential, said Masters.
"In Europe, logistics got half of its profits from food two years ago. Now that figure is less than 30 percent. Industrial logistics is growing at twenty percent per annum and the consumer business is growing at around 15 percent, with food manufacturing business also offering strong growth thanks to European deregulation."
Christian Salvesen will be making its case to institutional shareholders over the next two weeks, said Masters, in a bid to persuade them that this package offers a better deal than the 1.1 billion takeover bid from Hays.
The board has been under pressure to deliver after suffering share price underperformance earlier this year against the Financial Times All Share index.
--London newsroom +44 171 5427717
Debt-laden Eurotunnel is awaiting the outcome of insurer investigations into the costs of the major fire aboard a freight train last week.
Lead insurer Union des Assurances De Paris (UAP) said on Tuesday it was "impossible to quantify yet the cost of the damage."
"Up to now, there is no reliable estimate of the amount of damage caused by the fire on November 18 in the south tunnel," it said, adding its maximum residual risk was 75 million francs ($14.4 million).
Eurotunnel said in a statement earlier that it will hold a press conference to update the situation on Wednesday.
The beleaguered tunnel operator also said the investigating judge had finished his inspection of the scene of the blaze, but insurers and company engineers were continuing to investigate.
The latest statements were made amid rife speculation on the cost of the fire, including unconfirmed reports of total insured costs of as much as 200 million pounds ($334 million).
Current restrictions caused by fire damage are costing the group a million pounds in lost revenue every day.
Eurotunnel was also hit this week by reports of possible claims from companies operating the Eurostar high-speed train service which runs through the tunnel.
Eurostar's British owners, the London and Continental Railways consortium, said there were provisions in its contract with Eurotunnel for reduced access charges if the tunnel was partially or fully closed.
Eurotunnel's spokeswoman said reduced access meant Eurostar (and possibly its French and Belgian counterparts) could see "a reduction to their payment."
She reiterated that Eurotunnel is fully insured.
"The insurance should cover loss of business, the rolling stock, damage to the tunnel, compensation," she said.
The company declined to comment further at this stage.
One source close to Eurotunnel said last week that the cost of fire damage alone to freight and to the tunnel could run to tens of millions of pounds.
"The cost will be millions (of pounds) and could get into double figures, if you consider the damage to the 15 wagons and a locomotive, plus severe tunnel damage," said the source.
The cost of replacing a whole train was estimated at around 25 million pounds.
A senior source close to Eurotunnel insurers told Reuters on Tuesday that the cost of replacing rolling stock could be "in the range of mid- to late-teens (of millions of pounds)."
Adding to uncertainty surrounding insurance cover was the possibility that any payout could be affected by suggestions that the train was on fire before entering the tunnel.
However, analysts seem confident the costs would be covered.
But some said the level of losses caused by the fire were belittled by the scale of Eurotunnel's total debts.
"In relation to Eurotunnel's other financial problem of 8.8 billion (pounds) in debt anything else is incidental, even if the fire cost is 200 million at worst," one analyst said.
Since the fire, Eurotunnel's shares have fallen from a close of 91-1/2 pence on November 18 before the fire broke out to 77-1/2 by the close on Tuesday. ($1=5.190 French Franc) ($1=.5990 Pound)
Britain's top fraud watchdog, the Serious Fraud Office (SFO) on Wednesday launched an investigation into former bosses of Wickes Plc, the do-it-yourself retailer rocked by accounting irregularities worth tens of millions of pounds.
"The SFO has launched an investigation into the former senior management of Wickes," an SFO spokesman told Reuters.
It said the probe was being carried out jointly with the British police fraud squad in London.
Investigators are now expected to interview the ex-chairman and chief executive Henry Sweetbaum who resigned from the group in the summer, former finance director Trefor Llewellyn who is now at Caradon Plc, and the former buying and commercial directors.
"No-one has been arrested or charged and we have not executed any search warrants," the SFO spokesman said, adding that it had taken on the case on November 20 but had not announced its involvement "for operational reasons."
Wickes uncovered the accounting scam in June. The discrepancies date back five years and led to a 51 million stg overstatement of profits which will be wiped off shareholder funds.
The news led to a boardroom shake-up last summer and a three-and-a-half month internal inquiry by accountants Price Waterhouse and law firm Linklaters &amp; Paine.
"These investigations have led to the SFO having the reasonable grounds it requires to be able to launch a criminal investigation," said the SFO spokesman.
Meanwhile, Wickes is trying to salvage its business which was shaken by the summer's events.
Its shares remain frozen at 69 pence per share and it is planning to restate profits next month and launch details of a refinancing rights issue of between 30 and 40 million pounds.
A Wickes spokesman told Reuters those plans were "well advanced." It is also close to deciding on a new chief executive, with two to three candidates shortlisted including an internal candidate.
The former chief Sweetbaum said last month that he accepted "ultimate responsibility" for what happened under his regime.
He has agreed to repay his 1.2 million pounds in bonuses including tax. Former finance chief Llewellyn has also agreed to repay his bonus of 485,000 pounds for 1995.
Moves to refinance the group will help cut gearing to around 70 percent said analysts, who believe it will be far from easy to raise the rights issue cash needed to put the company back on the road to recovery.
Shares are not expected to resume trading until early 1997.
Britain's fraud watchdog, the Serious Fraud Office (SFO) on Wednesday launched an investigation into former bosses of Wickes Plc, the do-it-yourself retailer rocked by accounting irregularities worth tens of millions of pounds.
"The SFO has launched an investigation into the former senior management of Wickes," an SFO spokesman told Reuters.
It said the probe was being carried out jointly with the British police fraud squad in London.
Investigators are now expected to interview the ex-chairman and chief executive Henry Sweetbaum who resigned from the group in the summer, former finance director Trefor Llewellyn who is now at Caradon Plc, and the former buying and commercial directors.
"No-one has been arrested or charged and we have not executed any search warrants," the SFO spokesman said, adding that it had taken on the case on November 20 but had not announced its involvement "for operational reasons".
Wickes uncovered the accounting scam in June. The discrepencies date back five years and led to a 51 million pound ($85.62 million) overstatement of profits which will be wiped off shareholder funds.
The news led to a boardroom shake-up last summer and a three and a half month internal inquiry by accountants Price Waterhouse and law firm Linklaters &amp; Paine.
"These investigations have led to the SFO having the reasonable grounds it requires to be able to launch a criminal investigation," said the SFO spokesman.
Meanwhile, Wickes is trying to salvage its business which was shaken by the summer's events.
Its shares remain frozen at 69 pence per share and it is planning to restate profits next month and launch details of a refinancing rights issue of between 30 and 40 million pounds.
A Wickes spokesman told Reuters those plans were "well advanced." It is also close to deciding on a new chief executive, with two to three candidates shortlisted including an internal candidate.
The former chief Sweetbaum said last month that he accepted "ultimate responsibility" for what happened under his regime.
He has agreed to repay his 1.2 million pounds in bonuses including tax. former finance chief Llewellyn has also agreed to repay his bonus of 485,000 pounds for 1995.
Moves to refinance the group will help cut gearing to around 70 percent said analysts, who believe it will be far from easy to raise the rights issue cash needed to put the company back on the road to recovery.
Shares are not expected to resume trading until early 1997.
($1=.5956 Pound)
Stagecoach, the British bus and rail group which has seen its share price grow fivefold in three years, Thursday posted a bumper 127 percent rise in first-half profits, boosting its stock to a record high.
The Scottish-based group, which has enjoyed explosive growth since its flotation in 1993, said half year pre-tax profits climbed to a record 47 million pounds ($79 million). The half year dividend rose 43 percent to 3 pence (5 cents) a share and group revenues leapt to 405 million pounds ($679.0 million) from 198.8 million ($333.3 million).
Chairman Brian Souter called the results excellent.
Shares in Stagecoach were up 45.5 pence (76.28 cents) at 629 ($10.54) by 1350 GMT (8:50 a.m. EST), leading a fleet of other bus companies higher in its wake. Go-Ahead Group rose 15 pence to 411.5 ($6.90) and Cowie Group added 5.5 pence (9.2 cents) to 396p ($6.63).
"It's good news all round. The profits are two million ($3.4 million) above what I expected. We're upgrading our year forecast by five million ($8.4 million) to 97 million pounds ($162.6 million)," said UBS analyst Richard Hannah.
The results were the first since the group's high profile acquisitions of British rail rolling stock company Porterbrook and the Swedish bus group Swebus.
"The integration of Porterbrook and Swebus is proceeding and I am confident of a successful outcome," said Souter.
Porterbook and the bus operations were the real driver behind the growth in profits. The figures were also flattered by a one-off gain of 15 million pounds ($25.1 million) from the sale of a 21.7 percent stake in Strathclyde Buses. This was reflected in the high half-year payout.
Porterbook's profits were better than expected at 13.5 million pounds ($22.6 million) in the six weeks since it was acquired.
"That's about two million ($3.4 million) profit a week on operating profit margins of 40 percent," said Hannah.
Stagecoach finance director Keith Cochrane said operating profits would ease slightly in the latter part of the year as the company took on "on-going expenditure for maintenance."
He forecast Porterbrook would still perform strongly, although margins would not be as high as in the first six weeks.
Total sales in the bus operation rose to 232.2 million pounds ($389.3 million) against 189.2 million ($317.2 million), yielding profits of 34.6 million ($58 million) versus 29.0 million ($48.6 million).
South West Trains, a new business, saw sales of 128 million pounds ($214.6 million) and profits of 500,000 pounds ($838,222).
Porterbrook sales were 33.6 million pounds ($56.3 million), with 13.5 million ($22.6 million) profit and Swebus sales came in at 11.3 million ($18.9 million), with 600,000 pounds ($1 million) in profit.
Stagecoach, which started out as a brother and sister team in Scotland, was floated in 1993 at 112 pence ($1.87) a share. The share price has doubled this year.
Stagecoach, the British bus and rail group which has seen its shareprice grow fivefold in three years, saw its stock hit a record high on Thursday after posting a bumper 127 percent rise in first half profits.
The Scottish-based group which has enjoyed explosive growth since its flotation in 1993, said half year pre-tax profits climbed to a record 47 million pounds ($79 million). The half year dividend rose 43 percent to three pence a share and group turnover leapt to 405 million pounds from 198.8 million.
Chairman Brian Souter called the results excellent.
Shares in Stagecoach were up 45.5 pence at 629 by 1350 GMT, leading a fleet of other bus companies higher in its wake. Go-Ahead Group rose 15 pence to 411.5 and Cowie Group added 5.5 pence to 396p.
"It's good news all round. The profits are two million above what I expected. We're upgrading our year forecast by five million to 97 million pounds," said UBS analyst Richard Hannah.
The results were the first since the group's high profile acquisitions of British rail rolling stock company Porterbrook and the Swedish bus group Swebus.
"The integration of Porterbrook and Swebus is proceeding and I am confident of a successful outcome," said Souter.
Porterbook and the bus operations were the real driver behind the growth in profits. The figures were also flattered by a one-off gain of 15 million pounds from the sale of a 21.7 percent stake in Strathclyde Buses. This was reflected in the high half year payout.
Porterbook's profits were better than expected at 13.5 million pounds in the six weeks since it was acquired.
"That's about two million profit a week on operating profit margins of 40 percent," said Hannah.
Stagecoach finance director Keith Cochrane said operating profits would ease slightly in the latter part of the year as the company took on "on-going expenditure for maintenance".
He forecast Porterbrook would still perform strongly, although margins would not be as high as in the first six weeks.
Total sales in the bus operation rose to 232.2 million pounds against 189.2 million, yielding profits of 34.6 million versus 29.0 million.
South West Trains, a new business, saw sales of 128 million pounds and profits of 500,000 pounds.
Porterbrook sales were 33.6 million pounds, with 13.5 million profit and Swebus sales came in at 11.3 million, with 600,000 pounds in profit.
Stagecoach, which started out as a brother and sister team in Scotland, was floated in 1993 at 112 pence a share. The share price has doubled this year. ($1=.5956 Pound)
The British government on Thursday referred a proposed merger of key cross-Channel ferry services provided by Britain's P&amp;O and Sweden's Stena Line to its main competition watchdog for investigation.
Ian Lang, president of the Board of Trade, said he had asked the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC) to study competition effects of the deal -- hatched to help the ferry giants counter the impact on the market of Eurotunnel's Channel Tunnel.
Most Eurotunnel services, including its own passenger and freight shuttles and intercity rail trains run by Eurostar, were suspended following a serious fire last week.
Although the government gave no explanation of its motives for the review, both P&amp;O and share analysts said it seemed to be partly motivated by Eurotunnel's suspension of services.
P&amp;O immediately slammed the move, calling it "totally unnecessary". Its shares dipped on the news, and were down 6-1/2 pence at 589 1/2 pence by 1300 GMT.
P&amp;O chairman Lord Sterling said the two ferry companies' plans had now been "kicked into touch for three months," as the MMC has been given until March 6, 1997 to review the deal.
The two old shipping rivals unveiled plans in October to join forces on three routes across the English Channel, in response to the swift progress made by the tunnel in grabbing a 40 percent market share on the route two years after opening.
The tunnel opted for an aggressive pricing policy as it built up its market presence, cutting deep into the ferry lines' profits as firms led by P&amp;O European Ferries and Stena Sealink responded with parallel price-cuts and expensive extra ships.
The ferry duo's planned merger was designed to rationalise their capacity on the key short-sea section where the Channel is at its narrowest, crossing times are short and competition for millions of passengers and freight units a year is most fierce.
The ferry giants said the link-up would allow them to slash 75 million pounds ($126 million) off a combined fixed cost base of 280 million pounds, as well as building up cash generation.
P&amp;O's Sterling argued on Thursday that Eurotunnel's fire had done nothing to change the economic arguments for a ferry link-up to remove excess capacity.
"Although the tunnel is temporarily out of action due to the unfortunate fire, I cannot see how the MMC reference will change the underlying situation," the statement quoted him as saying.
With Eurotunnel taking 45 percent of the market, P&amp;O added, "it is difficult to see that there is any competition concern that requires investigation."
James Halstead, analyst at Credit Lyonnais Laing in London, said the referral decision was slightly unexpected and disappointing for the market.
"They were effectively given the green light in the summer by the government when the injunction on a merger was removed, and the government saw the impact on business after the Channel Tunnel opened. We thought there would be no problem," he said.
In Sweden, Stena Line's shares dipped 0.80 crowns to 28.50 after the news.
($1=.5956 Pound)
Stagecoach Plc, the bus to rail operator which has seen its shareprice double in under a year, said on Thursday it expected ongoing progress in dividend growth after reporting record profits of 47 million stg.
Keith Cochrane, finance director, told Reuters "We expect ongoing progress in our second half dividend," even after raising the interim payout by 43 percent to three pence. But he pointed out that the first dividend reflected the 15 million stg profit from the sale of its stake in Strathclyde Buses.
British entrepreneur Richard Branson's Virgin Group Friday clinched a British rail franchise and said it planned to spend an extra 250 million pounds ($420 million) on new trains and increased services.
He won control of the CrossCountry service, which covers more than 130 stations and is based in the central British city of Birmingham.
The company, with 842 employees and passenger revenues worth 108 million pounds ($181.3 million) in the year to March, is part of the national rail network that is in the process of being privatised.
"Virgin believes that it can be built into one of the prime rail franchises serving several markets... Exciting times are ahead," Branson told a London news briefing.
The Virgin empire, which spans everything from its airline, music and financial services to its own-label cola, already has a major rail business.
It is a partner in the London and Continental Railways (LCR) consortium which owns the Eurostar passenger service that links London with Paris and Brussels through the Channel Tunnel.
Will Whitehorn, director of Virgin Rail, told Reuters, "Our key plan is to buy a new fleet, spending 250 million pounds ($419.7 million) on new rolling stock, agreed as part of the bid."
The order will be placed next year, with the first deliveries due in 2002. Under financial terms, the government subsidy in the first year of the 15-year franchise will be 112.9 million pounds ($189.6 million).
That subsidy has been cut from the 1996/97 level of 127 million pounds ($213.2 million) and will average 36.4 million ($61.1 million) over the life of the franchise term.
Whitehorn said the subsidy will be eroded over the 15-year term and in the final year Virgin Rail will make a 10 million pound ($16.9 million) payment to the government.
Sir George Young, transport secretary said, "This deal is final proof of the renaissance which is sweeping through Britain's railway industry... Virgin will take a loss-making nationalised company and transform it within 15 years into a profitable enterprise."
Virgin will refurbish the company's HST 125 diesel trains and has pledged to increase train miles by 14 percent between May 1998 and 2002.
The services will be rebranded under the Virgin name and cover destinations across England, Scotland and Wales.
This is the first rail franchise to be awarded to Virgin Rail which also bid unsuccessfully for the Gatwick Express route.
But Virgin is on the shortlist for the West Coast rail franchise and has a bid in for the Thameslink service in London.
Of 25 rail franchises covering passenger services across Britain, the government has sold 14 to the private sector as part of its privatisation of the network.
British entrepreneur Richard Branson's Virgin Group said on Friday it had clinched the CrossCountry passenger rail franchise and planned to spend an extra 250 million pounds ($420 million) on new trains and increased services.
CrossCountry, which covers more than 100 stations and is based in the central British city of Birmingham, is one of the last few passenger rail franchises to be awarded under Britain's rail priavatisation programme.
The company has 842 staff and in the year to March 30 passenger revenues were 108 million pounds.
"Our key plan is to buy a new fleet, spending 250 million on new rolling stock, agreed as part of the bid," Will Whitehorn, director of Virgin Rail, said in an interview.
Train orders will be placed next year, with the first deliveries due to be made in 2002. Under Virgin's financial terms with the government, it will get a subsidy in the first year of the 15 year franchise of 115 million pounds. This is 12 million pounds less than in 1996/97.
Whitehorn said the subsidy will be eroded over the 15 year term and in the final year Virgin Rail will make a 10 million payment to the government.
It will refurbish existing HST 125 diesel trains and has pledged to increase train miles by 14 percent. "We will grow the service, we will not cut them." he said.
The services will be rebranded under the Virgin name and cover destinations across England, Scotland and Wales.
This is the first rail franchise to be awarded to Virgin Rail which also bid unsuccessfully for the Gatwick Express route which went to National Express buses.
But Virgin is on the shortlist for the West Coast rail franchise and has a bid in for the Thameslink service in London. There are 25 rail franchises in all, covering passenger services across Britain.
So far the government has sold 14 franchises to the private sector as part of its privatisation of the entire network.
The Virgin empire, which spans everything from its airline, music and financial services to its own-label cola, already has a major rail business.
It is a partner in the London and Continental Railways consortium which owns the Eurostar passenger service linking London with Paris and Brussels through the Channel Tunnel.
Service through the Channel Tunnel were suspended last week after a serious fire.
Whitehorn refused to comment on the financial impact of the closure of Eurotunnel's tunnel.
LCR has said that it needs to raise Eurostar's passenger traffic to fund construction of the Channel Tunnel Rail Link between the tunnel and London. ($1=.5956 Pound)
Virgin Rail group, the rail division of Entrepreur Richard branson's Virgin Group, said on Friday it planned to spend 250 million stg on new rolling stock after announcing it has won the CrossCountry rail franchise.
Will Whitehorn, director of Virgin Rail, told Reuters  "Our key plan is to buy a new fleet, spending 250 million (stg) on new rolling stock, agreed as part of the bid." The order will be placed next year, with delivery starting in 20002. He also said the government subsidy in the first year of the 15 year franchise will be 115 million pounds.  
The 115 million subsidy will be payable to Virgin in the first year of the new operation and has been reduced from the 1996/97 subsidy level of 127 million. Whitehorn said the subsidy will be eroded over the 15 year term and in the final year Virgin Rail will make a 10 milliong payment to the government.
It will refurbish the HST 125 diesel trains and pledges to increase train miles by 14 percent. "We will grow the service, we will not cut them." he said.
It plans to introduce a series of initiatives on the CrossCountry franchise, the first to be won by Virgin.
CrossCountry had 108 million stg in passenger revenues in the year to March 31. It employs 842 staff and covers services linking England, Scotland and Wales.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
British entrepreneur Richard Branson's Virgin Group on Friday clinched a British rail franchise and said it planned to spend an extra 250 million pounds ($420 million) on new trains and increased services.
He won control of the CrossCountry serice, which covers more than 130 stations and is based in the central British city of Birmingham.
The company, which has 842 staff and earned passenger revenues worth 108 million pounds ($181.3 million) in the year to March, is part of the national rail network that is in the process of being privatised.
"Virgin believes that it can be built into one of the prime rail franchises serving several markets...Exciting times are ahead," Branson told a London news briefing.
Will Whitehorn, director of Virgin Rail, told Reuters: "Our key plan is to buy a new fleet, spending 250 million pounds on new rolling stock, agreed as part of the bid."
The order will be placed next year, with the first deliveries due in 2002. Under financial terms, the government subsidy in the first year of the 15 year franchise will be 112.9 million pounds.
The 112.9 million subsidy has been cut from the 1996/97 level of 127 million pounds and will average at 36.4 million over the life of the franchise term.
Whitehorn said the subsidy will be eroded over the 15 year term and in the final year Virgin Rail will make a 10 million pound payment to the government.
Sir George Young, transport secretary said: "This deal is final proof of the renaissance which is sweeping through Britain's railway industry...Virgin will take a loss-making nationalised company and transform it within 15 years into a profitable enterprise."
Virgin will refurbish the company's HST 125 diesel trains and has pledged to increase train miles by 14 percent between May 1998 and 2002.
The services will be rebranded under the Virgin name and cover destinations across England, Scotland and Wales.
This is the first rail franchise to be awarded to Virgin Rail which also bid unsuccessfully for the Gatwick Express route.
But Virgin is on the shortlist for the West Coast rail franchise and has a bid in for the Thameslink service in London.
Of 25 rail franchises covering passenger services across Britain, the government has sold 14 to the private sector as part of its privatisation of the network.
The Virgin empire, which spans everything from its airline, music and financial services to its own-label cola, already has a major rail business.
It is a partner in the London and Continental Railways (LCR) consortium which owns the Eurostar passenger service that links London with Paris and Brussels through the Channel Tunnel.
A serious fire in the tunnel last week has temporarily halted services, but Whitehorn declined to comment on the financial impact on the company.
LCR has said that it needs to raise Eurostar's passenger traffic to fund construction of the planned Channel Tunnel Rail Link between London and the tunnel. ($1=.5956 Pound)
LucasVarity Plc, the U.S.-Anglo auto components giant formed in September, announced a major restructuring Tuesday, including the planned disposal of 13 non-core businesses and the elimination of 3,000 jobs over two years.
LucasVarity said it had identified a range of additional moves that will mean an extra 120 million British pounds ($200 million) in profit benefits -- double the level anticipated just three months ago when the company was formed in the merger of Lucas Industries of Britain and Varity Corp. of Buffalo, N.Y.
Worldwide employment will be cut by 3,000 over the next two years as a result of the moves, the company said.
LucasVarity said it also will take an extra one-time charge of 130 million pounds ($217 million), mainly in non-cash items, along with 120 million pounds ($200 million) in charges already planned for this year.
Thirteen companies were identified for sale in a three-month post-merger review, although only eight were named in the restructuring announcement -- all small businesses in Britain, Argentina and South Africa.
Chief Executive Victor Rice said in an interview that the company was "sifting through some offers" and expected to be in "active negotiations" on the sale of some of the 13 units quite soon.
Rice said major businesses like aerospace and electronics were not among the unnamed five.
The criteria for divestment were those firms which "neither fitted into the core strategy of the company or contributed economic added value," Rice said.
Rice, who came from Varity, said the post-divestment savings were "virtually double" original expectations.
LucasVarity is involved in the design, manufacture and supply of systems, products and services in international automotive, diesel engine, aftermarket and aerospace industries.
Both parties in the merger specialised in braking systems and industry sources expected that many of the measures would affect production and employment in these units.
Anglo-U.S. autocomponents giant LucasVarity unveiled a major corporate shake-up on Tuesday planning 13 non-core disposals and a speeded-up rationalisation which will axe 3,000 jobs worldwide over two years.
LucasVarity, created by a merger earlier this year of Britain's Lucas Industries and Varity Corp of the U.S., said it had identified a range of additional restructuring plans that meant it now saw operating savings of 120 million pounds ($200.2 million) -- double the level anticipated after the merger.
The market initially welcomed the news and the company's shares jumped to a new 12-month high of 263 pence. But downbeat company comments about the auto industry during a telephone conference call to analysts sent the stock slumping to close a sharp 16.5 pence lower at 234p.
"They said that things were relatively tough in France and in the heavy truck market, particularly in Europe, and that they weren't immune to the trends we are seeing in the (competitive) market," said one analyst, who declined to be named.
LucasVarity expects to take an extra one-off charge of 130 million pounds, mainly in non-cash items, which will be levied along with 120 million pounds of costs already planned for current year accounts.
Worldwide headcount will be cut by 3,000 over the next two years as a result of the moves, the company said.
Thirteen companies have been marked up for sale after the three-month review which came in the wake of the multi-billion pounds merger between Britain's Lucas Industries and Varity Corp of the U.S. which became effective in September this year.
Commenting on the speed of disposals, Victor Rice, chief executive, told Reuters the group was "sifting through some offers" and expected to be in "active negotiations" on the sale of some of the 13 quite soon.
Only eight of the 13 businesses marked for sale were named in the restructuring statement released earlier. Rice said that major businesses like aerospace and electronics were not among the unnamed five.
The eight named so far are small niche businesses and include starter and alternator firms in Britain, Argentina and South Africa. The 13 disposal targets have combined sales of 270 million pounds.
The criteria for divestment were those firms which "neither fitted into the core strategy of the company or contributed economic added value," said Rice.
Commenting on the rationalisation moves, Rice, who came from the Varity side of the merger, said "the combination of cost savings and anticipated revenue growth identified by these teams will help the company achieve the aggressive performance targets it has set for itself."
He said the post-demerger savings were "virtually double" original expectations. The process of cost cutting would continue he added, concluding that he was "pretty excited for the future" of the merged business.
LucasVarity is involved in the design, manufacture and supply of systems, products and services in international automotive, diesel engine, aftermarket and aerospace industries.
Both parties in the merger specialised in braking systems and industry sources expected that many of the rationalisation measures would affect production and employment in these units. ($1=.5995 Pound)
