The introduction of new accounting methods for Japanese banks will not have an immediate impact on their earnings, but it should help boost derivatives trading in Japan, analysts and banking sources say.
Major banks are preparing for the new accounting methods for derivatives and securities trade, which will be introduced from the end of the 1997/98 fiscal year, although the types of financial instruments to be covered by the new methods have not been set.
But the sources said the use of mark-to-market accounting would help increase arbitrage deals in derivatives while also helping reduce potential volatility in swap rates.
"Following the introduction of mark-to-market accounting, we will be able to offer various hedge instruments to clients, and this will help increase business opportunities for us in the long term," a bank official said.
In mark-to-market accounting, unrealised gains or losses in the trading accounts must be included in the current income statement.  
Currently in Japan, financial products are basically appraised according to the cost of purchase, and realised gains or losses are posted in current income statements only when the positions are closed.
One analyst said the new accounting methods would not be used for interest rate swaps for long-term holdings.
"Big commercial and trust banks posted bigger operating profitS 1995/96 as they increased profits from interest rate swaps," she said.
Even if the big banks take speculative positions in interest rate swaps, the deals are not expected to be covered by the mark-to-market accounting methods as they are not considered as instruments for short-term capital gains, she said.
Naruaki Sonoda, a senior analyst at Nikko Research Centre, said mark-to-market accounting standards would be applied only to short-term trading and banks do not hold shares for that purpose despite their huge stock investments.
Also, unrealised profits or losses in short-term bond dealings are not big enough to influence bank earnings, he said.  
The Japanese parliament passed a special act in June allowing banks and brokerages to include gains or losses from derivatives and short-term securities trading in their income statements from the end of March 1998.
To use mark-to-market accounting methods, however, banks and brokerages must get permission from the Finance Ministry. Not all banks are expected to apply to use the new methods.
A Finance Ministry official said the ministry has been working out details of which securities and derivatives deals will be covered by the new accounting methods.
Deciding which deals go into the trading account will be based on the initial purpose -- whether the deal was aimed at long-term holding or short-term trading, said Takashi Kinoshita, deputy general manager at Fuji Bank's capital markets trading division.
"We are trying to separate trading accounts from non-trading accounts based on business units," he said.
Each bank will divide its financial products holdings into two accounts -- one account for hedging risks in holdings of underlying cash instruments and for long-term investments, and the other for short-term operations, the sources said.
Undeterred by the woes of Japan's debt-laden finance industry, foreign investors have flocked to a new share offering by the nation's fourth-biggest bank.
The strong interest in the preferred shares issued last month by Sakura Bank Ltd, despite the institution's relatively weak financial strength rating, points to greater confidence among foreign investors than domestic ones about the state of the industry, market sources say.
"We received nearly two trillion yen ($18 billion) worth of demand for 150 billion yen ($1.35 billion) of preferred shares," said Kazuya Johno, assistant general manager at Sakura Bank's Planning Division.
"Foreign investors are properly assessing each Japanese bank and it seems to me they have acknowledged that the worst of the bad loan problem (at Japanese banks) is over."
Last month Sakura issued 75 million shares of preferred stock at 2,000 yen ($18) each, becoming the fourth big Japanese bank to launch a convertible offering to boost its capital base in the past year. All of the offerings have been well-received by foreign investors, market sources say.
Payment for Sakura's five-year preferred stock issue was on September 30. Holders of such shares do not get voting rights but generally receive higher dividends than for common shares.
Market sources said foreign investors have grown more positive about Japan's big banks than domestic investors, who are concerned about the idea of banks issuing shares to improve capital adequacy ratios. An official at a major life insurance company said: "We will not buy new shares even if banks issue them. We are worried about the negative impact of new share issues on bank stocks and the markets."
Sakura's Johno said that the bank's preferred stock had been repackaged through an overseas trust for selling abroad.
In Japan, issuers cannot force investors to convert preferred stock to common stock during the term period. Through repackaging, Sakura wanted investors to convert preferred shares to common shares in a way that would not jeopardise the bank's stock price or the stability of the overall market.
"If investors converted preferred stock at one time, it could bring some 150 million common shares into the market and have an enormous impact on share prices," Johno said.
In the scheme, investors must convert part of their holdings to common stock in stages, with one-third converted three years after the issue and a similar amount four years after the issue. All the preferred shares must be converted by October 1, 2001.
To attract investors, the bank also promised to review the conversion price every year to minimise risks stemming from stock price fluctuations. Under the formula, the lower the conversion price the more common shares investors can have.
The initial conversion price was set at 1,122 yen ($10) with an annual dividend of 15 yen. The conversion price will be reviewed on December 8, 1997, and every October 1 after that. Sakura was trading at 1,070 yen on Tuesday.
Johno said about 70 percent of foreign buyers of the preferred stock were long-term holders such as pension funds.
Sakura aimed to boost its core capital through the stock issue to help its restructuring after it disposed of about 950 billion yen ($8.55 billion) of problem loans in the last fiscal year, which cut its capital adequacy ratio by 0.35 percentage point to 8.37 percent. Under international rules, banks operating internationally are required to hold a minimum eight percent of capital against risk-weighted assets.
Sakura is Japan's fourth-biggest bank in terms of risk-weighted assets. Its financial strength rating of "D+" assigned by credit rating agency Moody's Investors Service Inc is among the lower gradings for major Japanese banks. ($1=111 yen)
Japan will set up a panel on Tuesday to tackle the after-effects of the nation's problem loans -- collection of bad loans in the form of land collateral, government sources said on Monday.
The panel will discuss wide-ranging steps to increase liquidity in the real estate market to facilitate collection of such problem loans, a government source said.
"The central issue for the panel will be studying measures to collect problem loans in the form of land collateral run up by (failed) 'jusen' mortgage firms,"  he said.
"We think securitisation of the problem loans is one effective measure to collect problem loans," he also said.
Officials from the ministries of finance, construction and justice and the National Land Agency will join the panel, along with officials from the Deposit Insurance Corp of Japan, a semi-governmental body set up to protect depositors from bank failures.
The Housing Loan Administration Corp (HLAC), in charge of recovering the problem loans of failed mortgage firms, known as "jusen", and the Resolution and Collection Bank (RCB), which will perform a similar task for troubled credit unions, will also send officials to join the panel.
Officials are now finally aware they must take steps to stimulate the real estate market from a budgetary standpoint, said Yoshinobu Yamada, analyst at Merrill Lynch Japan.
HLAC was set up in July to recover the problem loans of seven failed mortgage firms over the next 15 years. But the government says further losses may arise and that half of any future losses will be covered by public money.
In June, the government adopted a controversial scheme that allows for the use of 685 billion yen ($6.17 billion) in taxpayers' money to help wind up the failed mortgage firms.
The government has also committed itself to meeting any potential shortfalls at the Resolution and Collection Bank with government funds.
The bank was established last month to manage the holdings of failed credit unions and collect their problem loans. The government has given the bank a 10-year period to bail out credit unions and aims to disband the bank thereafter.
Some analysts said, however, that it would be tough for the ministries to agree on steps to boost the sagging real estate market, now in a five-year-long slump following the bursting of the 1980s "bubble economy" of inflated asset prices.
For instance, Japan may have to allocate budget funds for public utilisation of assets put up as collateral for problem loans, analysts said. The government should also adopt a flexible taxation system to help securitise problem loans backed by real estate, they said.
Securitising the loans involves selling property to a new special-purpose company, which in turn will issue bonds backed by these assets to procure money. Investors in the bonds would profits from any rise in land prices and from rent income.
The number of investors in Japan is still limited due to fears of further drops in land prices, and financial institutions themselves are reluctant to sell collateralised land at the currently cheap market prices, analysts said.
But Yukiko Ohara, an analyst at UBS Securities, said the setting up of a panel to discuss this dilemma is an important first step. "It is better than nothing."
Securitisation worked well in the United States when the U.S. Resolution Trust Corp tried to recover bad debts following the savings and loan crisis of the 1980s. ($1=111 yen)
Japan's rule-bound markets must be fully deregulated to ensure that the nation does not fall further behind in the global finance business, an influential reform panel said on Thursday in an interim report.
Establishing markets to effectively manage 1,000 trillion yen ($8.92 trillion) of individual assets through deregulation is particularly important ahead of a rapid rise in the proportion of old people, key panel member Kazuhito Ikeo said.
"Unless Japan speeds up restructuring of the financial system, it will be left behind in global competition even more than now, particularly asset management services," Ikeo, a professor at Keio University in Tokyo, told reporters.
The proposal includes abolition of all rules on the range of businesses which units of banks and brokers are allowed to engage in by the end of fiscal 1997/98 year in March.
It also recommended a fundamental revision in the Securities and Exchange Law and liberalisation of commissions on stockbroking, as well as lifting an almost 50-year ban on holding companies, which control one or more companies, often through a majority stake.
Ikeo said the panel, made up of private-sector figures and academics, focused on benefits for consumers and put aside an expected negative impact on existing financial firms.
Although the panel was urging total deregulation in the financial industry, Ikeo said, if there was a need for rules in exceptional cases, they should be clearly written in financial laws so bureaucrats would not need to intervene.
In the past, deregulation plans were drawn up by bureaucrats in powerful ministries such as finance, trade and construction, which have carefully guarded industries they surpervise. But these have been slow in getting results, and criticism from the United States and other major trading partners has continued.
Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto's government has wanted to step up efforts to cut bureaucratic red tape to boost the fragile economy, because its high-cost structure is making the country less attractive to investors.
The panel, set up in July by the Economic Planning Agency, comprises six subcommittees focusing on finance, information technology, distribution, land, employment and medicine.
The subcommittees on land, distribution and medicine presented proposals last week and the two on employment and medicine unveiled recommendations separately on Thursday, all of which called for sweeping reform in each field.
The proposals will become an outline for the advisory council's final recommendation to the prime minister, which will be made in December after the council hears the opinions of bureaucrats on each issue.
Panel chairman Koichi Minaguchi told a news conference that he wanted to ensure that the panel's efforts would not be a "total waste of energy".
"The ministries concerned all agree that they are heading in the direction outlined in the reports, but when it comes to specifics, they said they still have different opinions," Minaguchi said.
EPA officials were also cautious about the future of the proposals by the panel, however, as any action taken may hinge on the outcome of general elections set for October 20.
"It is not clear how ministers in the new government to be formed will treat those proposals," an EPA official said.
Haruo Shimada, also a key member of the panel, said, however, that any delay in overhauling laws relating to employment would be "suicidal".
While the number of workers would rapidly fall after 2010, Japan still uses employment laws established half a century ago. "If we don't start (reform and deregulation), immediately, it would be suicidal," Shimada said. ($1=112 yen)
Two out of Japan's "Big Four" brokers, Nomura Securities and Daiwa Securities, are expected to regain their financial health in the current business year, analysts said on Friday.
Japan's second-biggest broker Daiwa Securities said on Friday that it was considering a restructuring programme for a non-bank affiliate.
While details have yet to be decided, analysts said it would not be surprising if Daiwa announces financial aid later in the 1996/97 business year ending in March.
"We expect Daiwa to post a parent current profit of 67 billion yen ($598 million) in 1996/97 if daily average turnover on the Tokyo exchange hits 430 billion yen ($3.83 billion) and if it does not give any support," said Ayako Sato, an analyst at UBS Securities.
Problem loans held by Daiwa's non-bank affiliate are estimated to total 100 billion yen ($892 million) to 150 billion yen ($1.33 billion), and even if the broker decides to help its affiliate write off problem loans in 1996/97, it would have no major impact on Daiwa's financial health, she said.
The "Big Four", including Nikko Securities and Yamaichi Securities, are scheduled to announce their business results on Tuesday for the first half of the fiscal year to September 30.
Japanese business daily Nihon Keizai Shimbun reported on Friday that Daiwa was likely to post flat parent net profits in 1996/97 as it has basically decided to provide financial support of about 100 billion yen ($892 million) to a non-bank affiliate.
Daiwa was expected to post a parent current profit of 50 billion yen ($446 million) for 1996/97 and an extraordinary profit of about 50 billion yen ($446 million) from sales of shares, offsetting the special loss stemming from the financial support, the paper said.
In the year ended March 31, 1996, Daiwa posted a parent net profit of 43.69 billion yen ($390 million).
The broker did not issue a profit forecast.
Last month, Nomura said it would provide financial support to its ailing affiliate and post a special loss of 371 billion yen ($3.31 billion) in the half year to September 30.
Nomura said it would post a net loss for the first half because of the special loss, but declined to give an earnings forecast for the half-year and the full year.
However, analysts were unsure whether the other two, Nikko and Yamaichi, which face similar financial problems at their non-bank affiliates, would take action in 1996/97.
A Nikko spokesman said on Friday that the company was considering measures to help its financial affiliates, but no decision had been made.
Ryuji Shirai, deputy president at Yamaichi Securities, said earlier this month that the firm has been reviewing the 10-year programme it launched three years ago to help restructure its non-bank affiliate, and may shorten that period.
UBS's Sato said that it may be difficult for Nikko to quickly decide any course of action for its non-bank affiliates as one of Nikko group's non-bank affiliates is jointly owned by Asahi Bank and its group companies.
Yamaichi's relatively weak capital base compared with the three other big brokers may make it difficult to provide financial aid to its non-bank affiliate in 1996/97, analysts also said.
Nikko projected a parent net profit of nine billion yen ($80.3 million) for the first half and 24 billion yen ($214 million) for the full 1996/97 year.
Yamaichi expected a parent net profit for the half-year of five billion yen ($44.6 million) and for the full year of 16 billion yen ($142 million). ($1=112 yen)
Japan's biggest life insurer, Nippon Life Insurance Co, plans to set up a joint venture in the Philippines, becoming the first Japanese company to sell life insurance policies abroad.
A spokesman for Nippon Life said on Monday that it and the Yuchengco group of the Philippines' would sign a contract by the year-end to establish a joint venture by next March.
"Japanese insurers have not gone abroad to sell life insurance policies. We plan to sell policies in the Philippines to people in the medium to high income bracket, and also target Japanese firms that have already entered the country," he said.
Nippon Life will own 50 percent of the joint venture, which will be based in Manila. The rest will be owned by two Yuchengco group firms -- 30 percent by Great Pacific Life Assurance Corp and 20 percent by Rizal Commercial Banking Corp.
The size of the capitalisation and the number of staff at the new company have not yet been decided, but Nippon Life is expected to send several executives to the venture, he said.
Nippon Life is also looking to tap lucrative markets elsewhere in Asia as the domestic insurance business approaches saturation point, the spokesman said.
The president of Nippon Life, Josei Itoh, said earlier this year that it wants to help build up the life insurance market in the rest of Asia in collaboration with local firms.
Only an estimated five to 10 percent of people in Southeast Asia have life insurance policies, Itoh said, adding that China's biggest insurer, the People's Insurance Co of China (PICC), could be a candidate for a joint venture.
Nippon Life is a giant in the Japanese insurance business and one of the world's top providers of life cover, with assets of about 39 trillion yen ($348 billion), nearly one-fifth of the value of assets held by Japan's 31 life insurers.
Analysts say the insurance business in emerging Asian countries will grow rapidly in the coming decades. Purchase of life insurance policies is closely tied to an individual's affluence and disposable income, they say.
"While Japan's insurance market is reaching maturity, the prospects for growth are enormous in the rest of Asia as countries there have just begun to build up a pool of their own capital," said Nikko Research Centre analyst Kouya Hasegawa.
"Japanese banks and other financial institutions are already targeting Asian markets for future opportunities. Nippon Life took action in the region as the first Japanese life insurer to do so, indicating other big life insurance firms will follow," he said. ($1=112 yen)
Japan's biggest brokerage, Nomura Securities, posted a hefty half-year loss on Tuesday but other "Big Four" brokers turned in handsome profits due to improving business on the nation's stock market.
Nomura suffered a net parent loss of around $3 billion in the six months to September 30 after ploughing large amounts of money into helping an ailing finance firm in the Nomura group.
However, the three other big brokers posted healthy profits generally in line with their performance for the same period last year, helped by rising turnover on the Japanese stock market. The brokers have troubled affiliates too but have yet to work out detailed strategies for tackling the problem.
Executives at Daiwa Securities, Nikko Securities and Yamaichi Securities all said their firms had benefited from increased stockbroking fees and commission income from bond and stock underwriting.
Despite the net losses, analysts said Nomura was on track for better-than-expected profits this year, which would make it easier to resolve financial woes in the Nomura Group.
In the first half, Nomura's parent current profit stood at 69.87 billion yen ($618 million), more than double its 32.16 billion yen ($284 million) first-half profit a year earlier.
However, it reported a loss of 337.54 billion yen ($2.98 billion) on a net basis after providing financial support worth 371 billion yen ($3.28 billion) to the non-bank affiliate.
Parent current profit is pre-tax, and includes losses and gains on non-operating activities. Net profit is after-tax and includes extraordinary profits or losses.
Nomura's Vice President Atsushi Saito said there were no complaints from customers and shareholders about its decision to support the affiliate. Credit rating agencies have been positive about the decision as it shows a willingness to confront the problem, he said.
Nomura wants to boost its operating profits for the latter half of 1996/97 to offset the half-year net loss, he added.
Meanwhile, Hiromitsu Sogame, vice president of Japan's second-biggest broker Daiwa, said that the company wants to provide support to its non-bank affiliate in the current business year on a lump-sum basis and was working on a plan with tax officials and accountants.
In the first half, Daiwa's parent current profit rose 3.7 percent to 28.55 billion yen ($252 million). It was also in profit on a net basis. Sogame said the affiliate needs to write off more than 100 billion yen ($884 million) worth of bad assets and Daiwa will use profits from sales of shareholdings, internal reserves and current profits to provide the aid.
Masao Yuki, the vice president of third biggest broker Nikko, said the company was also considering financial support to several non-bank affiliates. However, he said one of the troubled units was jointly owned by Asahi Bank and it would take time to work out a plan.
Ryuji Shirai, deputy president at Yamaichi Securities, said his firm is expected to revise an existing restructuring plan for its non-bank financial affiliate to cut the period covered by the scheme from the current 10 years.
Nikko's parent current profits fell slightly to 22.23 billion yen ($196 million) in the first half from 25.53 billion yen ($225 million) in the year-earlier period.
Parent current profits at Yamaichi, the last of the "Big Four", rose 23 percent to 6.44 billion yen ($56.9 million) in the April-September period. Its net profit also rose.
Nomura and Daiwa did not give earnings forecasts but Nikko said that it expected a parent current profit of 60 billion yen ($530 million) in 1996/97, and Yamaichi said it projected a profit totalling 19 billion yen ($168 million).
Japan's biggest brokerage, Nomura Securities, posted a hefty half-year loss Tuesday, but other "Big Four" brokers turned in handsome profits due to improving business on the nation's stock market.
Nomura suffered a net parent loss of around $3 billion in the six months to Sept. 30 after ploughing large amounts of money into helping an ailing finance firm in the Nomura group.
However, the three other big brokers posted healthy profits generally in line with their performance for the same period last year, helped by rising turnover on the Japanese stock market. The brokers have troubled affiliates too but have yet to work out detailed strategies for tackling the problem.
Executives at Daiwa Securities, Nikko Securities and Yamaichi Securities T all said their firms had benefited from increased stockbroking fees and commission income from bond and stock underwriting.
Despite the net losses, analysts said Nomura was on track for better-than-expected profits this year, which would make it easier to resolve financial woes in the Nomura Group.
In the first half, Nomura's parent current profit stood at 69.87 billion yen ($618 million), more than double its 32.16 billion yen ($284 million) first-half profit a year earlier.
However, it reported a loss of 337.54 billion yen ($2.98 billion) on a net basis after providing financial support worth 371 billion yen ($3.28 billion) to the non-bank affiliate.
Parent current profit is pre-tax, and includes losses and gains on non-operating activities. Net profit is after-tax and includes extraordinary profits or losses.
Hiromitsu Sogame, vice president of Japan's second-biggest broker, Daiwa, said the company wants to provide support to its non-bank affiliate in the current business year on a lump-sum basis and was working on a plan with tax officials and accountants.
In the first half, Daiwa's parent current profit rose 3.7 percent to 28.55 billion yen ($252 million). It was also in profit on a net basis. Sogame said the affiliate needs to write off more than 100 billion yen ($884 million) worth of bad assets and Daiwa will use profits from sales of shareholdings, internal reserves and current profits to provide the aid.
Masao Yuki, the vice president of third-biggest broker, Nikko, said the company was also considering financial support to several non-bank affiliates. However, he said one of the troubled units was jointly owned by Asahi Bank and it would take time to work out a plan.
Nikko's parent current profits fell slightly to 22.23 billion yen ($196 million) in the first half from 25.53 billion yen ($225 million) in the year-earlier period.
Parent current profits at Yamaichi, the last of the "Big Four," rose 23 percent to 6.44 billion yen ($56.9 million) in the April-September period. Its net profit also rose.
Nomura and Daiwa did not give earnings forecasts but Nikko said that it expected a parent current profit of 60 billion yen ($530 million) in 1996/97, and Yamaichi said it projected a profit totalling 19 billion yen ($168 million).
Major Japanese non-life insurance company Yasuda Fire &amp; Marine Co Ltd announced on Monday that it plans to take a majority stake in the Japanese unit of U.S. life insurance giant CIGNA Corp.
Terms of the deal, which would be the first time a Japanese non-life insurance company has purchased a life insurance subsidiary, were not disclosed.
Yasuda said it would boost its business cooperation with CIGNA Corp of the United States by taking a majority stake in CIGNA's Japanese unit, INA Life Insurance Co.
"It is the first time a Japanese non-life insurance company has taken over a life insurance company. We have cooperated over the past 15 years and that experience made this possible," Yasuda president Koichi Ariyoshi told a news conference.
Ariyoshi said the relationship between CIGNA and Yasuda was an example of private-sector cooperation between Japanese and American companies even though Washington has protested Tokyo's newly revised insurance law, which it says violates a U.S.-Japan trade agreement.
The companies began cooperating in 1981 and Yasuda acquired 10 percent of INA in July 1993, and now plans to boost that stake to more than 50 percent within the next year or two, Ariyoshi said.
Under Japan's new Insurance Business Law, which took effect on April 1, non-life insurers and life insurers are allowed to enter each other's business sectors through subsidiaries.
Japan and the United States have been at odds over the entry of Japanese insurance firms' subsidiaries into the so-called third-sector market, a lucrative niche market that covers accident insurance products, among others.
Japan's Finance Ministry is likely to put conditions on the entry of domestic insurance companies' subsidiaries into the third sector, industry sources said.
Ariyoshi did not disclose the cost of the planned purchase of INA shares. However, he added the cost was similar to what it had cost non-life insurance companies to establish life insurance subsidiaries.
Japan's 11 other non-life insurers set up life insurance subsidiaries earlier this month with share capital ranging from 10 billion yen to 30 billion yen ($92.5 million to $277 million).
The life insurance subsidiaries are expected to begin operations in October.
($1=108 yen)
Investors in Asian countries are turning to Tokyo's property market, formerly notorious for high prices, says Richard Mandel, managing director of the Japanese unit of U.S. real estate firm Kennedy-Wilson Inc.
Mandel told Reuters in a recent interview that his California-based company could bring foreign investors into Japan's real estate market, currently suffering from a five-year tailspin, and reactivate trade.
This should also help ease one of the Japanese financial industry's biggest headaches -- selling off land collateral to recover something from the huge bad loans run up by Japan's seven failed "jusen" mortgage firms, he said.
"We are probably the only foreign company participating in the Japanese real estate market... Many foreign investors from Asia are coming over here, working with us to try to buy Japanese real estate," he said.
Asian investors see Tokyo as a powerful world business centre and believe that real estate prices here have come down to attractive levels after plunging 75 percent from the peak reached in the early 1990s, he said.
Japanese property prices went into a tailspin in the early 1990s when the nation's "bubble economy" era of soaring stock market and real estate prices came to an end.
Mandel said that while Kennedy-Wilson has not concluded any deals since it started operations in Tokyo in 1995, negotiations are going on with Asian investors, focusing on commercial buildings and apartment buildings in central Tokyo with values of less than 10 billion yen ($89.2 million).
"You can buy prime Japanese real estate much lower than you can buy in Hong Kong and Singapore," he said.
Real estate industry sources say big Japanese investors such as life insurers and developers, which were aggressive buyers of land in the bubble era, are finding it hard to allocate new money for land transactions because they carry huge problem assets left from the collapse of the bubble.
Meanwhile, they say banks and construction firms are reluctant to sell their real estate at current prices, and this has greatly decreased market liquidity.
He said Japan should take a look at taxes on capital gains. Japan's real estate market needs many investors from all over the world to become a truly healthy market, but a major drawback is its capital gain tax on land transactions, he said.
The company took part in helping the Resolution Trust Corp in the United States recover debts following the 1980s crisis at "savings and loan" mortgage associations, using its auction-marketing system. Mandel believes the system would be useful for selling jusen property.
Mandel will soon leave Japan for New York. Ryosuke Homma, who will take over the Tokyo operation, said making use of the Internet could be a method of soliciting investors.
In July, Japan set up the Housing Loan Administration Corp to recover, over the next 15 years, more than six trillion yen ($53.5 billion) worth of the jusen firms' problem loans in the form of real estate collateral.
Earlier this month, several Japanese ministries set up a joint panel to work out measures to boost liquidity in the property market to facilitate collection of debt through collateralised real estate.
Mandel said real estate sales by the Housing Loan Administration Corp would happen from the start of fiscal 1997, beginning on April 1, "and this will firmly set market prices". ($1=112 yen)
Overseas subsidiaries of Japan's top brokerage, Nomura Securities Co Ltd, virtually doubled their combined profits in the half year to September, energised by strong earnings in Europe.
An official of Nomura told Reuters its 66 subsidiaries abroad made a total of 17.7 billion yen ($158 million) in pre-tax profit in the six months, the first half of Japan's fiscal year, almost double the approximately nine billion yen ($80.36 million) in the same period a year earlier.
The main reason was a more than five-fold profit surge at Nomura's European subsidiaries, while results in the Asian and American regions were generally flat, the official said in a telephone interview.
Nomura released its half-year parent and group earnings results on Tuesday but did not give details of earnings in the regions.  Despite the buoyant business overseas, the brokerage tipped into the red on a parent and a group net basis after deciding to put large sums of money into helping an ailing financial affiliate.
In the business year that ended on March 31, 1996, pre-tax profits at Nomura's consolidated subsidiaries overseas totalled 47.1 billion yen ($420 million).
In the April-September period, European subsidiaries led by London-based Nomura International Plc posted current profits of 9.8 billion yen ($87.5 million), more than five times the amount a year earlier, the official said.
Hitoshi Tonomura, a new chairman who arrived at Nomura International in London in the spring of last year, helped to bring operations there back into profit, he said.
Current profits at Asian units were 1.5 billion yen ($13.3 million), slightly up from a year earlier, while those at subsidiaries in the American region totalled 6.4 billion yen ($57.1 million), little changed from a year earlier, he said.
The official said successful asset securitisation business by Nomura International fuelled the sharp increase in the profits there, and profits in the United States came largely from the asset-backed and mortgage-backed securities business.
As for business in Asia, he said: "We are still in the stage of investment and not getting returns yet, although we are allocating our human and other resources there."
Nomura used to announce its group results about a month after the parent earnings but has brought the group statement forward to provide more timely information for investors.
In the first half, it posted parent current profit of 69.87 billion yen ($623 million), while group current profit stood at 74.76 billion yen. However, it posted a hefty half-year net loss on both a parent and consolidated basis after providing financial support of 37.1 billion yen ($331 million) for an ailing non-bank financial affiliate in the Nomura group.
The parent net loss was 337.54 billion yen ($3.01 billion) and the group net loss 332.01 billion yen ($2.96 billion).
Current profit is pre-tax, and includes losses and gains on non-operating activities. Net profit is after-tax and includes extraordinary profits or losses.
($1=112 yen)
Investors in Asian countries are turning to Tokyo's property market, formerly notorious for its high prices, says Richard Mandel, managing director of the Japanese unit of U.S. real estate firm Kennedy-Wilson Inc.
Mandel told Reuters in a recent interview that his California-based company could bring foreign investors into Japan's real estate market, currently suffering from a five-year tailspin, and reactivate trade.
This should also help ease one of the Japanese financial industry's biggest headaches -- selling off land collateral to recover something from the huge bad loans run up by Japan's seven failed "jusen" mortgage firms, he said.
"We are probably the only foreign company participating in the Japanese real estate market... Many foreign investors from Asia are coming over here, working with us to try to buy Japanese real estate," he said.
Asian investors see Tokyo as a powerful world business centre and believe that real estate prices here have come down to attractive levels after plunging 75 percent from the peak reached in the early 1990s, he said.
Japanese property prices went into a tailspin in the early 1990s when the nation's "bubble economy" era of soaring stock market and real estate prices came to an end.
Mandel said that while Kennedy-Wilson has not concluded any deals since it started operations in Tokyo in 1995, negotiations are going on with Asian investors, focusing on commercial buildings and apartment buildings in central Tokyo with values of less than 10 billion yen ($89.2 million).
"You can buy prime Japanese real estate much lower than you can buy in Hong Kong and Singapore," he said.
Real estate industry sources say big Japanese investors such as life insurers and developers, which were aggressive buyers of land in the bubble era, are finding it hard to allocate new money for land transactions because they carry huge problem assets left from the collapse of the bubble.
Meanwhile, they say banks and construction firms are reluctant to sell their real estate at current prices, and this has greatly decreased market liquidity.
He said Japan should take a look at taxes on capital gains. Japan's real estate market needs many investors from all over the world to become a truly healthy market, but a major drawback is its capital gain tax on land transactions, he said.
The company took part in helping the Resolution Trust Corp in the United States recover debts following the 1980s crisis at "savings and loan" mortgage associations, using its auction-marketing system. Mandel believes the system would be useful for selling jusen property.
Mandel will soon leave Japan for New York. Ryosuke Homma, who will take over the Tokyo operation, said making use of the Internet could be a method of soliciting investors.
In July, Japan set up the Housing Loan Administration Corp to recover, over the next 15 years, more than six trillion yen ($53.5 billion) worth of the jusen firms' problem loans in the form of real estate collateral.
Earlier this month, several Japanese ministries set up a joint panel to work out measures to boost liquidity in the property market to facilitate collection of debt through collateralised real estate.
Mandel said real estate sales by the Housing Loan Administration Corp would happen from the start of fiscal 1997, beginning on April 1, "and this will firmly set market prices" ($1=112 yen)
A Japanese regional bank said on Wednesday that it could lose up to $26 million due to suspected misuse of bank funds by an employee.
Before Biwako Bank Ltd's announcement, rumours had swirled in Tokyo's markets that the bank was having financial problems, jolting stock and bond prices.
The bank allayed these fears somewhat when it said the suspected fund misappropriation, totalling about 3.4 billion yen ($29.8 million), would do only limited damage to its financial health.
However, analysts said the market jitters highlighted lingering nervousness about the health of Japan's financial industry, which is groaning under the weight of huge problem loans.
The bank said it expects to be able to recover about 400 million yen ($3.50 million) of the misappropriated funds and that it would write off the remaining expected losses in the current financial year ending next March.
The bank, based in Ohtsu City, western Japan, has yet to file a complaint against the former employee but plans to do so on completing an internal investigation, a bank official said.
Some analysts said the news about Biwako shocked markets because the bank had been considered financially healthy.
"The feeling of unease spread rapidly because it was talk about (financial) problems at a bank whose name had never been mentioned among the list of troubled banks before," said Yoshinobu Yamada, an analyst at Merrill Lynch Japan Inc.
"If the name was one included in the list, the impact would have been minimal," he said.
Fears about Biwako's financial health helped push down the Tokyo stock market's benchmark Nikkei average, which ended the morning session 1.20 percent lower than the previous day close.
The Nikkei ended the day down 276.41 points, or 1.32 percent, at 20,681.67.
The rumours pressured Biwako's share price, which had fallen to 491 yen by the midday close after closing at 549 yen on Monday. It was untraded on Tuesday and the Osaka Securities Exchange (OSE) suspended trading in it on Wednesday afternoon.
The drop in stock prices supported the Japanese government bond (JGB) market and the key December JGB futures contract rose to 125, a record high for any benchmark.
Analysts said the market was particularly nervous about talk about the health of a financial institution after Japanese financing company Nichiei Finance Co Ltd filed for liquidation last week with huge debt liabilities.
Japan's financial industry is still reeling in the aftermath of the late 1980s "bubble economy" of soaring stock and property prices.
When asset prices began to plunge in the early 1990s, many companies which had borrowed aggressively to invest during the bubble economy were unable to return the money and their lenders were left saddled with huge problem loans.
While big Japanese banks are expected to clean up their problem loan woes over the next one year or so, many others are likely to be plagued by the problem for longer period, said Katsuhito Sasajima, an analyst at Nikko Research Centre.
However, failures of financial institutions would not jeopardise the system now that Japan had established a framework for handling such problems, he said.
Japan's financial industry is gradually recovering from the bad-debt hangover left by the economic "bubble" years, but the pain lingers on for smaller banks and loan institutions.
Analysts say the industry has got over the worst of the bad loan mess after vigorous efforts by the government and major banks over the past year to tackle the problem. Any further serious damage to the system is therefore unlikely, they say.
But the picture is darker for small institutions that lack the financial might of the big banks but were similarly saddled with soured loans from the late 1980s lending boom.
Analysts say it will take years to restore confidence in the banking sector given the lingering problems and exposure to the troubled real estate and construction industries.
The nervousness was highlighted last month by the collapse of financing firm Nichiei Finance Co Ltd with huge debt liabilities, and revelations of losses at a regional bank because of suspected misuse of funds by an ex-employee.
Both these incidents jolted financial markets. In the case of Biwako Bank, the markets were unsettled by vague rumours of dire trouble before the bank said it had lost money due to the suspected misappropration but remained in sound health.
A new restructuring programme unveiled two weeks ago by Tobishima Corp, a contractor and engineering company, also fuelled concerns that banks would face new burdens as ailing firms seek further support while trying to reshape themselves.
Katsuhito Sasajima, an analyst at Nikko Research Center, said the banks are dealing with the problem in stages -- first with their own bad loans, then the problems of affiliated firms and, finally, the issue of other debtors.
"Banks are trying to dispose of problem loans to independent non-banks after mostly completing write-offs of debt held by their non-bank affiliates," he said.
Failures of troubled non-banks are already anticipated and it may take one or two years for the big banks to fully recover from the mess, he said.
Non-banks are financial firms which do not take deposits but rely mostly on loans from banks and other deposit-taking bodies such as agricultural credit cooperatives.
Like the "jusen" mortgage firms, which were wound up this year, many non-banks are in trouble. They lent to golf-course and resort companies that joined hands with developers looking for easy profits during the free-wheeling "bubble" years.
When asset prices began to plunge in the early 1990s, many firms which had relied on borrowed funds for investments were unable to repay the money, causing a ripple effect of bad debt.
The Finance Ministry said this week that outstanding loans by Japan's 249 non-banks fell 4.4 percent to 50.74 trillion yen ($449 billion) at the end of March from a year earlier.
Analysts said Nichiei's main creditors -- Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank (DKB), Asahi Bank and the Bank of Yokohama -- are expected to give up their claims after the company filed for restructuring under court guidance, a category of business failure under Japan's bankruptcy laws.
As of March, DKB had 56 billion yen ($495 million) ($495 million) in loans to Nichiei Finance, while Asahi had 32 billion yen ($283 million) and Bank of Yokohama 20 billion yen ($176 million) in loans, they said.
James Fiorillo, a ING Baring Securities (Japan) analyst, said the amount these three write off for Nichiei will only be about a fifth of their total disposals this fiscal year.
DKB has predicted an operating profit for 1996/97 to next March of about 320 billion yen ($2.83 billion) and current profit, a form of pre-tax profit including non-operating activities, of 40 billion yen ($353 million). This suggests DKB may use the difference -- 280 billion yen ($2.47 billion) -- to write off problem loans.
Japan's 20 big banks are already planning to dispose of 3.5 trillion yen ($30.9 billion) to 4.0 trillion yen ($35.3 billion) of problem loans in 1996/97 after writing off nearly 11 trillion yen ($97.3 billion) in 1995/96, analysts estimated.
It will, however, take some time for creditor banks to solve the problem of the non-banks including Nichiboshin Ltd and Apollo Leasing Co Ltd.
The search for a solution is complicated by the fact that the non-banks are part of a web of lending, having borrowed from more than 100 creditors including financially weak agricultural credit unions.
"People say that the problem is that losses (stemming from the non-bank liquidation) may break the back of weak agricultural financial institutions," one analyst said. ($1=113 yen)
Japan's financial industry suffered another blow Tuesday when a court was asked to start bankruptcy proceedings against a major realtor that has estimated liabilities of almost $5.5 billion.
But analysts said that while the collapse of Osaka-based Sueno Kosan could affect some individual financial institutions, it was unlikely to have any major negative impact on the overall financial industry.
The Housing Loan Administration Corp., or HLAC, a semi-governmental body set up to collect problem loans run up by seven failed mortgage companies, said it had asked the Osaka District Court to start bankruptcy proceedings against Sueno Kosan and two of its affiliates.
If Sueno Kosan, a privately held real estate company that borrowed heavily from the "jusen" mortgage firms, is declared bankrupt, it could become one of Japan's biggest-ever business failures, analysts said.
The HLAC said it has claims totalling 347 billion yen ($3.07 billion) on Sueno Kosan and the two units. The claims were transferred from the failed jusen firms to the body.
Sueno Kosan group's total liabilities are estimated at 620 billion yen ($5.48 billion), said Tokyo Commerce and Industry Research Co, a private credit research body.
Japan's banking industry was also jolted last month when a major financing company, Nichiei Finance Co. Ltd, filed for liquidation with huge debt liabilities. Like the jusen and Sueno Kosan, Nichiei was a casualty of the property-related lending boom in the late 1980s "bubble era" and the subsequent dive in asset prices.
Although the overall damage to the financial system may be slight, analysts said individual non-bank financial institutions with outstanding loans to Sueno could suffer. A non-bank financial institution makes loans but does not take deposits, raising funds by borrowing from banks.
"Should Sueno be forced into bankruptcy and its assets distributed, many of the other lender non-banks will be forced to absorb huge losses relative to their size," said James Fiorillo, ING Baring Securities (Japan) analyst.
"This will probably force many of them (creditors) into distress or bankruptcy, so the outcome ... should be closely watched," he said.
Finance Minister Wataru Kubo did not appear to be that worried, although he told reporters the Sueno Kosan problem might spread to financial firms that had lent it money.
"However, such an impact will be resolved among related financial institutions in accordance with our financial system," he said.
In June, Japan adopted a controversial plan that allowed for the use of 685 billion yen ($6.06 billion) in public funds to help wind up the jusen.
Japan's financial industry suffered another blow on Tuesday when a court was asked to start bankruptcy proceedings against a major realtor which has estimated liabilities of almost $5.5 billion.
But analysts said that while the collapse of Osaka-based Sueno Kosan could affect some individual financial institutions, it was unlikely to have any major negative impact on the overall financial industry.
The Housing Loan Administration Corp (HLAC), a semi-governmental body set up to collect problem loans run up by seven failed mortgage companies, said on Tuesday it had asked the Osaka District Court to start bankruptcy proceedings against Sueno Kosan and two of its affiliates.
If Sueno Kosan, an unlisted real estate company which borrowed heavily from the "jusen" mortgage firms, is declared bankrupt, it could become one of Japan's biggest ever business failures, analysts said.
The HLAC said it has claims totalling 347 billion yen ($3.07 billion) on Sueno Kosan and the two units. The claims were transferred from the failed jusen firms to the body.
In total, Sueno Kosan group's liabilities are estimated at 620 billion yen ($5.48 billion), said Tokyo Commerce and Industry Research Co, a private credit research body.
Japan's banking industry was also jolted last month when a major financing company, Nichiei Finance Co Ltd, filed for liquidation with huge debt liabilities. Like the jusen and Sueno Kosan, Nichiei was a casualty of the property-related lending boom in the late 1980s "bubble era" and the subsequent dive in asset prices.
The Osaka court has taken steps to seize the assets of Sueno Kosan and its affiliates in response to the application, the HLAC statement said. There was no immediate comment from Sueno Kosan on the moves.
Although the overall damage to the financial system may be slight, analysts said individual non-bank financial institutions with outstanding loans to Sueno could suffer. A non-bank financial institution makes loans but does not take deposits, raising funds by borrowing from banks.
"Should Sueno be forced into bankruptcy and its assets distributed, many of the other lender non-banks will be forced to absorb huge losses relative to their size," said James Fiorillo, ING Baring Securities (Japan) analyst.
"This will probably force many of them (creditors) into distress or bankruptcy, so the outcome...should be closely watched," he said.
Finance Minister Wataru Kubo did not appear to be that worried, although he told reporters the Sueno Kosan problem might spread to financial firms that had lent it money.
"However, such an impact will be resolved among related financial institutions in accordance with our financial system," he said.
Noboru Matsuda, governor of the Deposit Insurance Corp of Japan (DIC), which supervises the HLAC, said in a statement that it was inevitable such action would be taken against some "malignant" borrowers like Sueno, which he said had repeatedly attempted to hide assets.
In June, Japan adopted a controversial plan that allowed for the use of 685 billion yen ($6.06 billion) in public funds to help wind up the jusen.
The HLAC inherited assets totalling 6.5 trillion yen ($57.5 billion) from the failed firms after 6.4 trillion yen ($56.6 billion) worth of unrecoverable loans were written off with the help of financial institutions and public money. ($1=113 yen)
The collapse of a major real estate company which borrowed heavily from Japan's "jusen" mortgage firms would be unlikely to have any major negative impact on the financial industry, analysts said on Tuesday.
Earlier on Tuesday, a semi-governmental body set up to collect problem loans run up by the "jusen" companies said it was seeking the involuntary bankruptcy of unlisted real estate firm Sueno Kosan.
The Housing Loan Administration Corp (HLAC) made the request to an Osaka court.  
"The action has been already factored in (to the financial markets)," said Takakazu Nakamori, an official at credit research firm Teikoku Databank.
He said the Finance Ministry appeared to have recognised the problem and given the go-ahead for the forced bankruptcy.
Yushiro Ikuyo, first vice president at Smith Barney International, said the loan body was taking the right course of action, given the severity of the Sueno Kosan problem.  
Banks which had loans to the failed jusen firms and related companies like Sueno Kosan have mostly made loan loss provisions, as well as forgiving loans under the government's scheme to wind up the firms, he said. Those creditors will not have any problem from the expected insolvency, he said.
The HLAC said in a statement that it had also asked the Osaka District Court to start bankruptcy proceedings for two of Sueno Kosan's affiliates. The court has taken steps to seize their assets in response to the application, it also said.
The application also sought bankruptcy proceedings against three individuals associated with the firm, including president Kenichi Sueno, the HLAC said in its statement.  
The HLAC said it has claims totalling 347 billion yen on Sueno Kosan and two of its group firms. The claims were transferred from the failed jusen firms to the body, it said.
In June, Japan adopted a framework that allowed for the use of 685 billion yen of public money to help wind up the jusen.
The HLAC inherited assets totalling 6.5 trillion yen from the seven failed firms after 6.4 trillion yen worth of unrecoverable loans were written off with the help of financial institutions and public money.
Katsuhito Sasajima, a Nikko Research Centre analyst, said the action by the body was good news.  
"The insolvency of Sueno is not a matter of damage to the financial system... Rather, the market would probably appreciate the action as such legal procedures are transparent," Nikko's Sasajima said.
An HLAC official quoted a senior official of the Deposit Insurance Corp of Japan (DIC) as telling reporters in Osaka that the decision to seek the insolvency was taken after consultation with the Finance Ministry and that the move would not greatly affect the financial system as a whole.  
But although the overall damage to the financial system may be slight, analysts said individual non-bank financial institutions with outstanding loans to Sueno could suffer.
"Should Sueno be forced into bankrutpcy and its assets distributed, many of the other lender non-banks will be forced to absorb huge losses relative to their size," ING Baring Securities (Japan) analyst James Fiorillo said.
If Sueno Kosan is declared bankrupt, it would be one of the biggest Japanese insolvencies on record, analysts said.
"This will probably force many of them (creditors) into distress or bankruptcy, so the outcome...should be closely watched," Fiorillo said. In total, the Sueno Kosan group has liabilities of about 600 billion yen, he added.
Several analysts said that a non-bank institution, Apollo Leasing Co Ltd, may be affected. An official at Apollo said that the company has loans to Sueno Kosan and will try to figure out the impact of its collapse. He did not give further details. Non-bank financial institutions make loans but do not take deposits, borrowing money instead from banks.
There was no immediate comment from Sueno Kosan itself about the move by the loan-collecting body.  
A survey by the Tokyo Commerce and Industry Research Co, a private sector research arm, said Apollo Leasing had 21.13 billion yen in loans to Sueno as of the end of December 1995.
Other major creditors to Sueno at the end of last December included Inter-Lease Corp with claims of 5.35 billion yen, All Corp with 6.0 billion yen and Crown Leasing Corp with 17.6 billion yen, the research body said.
Analysts said the non-bank financial institutions had undertaken restructuring programmes by asking creditors to do such things as cut interest payments on loans and delay principal payments.
A loan-collecting body said on Tuesday it was seeking the involuntary bankruptcy of a major real estate firm, the latest shock to the country's financial system from the long-running "jusen" mortgage firm scandal.
If Osaka-based Sueno Kosan were declared bankrupt it would be one of the biggest Japanese business failures on record, financial industry sources said. The firm has estimated total liabilities of 670 billion yen ($5.87 billion).
The sources said the bankruptcy could lead to problems at financial firms that have loaned money to Sueno Kosan.
The bankruptcy request was made to the Osaka District Court by the semi-governmental Housing Loan Administration Corp (HLAC), set up to collect problem loans run up by the "jusen" group of home loan firms.
Sueno Kosan is a major borrower from the "jusen" mortgage firms, which collapsed under the weight of rash property loans made during the "bubble" economy of the 1980s.
Finance Minister Wataru Kubo also said the Sueno Kosan problem was likely to spread to financial firms that had lent it money. "However, such an impact will be resolved among related financial institutions in accordance with our financial system," he said.
Jitters about problems in the banking industry helped push up the price of Japanese government bonds to record levels on Tuesday.
The filing was somewhat expected. Kohei Nakabo, president of the HLAC, told reporters recently the body was considering taking such action.
Japanese media reported recently that the corporation was considering such a move because of alleged attempts to transfer Sueno Kosan assets to affiliates.
In September, Sueno Kosan chief Kenichi Sueno pleaded guilty in the Osaka District Court to charges that he and some aides hid assets to prevent them being seized by creditors.
The Sueno group was the second-largest borrower from the mortgage firms.
Media reports have said it borrowed 236.7 billion yen ($2.07 billion) from five of the seven jusen and about 300 billion yen ($2.63 billion) from 10 other financial institutions.
Noboru Matsuda, governor of the Deposit Insurance Corp of Japan (DIC), which supervises the loan-collecting body, said in a statement that DIC has no intention of seeking the bankruptcy of every borrower from the jusen firms.
But he said that taking such action would be inevitable for some "malignant" borrowers like Sueno which he said had repeatedly attempted to hide assets.
Sueno Kosan officials were not immediately able to comment.
Japan's financial industry has made progress in tackling the problem of bubble-era loans gone bad, but analysts say some smaller loan institutions heavily exposed to the real estate and construction industries remain vulnerable.
The collapse of a major financing company last month, Nichiei Finance Co Ltd, with huge debt liabilities also highlighted the continuing fallout from the bad loan problem. ($1=114 yen)
Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto unveiled plans Monday for a five-year "Big Bang" to liberalise Japan's financial markets and catch up with reforms carried out more than a decade ago in Europe and North America.
Finance Minister Hiroshi Mitsuzuka told reporters the three main pillars of the reforms would be to make markets "free, fair and global" by the year 2001.
The moves would end fixed commissions for stockbrokers, increase the release of financial information and allow banks, securities houses and insurance companies to enter each others' now-protected areas.
"This is going to be Tokyo's 'Big Bang,'" Mitsuzuka said, referring to British financial reforms in 1986, which removed a myriad of barriers in the financial industry.
Analysts welcomed the move to sweep away rules that date back to the end of World War II, saying that Japan must reform in order to stop its slide as a world financial centre.
"Japanese banks and securities houses are left behind U.S. institutions in financial expertise and innovation," said Ken Okamura, strategist at Dresdner Kleinwort Benson (Asia) Ltd.
Tight regulation in Japan's financial markets has only pushed lucrative business offshore to less regulated markets, he said.
Hashimoto formed a new Cabinet Thursday made up solely of Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) lawmakers, the first time the conservative, pro-business party has ruled on its own since being booted out of power in 1993.
Some pundits have wondered how serious Hashimoto and the LDP are about drastic deregulation, although others say the politically astute prime minister is well aware of the need to open Japanese markets to competition to ensure the economy flourishes in the 21st century.
"This is a very good objective, but getting there is going to be extremely difficult," said Brian Waterhouse, a James Capel Pacific analyst.
The securities industry is expected to be the hardest hit by the changes, and the nation's big banks are expected to face some bloodletting as well.
The reforms would bring Tokyo into line with rival centres in Europe and the United States, where liberalisation began in the 1960s and culminated in London's "Big Bang."
"We think this is the last opportunity to revitalise Tokyo's financial markets," a Finance Ministry official told reporters.
Here are the main points of the financial reform plansL:
To create freer markets:
-- Banks, securities houses and insurance companies should be allowed to enter each others' business areas.
-- Banks and other financial institutions should be allowed to deal in more products in a bid to meet investors' wide range of needs.
-- Japan will look into the liberalisation of financial market commission fees.
-- Participation in foreign exchange transactions, currently limited to banks authorised by the government, should be liberalised.
-- Considering the effective use of individual savings, which now total 1,200 trillion yen ($10.81 trillion).
To create fairer markets:
-- Financial institutions should be required to make satisfactory disclosure of information to investors and depositors and clarify relevant rules to make market participants responsible for their investment.
-- Market participants will be more severely punished if they violate the rules regarding their involvement in the markets.
To createe more internationalized markets:
-- Investment in financial derivatives -- securities derived from simpler financial instruments -- should be promoted in Japan by revising Japan's accounting system and relevant laws to meet global standards.
-- A supervisory system on a global scale should be established. The Group of Seven (G7) industrialised nations is working on setting up up such a system. ($1=111 yen)
Japan is expected to lift controls on stock-related derivatives as part of a drive to free up its financial markets, but industry sources have doubts about whether the products can really take off here.
The securities industry sources said Tokyo was lagging so far behind overseas rivals, including Singapore and Hong Kong, that it would be extremely difficult to make a viable and attractive market for stock-based derivatives in Japan.
On Monday, Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto announced a five-year "Big Bang" plan to liberalise the nation's markets and catch up with reforms carried out years ago in rival financial centres like London. The aim is to make Japanese markets "free, fair and global".
As part of that push, Hashimoto asked for a review of laws relating to derivatives transaction, which currently restrict stock options to those based on indices, rather than on individual stocks.
But even before the "Big Bang" announcement, Japan's Ministry of Finance (MOF) had already been looking at lifting restrictions on stock options and equity swap transactions.
A trader at a foreign brokerage said that Japanese participants are already used to offshore trading in derivatives, avoiding the tightly regulated Japanese markets, and it may be hard to generate interest here.
"It is too late to induce market enthusiasm," he said. "Even if the finance ministry deregulates (stock-related) derivatives trading in Japan, it might be difficult to make Tokyo markets attractive," he said.
An official at the ministry told Reuters recently that it plans to decide whether to allow the introduction of a variety of stock-related derivatives transactions after an advisory panel delivers its recommendations next spring.
While Japan introduced stock index futures and options in the late 1980s, the ministry has taken a particularly cautious approach to derivatives of individual stocks in order to concentrate equity-related deals on stock exchanges.
Options, which are usually used to hedge against losses due to price fluctuations, allow the holder to buy or sell a specified amount at an agreed price during a set time period.
An analyst at a big brokerage said that the securities industry and the Osaka and Tokyo stock exchanges have made preparations to list individual stock options and are ready to start as soon as the ministry gives the go-ahead.
Such options on individual stocks were introduced in the early 1970s in the U.S. and European markets.
Big Japanese brokers also want to offer stock options which can be traded directly between investors and traders without any stock exchange involvement, he said.
Up until now, trading of individual stock options and equity swap transactions was banned as this was judged to violate the Criminal Code outlawing gambling.
This has pushed lucrative business offshore to less regulated markets, where brokers are able to trade options or warrants based on Japanese stocks if they wish. Market sources say Japan may have to revise the law to clear the way for such derivatives trade.
Japan's Finance Ministry pledged on Thursday to lift its controls on management of employee pension funds, a key member of an advisory panel to the prime minister said.
At a meeting of the Administrative Reform Council's subcommittee on deregulation, the ministry clearly stated it would abolish restrictions on where employee pension funds managed by trust banks could be invested, Yoshihiko Miyauchi, chairman of the subcommittee, told reporters.
Under current rules, each trust bank must invest at least half of the funds it manages in fixed-income assets, such as Japanese government bonds, no more than 30 percent in Japanese stocks, no more than 30 percent in foreign currency-denominated shares and bonds, and no more than 20 percent in real estate.
Miyauchi said the Finance Ministry said it would work out details on lifting its regulations on asset allocation by the end of the year.
Japan's corporate pension system is divided into employee pension funds, which are supervised by the Welfare Ministry, and Tax-Qualified Retirement Pension (TQP) plans, which are supervised by the Finance Ministry.
The Welfare Ministry abolished its restrictions on asset management by trust banks in April.
Industry sources currently estimate assets in employee pension funds at about 42 trillion yen ($378 billion) and those in TQPs at about 18 trillion yen ($162 billion).
However, Miyauchi quoted Finance Ministry officials as saying the ministry was still considering whether it would allow investment advisory companies to manage TQP plans.
At the moment, only trust banks and life insurers are allowed to manage them.
The Welfare Ministry has already lifted the rules it had to prevent investment advisory companies managing employee pension funds, although some restrictions remain on the firms.
Japanese corporations have been urging the government to reform Japan's rigid corporate pension system in the face of low returns on investment and to help maintain the international competitiveness of Japanese firms.
Employers participating in the corporate pension system are required to maintain specified yields, currently 5.5 percent a year, to guarantee pre-determined benefits.
However, the actual return on pension funds' investments is now about three percent, due to Japan's record-low interest rates and weak economic recovery, industry sources say.
Miyauchi said the Finance Ministry told the sub-committee it was studying ways to relax specified yields but had not given details.
Securities industry sources said the abolition of restrictions on asset management would encourage fund managers to pump more money into Tokyo's stock market in order to boost returns on investment. ($1=111)
Japan's Finance Ministry, which has long resisted calls from employers to reform the country's rigid corporate pension system, has finally decided to relax its tight grip.
However, industry sources say its proposals fall short of what is needed to cope with Japan's rapidly "greying" society and the poor financial state of employee pension funds resulting from record-low interest rates and a weak economic recovery.
"Unless Japan undertakes a drastic overhaul of the corporate pension system, it will remain out of step with the rest of the world," said an official at an overseas-based investment advisory company.
In the past, the amount of money Japanese corporate pension funds held was so small that authorities could regulate them without too much difficulty. But the amount has grown to about 60 trillion yen ($540 billion) and unless the current system is changed, it will hurt corporate balance sheets, he said.
Yoshihiko Miyauchi, a key member of an advisory panel to the prime minister, said on Thursday that the Finance Ministry had stated in a subcommittee meeting on deregulation that it would abolish restrictions on where employee pension funds managed by trust banks could be invested.
Under the current rules, each trust bank must invest at least half of the funds it manages in fixed-income assets, no more than 30 percent in Japanese stocks, no more than 30 percent in foreign currency-denominated shares and bonds, and no more than 20 percent in real estate.
Japan's corporate pension system is divided into employee pension funds, which are supervised by the Welfare Ministry, and Tax-Qualified Retirement Pension plans (TQPs), which are supervised by the Finance Ministry.
Miyauchi said the Finance Ministry was still considering whether to allow investment advisory firms to manage TQPs. It also told the subcommittee that it was studying whether to allow variable yields and flexible benefits, he said.
The Welfare Ministry has steadily lifted its restrictions on the management on employee pension funds, which have assets estimated at 42 trillion yen ($378 billion), and allowed investment advisory firms to manage the funds.
However, the Finance Ministry has barred investment advisory firms from managing TQPs, which have assets totalling 18 trillion yen ($162 billion). Only trust banks and life insurers are allowed to manage TQPs.
Employers participating in the corporate pension system are required to maintain specified yields, currently 5.5 percent a year, to guarantee predetermined benefits. But the actual return on investments is now only about three percent.
Because of the poor investment environment, many corporate pension funds are facing a shortage of funds to pay benefits to pensioners in the future, industry sources said. If pension funds fall short of meeting future payments, sponsoring companies must cover the shortfall.
Industry sources said that investment advisory firms, especially foreign companies, are keen to manage TQPs.
"Generally speaking, fund managers at Japanese companies are conservative," said the official with the investment advisory company.
"They tend to avoid investment risks because they see the risks, which are short-term volatility, as something dangerous. But experienced foreign advisors are well-qualified to manage pension funds as they take reasonable risks in long-term pension fund management over 20- to 30-year periods," he said.
He said British pension funds invest about 90 percent of their assets in equities, including about 15 percent in foreign stocks.
Ken Okamura, a strategist at Dresdner Kleinwort Benson (Asia) Ltd, said in a recent report that if Japan completely abolished restrictions on asset management of corporate pension funds, it was likely to see more investment in local stocks.
He estimated that at the moment, life insurers and trust banks put an average of about 20 percent of the pension assets they are entrusted with into local stocks.
"If corporate pension funds increase the weighting of local stocks to 30 percent, about six trillion yen ($54.0 billion) of funds will come to Japanese stock markets." ($1=111 yen)
An influential Japanese government panel on Thursday called for a fundamental change in the nation's land policies, arguing that the old concept of trying to hold down land values was out of date.
Real estate values have plummeted since the bursting in the early 1990s of Japan's "bubble" of inflated asset prices.
The panel called for an "appropriate" tax on landholdings in line with balanced assessments of value.
To promote more liquidity in real estate holdings it recommended securitisation and promotion of joint ventures.
It also called for steps to encourage small landowners to sell their land or cooperate in development projects in order for large-scale development to take place in big cities.
Analysts and real estate industry sources said, however, that the panel failed to make specific proposals that would help end the long slump in the real estate market.
"Nobody in the government or politicians have yet formed a clear policy to solve the slump in the real estate market and falling land prices," said a real estate industry source.
Some experts said a change in taxation is the most important step that needs to be taken.
"While the panel makes wide-ranging proposals, it is somewhat disappointing that the panel did not make specific proposals on taxes on land (holdings and transactions)," said Keiko Otsuki, a senior analyst at UBS Securities Ltd.
It is Japan's first review of land policy in five years.
The panel said in its proposals to Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto that land prices had fallen to a point where the price surges in the latter half of the bubble had been offset after a five-year slump.
Emergency intervention measures to curb land prices adopted in 1991 are no longer needed as they are still falling, it said.
Banks and non-bank financial institutions have been reeling from property-related bad loans, a factor blocking a smooth supply of funds to the real estate market and strong economic recovery.
The proposals follow a request by Hashimoto in April for a review of Japan's land policy to cope with structural changes such as falling land prices, growing numbers of people leaving the Tokyo metropolitan area and a rapid rise in the proportion of old people in the population.
Japan's major commercial banks on Friday said they had returned to the black in the first half of the current business year after many of them posted losses in the previous fiscal year.
Analysts said that aggressive problem loan write-offs in the second half of the previous fiscal year which ended in March led to the losses after the 10 banks posted record profits in the first-half of that business year.
They added the results were close to the previous earnings' forecasts made by the biggest banks, showing that the banks are on schedule in steadily writing off their problem loans.
"The earnings results in the first half of the last business year were extraordinarily good...Interest rates were falling and anybody could earn profits if they sold bonds," said Katsuhito Sasajima, an analyst at Nikko Research Centre.
"While operating profits have declined from a year earlier, the business environment is not bad due to the low interest rates, and they will probably post handsome profits for the whole business year," he said.
Many of the big banks had losses in the previous business year due to the massive disposal of problem loans, including those to failed "jusen" mortgage firms, he said.
The 10 banks said that combined operating profits -- profits from the banking business before loan loss provisions -- totalled 1.19 trillion yen ($10.7 billion) in the first half, down from 1.87 trillion yen ($16.8 billion) a year earlier.
Combined parent current profits -- pre-tax profit including losses and gains on investments -- totalled 391.9 billion yen ($3.53 billion) in the first half, down from 463.2 billion yen ($4.17 billion) a year earlier.
Sasajima said the 10 banks had projected 1.16 trillion yen ($10.4 billion) in combined operating profits and 334 billion yen ($3.00 billion) in combined parent current profits.
Some of the bankers, however, remained cautious.
Akishige Okada, senior managing director at Sakura Bank Ltd, told reporters that a narrowing in the loan spread, which was a main reason for the decline in operating profits, was likely to continue in the second half of the year to March 31.
"I expect the business environment will not be so good, as the current interest rate situation is not expected to change in the latter half," Okada said.
The loan spread is the spread between the rates paid on deposits and for other fund-raising, and the rates charged on lending. Japan's interest rates fell to record low levels in the last fiscal year and have remained there.
Of the 10 banks,  Hokkaido Takushoku, Sakura, Fuji, Daiwa, Sanwa, Tokai and Asahi posted current losses in 1995/96.
The 10 banks -- including the Bank of Tokyo and Mitsubishi Bank which merged into the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi on April 1, Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank, and Sumitomo Bank -- disposed of 6.31 trillion yen ($56.8 billion) worth of problem loans in 1995/96.
Bankers said that they would continue to dispose of problem loans in the latter half of 1996/97 after doing so in the first half by setting aside loan-loss provisions and selling them to a joint problem loan liquidation body.
For instance, Fumio Akanuma, senior managing director at Dai-Ichi Kangyo, said: "We disposed of 134.6 billion yen ($1.21 billion) of problem loans in the first half...We plan to dispose of a total of 330 billion yen ($2.97 billion) in the full year (to March 31)." ($1=111 yen)
First-half results from Japan's 20 biggest banks show they have moved back into the black despite hefty write-offs of problem loans.
Analysts said figures released by 10 trust and credit banks on Monday showed that all of Japan's big banks had continued actively writing off problem loans resulting from the collapse of Japan's 1980s asset "bubble".
The 10 biggest commercial banks announced their interim earnings and loan write-off statistics on Friday.
Combined write-offs by the 20 biggest banks totalled about 2.4 trillion yen ($21.4 billion) in the first half of the current financial year to September 30.
At the end of March, the Finance Ministry said the 20 banks had about 25 trillion yen ($223 billion) worth of problem loans, which include loans made to bankrupt companies and those on which interest payments are in arrears by six months or more.
Last fiscal year, the 20 big banks disposed of nearly 11 trillion yen ($98.2 billion) worth of problem loans.
Katsuhito Sasajima, an analyst at Nikko Research Centre, said the 20 banks may dispose of at least five trillion yen ($44.6 billion) worth of problem loans in the current fiscal year in order to cut the size of problem loans to manageable levels.
Analysts said many big banks were now recovering from the difficulties caused by the problem loans, but some financially-weak banks would continue to struggle to dispose of such loans in the coming years.
Yoshinobu Yamada, an analyst at Merrill Lynch Japan, said that major banks should be able to cut their problem loans to manageable levels this financial year, but added that "some banks are still reeling from the bad loan problem."
Three long-term credit banks -- Industrial Bank of Japan, Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan and Nippon Credit Bank -- all recorded parent current profits for the first half after posting parent current losses in 1995/96.
Current profit is pre-tax and includes gains or losses from sales of securities.
The three said they disposed of 255.1 billion yen ($2.27 billion) of problem loans in the first half against a total of 1.93 trillion yen ($17.2 billion) last year.
The smallest long-term credit bank, Nippon Credit, said that it hoped to cut its problem loans to manageable levels by the end of 1997/98 at the earliest.
As of the end of September, problem loans at Nippon Credit stood at about 1.4 trillion yen ($12.5 billion) or nearly 14 percent of its total loans.
Japan's seven major trust banks, all of which posted parent current losses in 1996/97, said they posted combined parent current profits of 316.76 billion yen ($2.82 billion) in the first half after disposing of 1.02 trillion yen ($9.1 billion) of problem loans in the period. This compared with disposals of 2.69 trillion yen ($24.0 billion) last year.
A trust bank executive said the banks' combined parent current profit for the first half was a record as Japanese authorities had eased special reserve requirements for trust banks in March to free up funds to dispose of problem loans.
Analysts said the seven banks would use about one trillion yen ($8.9 billion) of the special reserves to write off problem loans in fiscal 1996/97.
Atsushi Takahashi, the managing director of Sumitomo Trust, told reporters that the bank aims to reduce its problem loans to manageable levels in the current financial year.
"We are planning to dispose of a total of 370 billion yen ($3.30 billion) of problem loans in 1996/97," he said. ($1=112 yen)
Half-year results from Japan's 20 biggest banks show they have moved back into the black despite hefty write-offs of problem loans.
Analysts said figures released by 10 trust and credit banks Monday showed that all of Japan's big banks had continued actively writing off problem loans resulting from the collapse of Japan's 1980s "bubble" economy of over-priced real estate.
The 10 biggest commercial banks announced their interim earnings and loan write-off statistics Friday.
Combined write-offs by the 20 biggest banks totalled about 2.4 trillion yen ($21.4 billion) in the six months ended Sept. 30. Last fiscal year, the 20 big banks disposed of nearly 11 trillion yen ($98.2 billion) worth of problem loans.
At the end of March, the Finance Ministry said the 20 banks had about 25 trillion yen ($223 billion) worth of problem loans, which include loans made to bankrupt companies and those on which interest payments are in arrears by six months or more.
Katsuhito Sasajima, an analyst at Nikko Research Centre, said the 20 banks may dispose of at least five trillion yen ($44.6 billion) worth of problem loans in the current fiscal year in order to cut the size of problem loans to manageable levels.
Analysts said many big banks were now recovering from the difficulties caused by the problem loans, but some financially-weak banks would continue to struggle to dispose of such loans in the coming years.
Yoshinobu Yamada, an analyst at Merrill Lynch Japan, said that major banks should be able to cut their problem loans to manageable levels this financial year, but added that "some banks are still reeling from the bad loan problem."
Three long-term credit banks -- Industrial Bank of Japan, Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan and Nippon Credit Bank -- all recorded parent current profits for the first half after posting losses in 1995-1996.
Current profit is pre-tax and includes gains or losses from sales of securities.
The three said they disposed of 255.1 billion yen ($2.27 billion) of problem loans in the first half against a total of 1.93 trillion yen ($17.2 billion) last year.
Japan's seven major trust banks, all of which posted parent current losses in 1995-1996, said they posted combined parent current profits of 316.76 billion yen ($2.82 billion) in the first half after disposing of 1.02 trillion yen ($9.1 billion) of problem loans in the period.
This compared with disposals of 2.69 trillion yen ($24.0 billion) last year.
Seven of Japan's eight biggest life insurers said on Wednesday that they experienced a drop in assets in the first half of the current fiscal year, the first such fall in many years.
Executives attributed the decline to a cancellation of pension fund management contracts after the firms cut their guaranteed rate of return in April.
"It was the first time we have seen a drop in assets since we started announcing our interim business reports (six years ago)," said Taichi Ohtaki, managing director of Asahi Mutual Life Insurance Co. "It would probably be the first time we have experienced a decline in our assets since World War Two."
Combined assets at the eight firms totalled 142.8 trillion yen ($1.26 trillion) at the end of September, down 1.2 percent from 144.6 trillion yen ($1.27 trillion) at the end of March.
Only Nippon Life Insurance Co, the biggest life insurer in Japan, increased its assets -- to 39.44 trillion yen ($349 billion) from 39.03 trillion yen ($345 billion).
The other firms are Meiji Life Insurance, Sumitomo Life Insurance, Dai-ichi Mutual Life Insurance, Mitsui Mutual Life Insurance, Yasuda Mutual Life Insurance and Chiyoda Mutual Life Insurance.
Assets of the eight account for about 75 percent of the total assets held by all Japanese life insurers.
The executives said that some corporate pension funds and the Pension Welfare Service Public Corp (PWSPC) -- an affiliate of the Welfare Ministry -- had cancelled fund management contracts in the first half of 1996/97, due to a cutback in the guaranteed rate of return offered by life insurers to 2.5 percent from 4.5 percent.
The PWSPC said earlier this year that it had cancelled about five trillion yen ($44.2 billion) worth of fund management contracts with 18 life insurers.
However, some insurers were optimistic and said the decline in assets was only a temporary phenomenon.
"I think the cancellation of pension funds peaked out in the first half and assets at the end of next March will likely recover to the same level as at the end of last fiscal year," said Minoru Mochida, senior managing director at Meiji Life.
Analysts said that despite the decline in assets, the profitability of the insurers was improving.
A serious headache for the insurers has been the negative spread between current low investment yields and already promised payouts, they said. Since the cancellation of pension fund management contracts, the gap has been narrowing.
The payouts are calculated based on prospective investment yields at the time insurance policies were written.
Meiji Life's Mochida said the overall average guaranteed rate of return offered by life insurers would fall to about four percent in 1996/97 from about five percent in 1995/96, while investment yields would remain low at around three percent.
The eight firms also announced a combined 2.15 trillion yen ($19.0 billion) of problem loans as of the end of September, the first time they had revealed such statistics.
They said that at the end of September the amount of this total classified as "bad loans" -- loans to bankrupt companies and those on which interest payments are in arrears of six months or more -- was 1.06 trillion yen ($9.3 billion).
An official at Sumitomo Life said the firm would this fiscal year dispose of about 500 billion yen ($4.42 billion) of problem loans made to its non-bank affiliates in an effort to cut them back to a manageable level. At the end of September Sumitomo had 789.9 billion yen ($6.99 billion) of problem loans, more than any of the eight insurers. ($1=113 yen)
Japan faces a number of regional bank failures over the next few years but the nation's financial system should not suffer any major damage, a leading U.S. rating agency said on Tuesday.
Senior executives from Standard &amp; Poors Corp said weaker Japanese regional banks will go to the wall as liberalisation triggers a shake-out in the Japanese financial sector.
They were speaking to reporters after the agency issued ratings on a small number of top Japanese regional banks, which were mostly judged to be a reasonably safe investment.
"We will see some (Japanese) regional bank failures," Ernest Napier, an S&amp;P director, told a news conference.
But he said that as long as the process was well-managed, the failures should not cause a crisis of confidence in the financial system.
The credibility of Japan's debt-burdened finance industry has been rocked by a string of banking failures, including the forced closure last month of Hanwa Bank, a second-tier regional bank based in western Japan.
Naoko Nemoto, an associate director at S&amp;P, said it would be hard for some other second-tier regional banks to stay afloat. While some of Japan's top regional banks enjoy higher credit ratings than big commercial banks, smaller regional banks continue to be plagued by poor asset quality and structural problems, she said.
When Japanese authorities stepped in to close Hanwa, it was the first such forced halt of a bank's operations since World War Two, and only the third bank failure since then -- although several small credit unions have folded.
At the time, the authorities said such swift action was essential for the recovery of the financial system.
Nemoto said that this could become a standard method of dealing with future bank failures.
Japan's other two post-war bank failures were dealt with by creating new bodies to take over their business.
James Fiorillo, an analyst at ING Baring Securities (Japan), echoed the S&amp;P view. Second-tier regional banks are likely to be at the sharp end of industry restructuring in the next few years, he said.
"We believe that there are a number of other 'tier two' banks that appear to be equally shaky (as Hanwa)," he said.
However, the Finance Ministry is honouring a promise it made a year ago to intervene at an earlier stage to close down poorly managed financial institutions, he added.
To meet strong capital market interest in financial institutions, S&amp;P gave public information (pi) ratings to seven first tier regional banks on Tuesday. These are unsolicited credit ratings based on information available to the public rather than lengthy consultations with the issuer.
S&amp;P plans to rate more Japanese banks on a "pi" basis, including some of the nation's 20 biggest banks and second-tier regional banks, over the coming months.
Of the seven regional banks given "pi" ratings by S&amp;P, Kiyo Bank Ltd got the lowest rating of BBpi while Hachijuni Bank Ltd got the highest at Api. BBBpi ratings were given to five regional banks -- Bank of Yokohama Ltd, Hyakujushi Bank Ltd, Iyo Bank Ltd, Nanto Bank Ltd and Suruga Bank Ltd.
Ratings in the "AAA", "AA", "A" and "BBB" categories are considered investment grade, while the "BB" category is regarded as having speculative characteristics.
Japan, worried about being isolated in global capital markets, is working to harmonise its domestic accounting standards with international methods.
Finance Ministry (MOF) officials and analysts say Japan must comply with international accounting methods amid growing criticism that it is difficult to calculate how much risk a Japanese firm holds.
"To raise funds in international capital markets, financial statements of Japanese firms must be accepted by foreign investors," said an official in MOF's securities bureau.
Naruaki Sonoda, Nikko Research Centre's senior analyst, says: "It is needed to harmonise Japanese standards with international ones as it is costly for Japanese firms which want to raise funds overseas to have to make two financial statements based on domestic and international standards."
Last month, an advisory body to the ministry started a two-year discussion into whether and how far mark-to-market accounting should be used for companies' financial products holdings, such as securities and derivatives, as well as corporate pension fund accounts.
In mark-to-market accounting, unrealised gains or losses from financial products holdings must be stated in balance sheets and included in income statements.
In Japan, financial products are fundamentally appraised according to the cost of purchase, and only realised gains or losses need to be posted when positions are closed, regardless of the size of the open position a corporation is holding.
Growing financial assets at Japanese corporations and a series of trading fiascos by Japanese firms in the past year has prompted Japanese authorities to set tougher accounting rules.
At the end of March 1995, securities holdings at Japanese corporations, excluding financial industries, totalled 50.11 trillion yen ($463 billion) based on book value, accounting for 16 percent of their total assets, NRC's Sonoda said.
This compared with 21.15 trillion yen ($195 billion) of securities holdings at the end of March 1985, which accounted for 11 percent of their total assets.
Huge losses stemming from securities and derivatives trading have raised criticism for lax Japanese corporate risk management and accounting methods.
Earlier this year, Japanese trading house Sumitomo Corp announced it had lost $1.8 billion through unauthorised trading in copper futures.
Last November, Daiwa Bank said it lost $1.1 billion in unauthorised bond trading at its now-closed New York office.
The MOF also announced last month that it would tighten rules on corporate disclosure, highlighting that corporations will have to disclose unlisted derivatives trading such as swap trading, based on market prices, beginning in April 1998.
Listed derivatives, which are already calculated at market values, cover futures and options traded at the securities exchanges. Unlisted derivatives include swap trading such as interest-rate swaps.
The new rules do not affect corporate balance sheets, but disclosing the data is a step towards introducing mark-to-market accounting for financial products holdings.
Japan is working toward using international standards, said Hirokazu Moriyama, general manager at Yamaichi Research Institute of Securities &amp; Economics.
"I expect Japan to introduce international accounting standards by the end of the fiscal 1998/1999, as the European Commission, and the Securities and Exchange Commission of the United States have stated their support for the IASC process in setting international accounting standards," Moriyama said.
IASC, the International Accounting Standards Committee, has been working out principles of international accounting rules that can be applied in consistent ways in different countries.
It is expected to complete the process by March 1998.
The International Organisation of Securities Commissions, comprised of governmental securities authorities, including Japan, decided in July last year that it would take steps towards accepting IASC accountancy proposals.
Sonoda said, however, it was still unclear how far Japan would go in adopting mark-to-market methods in securities holdings and derivatives trading.
The United States basically uses the mark-to-market appraisal for securities holdings.
Sonoda says if international accounting standards follow the U.S. method, the impact would be enormous on Japanese corporations.
"Japanese companies own huge amounts of stocks in unique cross holdings, and they have massive unrealised profits on those holdings as they bought the shares a long time ago at cheap prices."
If those hidden profits are appraised in balance sheets, the boost in assets would deteriorate the return on equity (ROE) at Japanese companies.
ROE is a common financial yardstick, showing how efficiently a company is using its capital.
"This may reveal how poorly Japanese companies make use of shareholders' capital..." Sonoda said.
Currently, the ROE for Japanese companies is about 3.8 percent, compared with more than 10 percent for U.S. companies.
A bill to lift a 50-year-old ban on holding companies is expected to be submitted to Japan's next parliament, with passage almost assured because of the government's "Big Bang" deregulation plans, economists say.
They added the financial industry would likely be the one which benefits first as the lifting of the ban would help it restructure and bail out troubled financial institutions.
Political haggling has delayed a decision on the holding companies ban for almost a year.
But the economists said Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto's plans to liberalise the financial markets by 2001 and the proposed breakup of telecommunications giant Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp (NTT) mean the ban will likely be lifted.
A holding company is a firm which controls one or more companies, often by having a majority of shares in them, but does not engage in a specific business.
Big business has demanded for years that the ban be lifted, and the pressure on the government has increased recently as many companies push for deregulation to help them streamline and compete with overseas rivals.
The plan to break up NTT calls for it to be restructured into three firms under a holding company. The firm had resisted the break-up plans until the holding company option was offered.
U.S. occupation forces introduced the ban on holding companies in 1947 to break up powerful conglomerates, known as "zaibatsu", which the United States said had contributed to Japan's war effort.
"I am sure the ban will be relaxed broadly in line with ideas the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) has been advocating," said Hideo Fujiwara, senior research fellow at LTCB Research Institute Inc.
The Fair Trade Commission (FTC), the anti-monopoly watchdog, said last week it plans to submit a bill to end the ban to the session of parliament which starts in January.
Last January, the FTC sought to revise the Anti-Monopoly Law to broadly remove the ban, which had the backing of the pro-business LDP.
But that failed when the Social Democratic Party, a member in the then-ruling coalition, called for only a partial lifting of the ban.
If the bill passes next year, the ban would be relaxed by October 1997 at the earliest.
"Even if the ban is lifted, not many companies will make use of the new corporate structure immediately," Fujiwara said.
Companies such as Sony Corp, Canon Inc and Asahi Glass Co Ltd may be able to establish holding companies as they have already split their operations, he said, but many other companies have not.
But financial companies are in a better position to take advantage of the change, some economists said.
"Holding companies will enable banks, brokers and insurers to break down barriers between them," said Yushiro Ikuyo, a first vice president at Smith Barney International Inc.
Ikuyo said a holding company would make it easy for a big financial institution to streamline its corporate group, in particular, bailing out an ailing financial firm in the group.
The economists also said regional banks which tie up under a holding company would be able to boost their coverage areas.
Some warn, however, that financial holding companies would not solve all the problems facing the financial industry, in which too many deposit-taking institutions are competing.
"Like the recently collapsed Hanwa Bank, not all failed financial institutions can be bailed out through a holding company," LTCB Research's Fujiwara said.
The Finance Ministry last month suspended most operations at Hanwa and will eventually wind down the regional bank, which collapsed under the weight of its problem loans.
One year after the peak of Japan's banking crisis, financial institutions are still reeling from the shock, and some have not escaped bankruptcy, analysts say.
Bankers say the worst of the bad loan nightmare is over, but analysts believe Japan's financial industry remains vulnerable.
"It will take some time for confidence in Japanese banks to be restored -- at least until real estate transactions are reactivated," said Yushiro Ikuyo, first vice president at Smith Barney International.
Bad loans largely take the form of land collateral.
"Even for big banks, it will take a few years to write off most problem loans and this will hurt their earnings," he said.
Financial analyst Hideichiro Nishimura at Yamaichi Research Institute of Securities and Economics said that despite vigorous efforts by the government and banks to clear the bad loan mess in the past year, confidence in Japanese financial institutions has not improved in international markets.
Currently stable share prices and low interest rates are helping banks dispose of problem loans steadily and on schedule, but their efforts to restructure operations still fall short of boosting their declining asset quality, he said.
August 30 last year saw Japan's first bank failure since World War Two. The financial system was jolted as major regional bank Hyogo Bank and the country's biggest credit union, Kizu Shinyo Kumiai, collapsed due to adventurous lending during the "bubble economy" of the late 1980s.
Ahead of that dark day, the biggest credit union in Tokyo, Cosmo Shinyo Kumiai, had collapsed, and then this year, second-tier regional bank Taiheiyo Bank went under.
Several analysts expect more bank failures.
"Everyone knows what has to happen (more financial failures), but no one knows when and how and who pays," an analyst at a foreign securities firm said.
To dispose of 10.7 trillion yen ($99.0 billion) of loan losses, many of Japan's biggest banks posted net losses in the fiscal 1995/96, ended March 31.
But counting all deposit-taking institutions, on that date there were still 8.3 trillion yen ($76.8 billion) of loan losses which need to be written off, the Finance Ministry said.
In June, parliament passed bills to clean up the nation's bad loan mess and deal with bank failures, along with a scheme to wind up failed mortgage firms, using taxpayers' money.
Analysts are cool about such efforts, however.
A spokeswoman at international credit-rating agency Moody's Investors Service said it has not much changed its BFSR (bank financial strength rating) since August last year, when it unveiled the BFSR for major Japanese banks for the first time.
Moody's last week warned that some of Japan's seven major trust banks may need external support in order to survive growing competition and the burden of bad debts.
Moody's gave Chuo Trust &amp; Banking and Yasuda Trust &amp; Banking an "E" ranking, meaning that they suffer from very weak intrinsic financial strength, and gave only a slightly better "E+" rating to Mitsui Trust &amp; Banking and Nippon Trust Bank.
It also kept Hokkaido Takushoku Bank and Nippon Credit Bank at the "E" it gave them last August.
"We expect banks with very weak financial fundamentals to ultimately require assistance either from the authorities or from their respective corporate group members," Moody's said.
The deal with the United States to open Japan's insurance market will create some convulsions in the industry, but analysts said it will help make way for the deregulation of Japan's financial sector.
A final agreement was reached on Sunday, ending a dispute that U.S. President Bill Clinton had called the biggest trade barrier between the two nations.
While it focuses on such esoteric issues as who can sell cancer healthcare policies and whether auto insurance can be purchased through the mail, the issue had become a major political dispute.
U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher even got in on the act, calling his Japanese counterpart to apply some last-minute pressure ahead of the Sunday deadline. Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto said he was relieved that the whole thing was over.
The United States, in a statement issued by the embassy here, said the measures "represent fundamental change in the Japanese insurance market, making it more open and competitive."
Insurance trade groups were less than thrilled, however, saying the agreement ignores the needs of consumers and keeps their firms out of some fast-growing parts of the business.
Under the agreement, Japanese companies will be allowed -- in stages -- to enter the niche "third sector" that includes cancer, healthcare and accident coverage. This is the area where foreign firms have gained a foothold.
Foreign firms are expected to benefit from a deregulation of rates in the non-life insurance sector, including fire and auto insurance, to take place by the end of 1998.
Analysts say that even without the U.S. pressure, the changes were coming as part of Hashimoto's drive to revitalise Japan's financial sector.
"It was a matter of when," said Kouya Hasegawa, an analyst at Nikko Research Centre.
He said that as with most deregulation, smaller firms will find it tougher to compete in the new world.
"The liberalisation of premiums is a major blow to the non-life insurance industry, particularly medium- to small-sized firms," Hasegawa said
Takehito Yamanaka, an analyst at SBC Warburg (Japan) Ltd, agreed: "It is inevitable that non-life insurers will compete by cutting premiums."
Medium and small insurers must streamline their network of sales agents to cut costs, he said.
It was not until October that Tokyo removed a ban on mail-order auto insurance under U.S. pressure. Without a network of agents, insurance by mail was seen as an important step for foreign firms.
Income from auto insurance policies account for 40 percent to 50 percent of income at non-life insurance companies, analysts say.
Last month, American Home Assurance Co announced plans for what it says will be Japan's first mail-order car insurance service.
Analysts said the liberalisation of the premiums would eventually result in the disappearance of some financially weak firms and an increase in mergers.
To cope with deregulation, major non-life insurance firm Yasuda Fire &amp; Marine Co Ltd recently announced it would take a majority stake in the Japanese unit of U.S. life insurance giant CIGNA Corp within the next year or two, the first time a Japanese non-life insurer has purchased a life insurance operation.
Under Japan's new Insurance Business Law, which took effect on April 1, non-life and life insurers were allowed to enter each other's business sectors for the first time.
Some in the industry argue that deregulation could create huge problems. They say that higher rates will lead to more uninsured drivers and jeopardise the protection of accident victims.
But no one is predicting that the concerns will stop a deregulation drive across the financial sector that comes to Japan a decade after it hit most industrialised nations.
A deal with the United States to open Japan's $400 billion insurance market will create some convulsions in the industry, but analysts said Sunday it will help make way for the deregulation of Japan's financial sector.
A final agreement was reached on Sunday, ending a dispute that President Clinton had called the biggest trade barrier between the two nations.
While it focuses on such esoteric issues as who can sell cancer healthcare policies and whether auto insurance can be purchased through the mail, the issue had become a major political dispute.
U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher even got in on the act, calling his Japanese counterpart to apply some last-minute pressure ahead of the Sunday deadline. Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto said he was relieved that the whole thing was over.
The United States, in a statement issued by its embassy here, said the measures "represent fundamental change in the Japanese insurance market, making it more open and competitive."
Insurance trade groups were less than thrilled, however, saying the agreement ignores the needs of consumers and keeps their firms out of some fast-growing parts of the business.
Under the agreement, Japanese companies will be allowed -- in stages -- to enter the niche "third sector" that includes cancer, healthcare and accident coverage. This is the area where foreign firms have gained a foothold.
Foreign firms are expected to benefit from a deregulation of rates in the non-life insurance sector, including fire and auto insurance, to take place by the end of 1998.
Analysts say that even without the U.S. pressure, the changes were coming as part of Hashimoto's drive to revitalise Japan's financial sector.
"It was a matter of when," said Kouya Hasegawa, an analyst at Nikko Research Centre.
He said that as with most deregulation, smaller firms will find it tougher to compete in the new world.
"The liberalisation of premiums is a major blow to the non-life insurance industry, particularly medium- to small-sized firms," Hasegawa said
Takehito Yamanaka, an analyst at SBC Warburg (Japan) Ltd, agreed: "It is inevitable that non-life insurers will compete by cutting premiums."
It was not until October that Tokyo removed a ban on mail-order auto insurance under U.S. pressure. Without a network of agents, insurance by mail was seen as an important step for foreign firms.
Income from auto insurance policies accounts for 40 percent to 50 percent of income at non-life insurance companies, analysts say.
Last month, American Home Assurance Co. announced plans for what it says will be Japan's first mail-order car insurance service.
Analysts said the liberalisation of the premiums would eventually result in the disappearance of some financially weak firms and an increase in mergers.
To cope with deregulation, major non-life insurance firm Yasuda Fire &amp; Marine Co. Ltd recently announced it would take a majority stake in the Japanese unit of U.S. life insurance giant CIGNA Corp. within the next year or two, the first time a Japanese non-life insurer has purchased a life insurance operation.
Under Japan's new Insurance Business Law, which took effect on April 1, non-life and life insurers were allowed to enter each other's business sectors for the first time.
Some in the industry argue that deregulation could create huge problems. They say that higher rates will lead to more uninsured drivers and jeopardise the protection of accident victims.
But no one is predicting that the concerns will stop a deregulation drive across the financial sector that comes to Japan a decade after it hit most industrialised nations.
The tentative deal with the United States to open Japan's insurance market will create some convulsions in the industry, but will help pave the way for the financial sector deregulation both sides say is vital.
A basic agreement was reached on Saturday, ending a dispute that U.S. President Bill Clinton had called the biggest trade barrier between the two nations.
While it focuses on such esoteric issues as who can sell cancer healthcare policies and whether auto insurance can be purchased through the mail, the issue had become a major political dispute.
U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher even got in on the act, calling his Japanese counterpart to apply some last-minute pressure ahead of the Sunday deadline, and Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto said he was relieved that the whole thing was over.
Insurance trade groups were less than thrilled, however, saying the agreement ignores the needs of consumers and keeps their firms out of some fast-growing parts of the business.
Under the agreement, Japanese companies will be allowed -- in stages -- to enter the niche "third sector" that includes cancer, healthcare and accident coverage. This is the area where foreign firms have gained a foothold.
Foreign firms are expected to benefit from a deregulation of rates in the non-life insurance sector, including fire and auto insurance, to take place by the end of 1998.
Analysts say that even without the U.S. pressure, the changes were coming as part of Hashimoto's drive to revitalise Japan's financial sector.
"It was a matter of when," said Kouya Hasegawa, an analyst at Nikko Research Centre.
He said that as with most deregulation, smaller firms will find it tougher to compete in the new world.
"The liberalisation of premiums is a major blow to the non-life insurance industry, particularly medium- to small-sized firms," Hasegawa said
Takehito Yamanaka, an analyst at SBC Warburg (Japan) Ltd, agreed: "It is inevitable that non-life insurers will compete by cutting premiums."
Medium and small insurers must streamline their network of sales agents to cut costs, he said.
It was not until October that Tokyo removed a ban on mail-order auto insurance under U.S. pressure. Without a network of agents, insurance by mail was seen as an important step for foreign firms.
Income from auto insurance policies account for 40 percent to 50 percent of income at non-life insurance companies, analysts say.
Last month, American Home Assurance Co announced plans for what it says will be Japan's first mail-order car insurance service.
Analysts said the liberalisation of the premiums would eventually result in the disappearance of some financially weak firms and an increase in mergers.
To cope with deregulation, major non-life insurance firm Yasuda Fire &amp; Marine Co Ltd recently announced it would take a majority stake in the Japanese unit of U.S. life insurance giant CIGNA Corp within the next year or two, the first time a Japanese non-life insurer has purchased a life insurance operation.
Under Japan's new Insurance Business Law, which took effect on April 1, non-life and life insurers were allowed to enter each other's business sectors for the first time.
Some in the industry argue that deregulation could create huge problems. They say that higher rates will lead to more uninsured drivers and jeopardise the protection of accident victims.
But no one is predicting that the concerns will stop a deregulation drive across the financial sector that comes to Japan a decade after it hit most industrialised nations.
Two Nomura Securities group asset management firms said on Wednesday that they would merge next October to create a top player with a competitive edge on rivals in Japan's rapidly growing market.
The planned merger of Nomura Investment Management (NIM) which manages corporate pension funds and other large funds, and Nomura Securities Investment Trust Management (NSITM) which manages investment trusts for individuals -- similar to mutual funds -- would yield one of the world's biggest asset management companies, with total assets of 15 trillion yen ($132 billion) under its care, analysts said.
NIM president Tadashi Takubo told a news conference that overlapping operations at the two firms would be streamlined to sharpen the new company's competitive edge as Japan implements broad financial reforms targeted for completion by 2001.
Last month, Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto unveiled plans for a five-year "Big Bang" to liberalise Japan's financial markets and recoup Tokyo's status as the key financial centre.
Among Hashimoto's proposals was a call to make effective use of individual financial assets which now total some 1,200 trillion yen ($10.61 trillion).
"We would like to form an internationally competitive system because regulations on asset management are being lifted (in Japan), Takubo said.
Getting good returns on those assets is increasingly vital as Japan confronts a rapid rise in the proportion of elderly people in its population, analysts said.
Foreign rivals are also keen to cash in on the expected growth in Japan's pension fund and investment trust markets. Andrew Simmonds, president of BZW Securities (Japan) Ltd, said last month, "One of the things I think is exciting is the potential mutualisation of the savings base in Japan.  We're not alone there -- everyone else is excited by that."
U.S. mutual fund giant Fidelity Investments also plans to enter the Japanese market in a big way next year and hopes to lure Japanese investors now fed up with ultra-low returns by making available its unique U.S.-style services.
An industry source said that outstanding mutual funds in Japan total only about 50 trillion yen ($442 billion) in Japan compared to nearly 200 trillion yen ($1.76 trillion) in the United States.
"The figures show Japan's investment trust market has the potential to grow much bigger," the source said.
Some analysts dubbed the planned merger a natural attempt to boost efficiency, but others warned that achieving that goal was not necessarily assured.
"Nomura's asset management companies have already been big compared with competitors, and it is questionable whether they will be able to boost performance through the merger," said an official at an overseas-based investment advisory firm.
"Generally speaking, fund managers at Japanese companies are conservative," he said. "They tend to avoid investment risks because they see the risks, which are short-term volatility, as something dangerous. But experienced foreign advisors are well-qualified to manage pension funds as they take reasonable risks in long-term pension fund management."
Toru Tsuchida, president of NSITM, meanwhile, said the merged company would not cut jobs and in fact might increase its workforce later to improve the quality of asset management and research. ($1=113 yen)
Japanese banks, still struggling under the weight of massive problem loans, now face tough decisions on how to adapt to expected structural changes to the country's economy and financial system, analysts say.
They say it is inevitable the banks will need to shift their focus towards creating new business and offering specific services to boost profits as demand for loans weakens.
Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto's "Big Bang" financial reform plans unveiled last month to liberalise Japan's financial markets by 2001 will also accelerate competition.
"To increase profitability, Japanese banks must change the sources of their profits," said Koyo Ozeki, a director at international credit rating agency IBCA Ltd.
On Thursday, the Finance Ministry announced sweeping plans to deregulate Japan's foreign exchange market in 1998.
Eisuke Sakakibara, director-general of the ministry's International Finance Bureau, warned that Japanese banks will face intensified competition as a result of the deregulation.
"I hope Japanese financial institutions will be well prepared for severe competition in the future," he said.
Tight regulation, dating back to the end of World War Two, has protected Japanese banks from competition and has made them less efficient than Western rivals, analysts say.
And because of that, some analysts such as Shinji Okabe, senior credit officer at rating agency Moody's Japan, are pessimistic about the future of Japanese banks.
"It seems to me that Japanese banks cannot judge which business is profitable... It looks like the banks all think they can do everything with unlimited resources," he said.
Since the early 1990s, Japanese banks have written off problem loans resulting from their adventurous lending policies in the late 1980 "bubble economy" of inflated asset prices.
But as of the end of September, 20 major banks were still carrying 23 trillion yen ($201 billion) worth of problem loans.
Analysts say it will take two more years on average for the top 20 banks to cut the loans to manageable levels, giving foreign banks further chances to to nudge into the market.
"Foreign banks have expanded and strengthened their business base in the past decade, but Japanese banks were not able to do anything because they had to dispose of the problem loans," said IBCA's Ozeki.
Japan's 20 biggest banks, down from 21 after a merger in April between Bank of Tokyo and Mitsubishi Bank, posted 22.85 trillion yen ($200 billion) in parent operating profits in an eight-year period to the end of March this year.
During that time they also disposed of 21.7 trillion yen ($190 billion) in problem loans, Ozeki said.
Even profitability at Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi, which many analysts agree is the strongest Japanese candidate to become an internationally competitive bank, is low.
The bank's return on equity, a gauge to show the efficiency of the use of capital, is only about 7.2 percent, compared with Barclays Plc's 13.09 percent and Bankers Trust's 18.32 percent, an IBCA study showed.
Analysts say they expect more bank failures in Japan, particularly among smaller regional banks and credit unions.
In November, Japanese authorities ordered the regional Hanwa Bank to halt business, the third regional bank failure since the end of World War Two. Eleven smaller credit unions and associations have also gone under since December 1994.
Analysts said uncertainty over how to deal with troubled banks has not been entirely removed in Japan, and there remains some concern that larger and stronger banks may be drawn into the support mechanism at some cost to themselves.
Japanese banks to which Moody's has given a bank financial strength rating (BFSR) of "E" are financially weak, Okabe said.
Chuo Trust &amp; Banking and Yasuda Trust &amp; Banking, Hokkaido Takushoku Bank and Nippon Credit Bank are the E rated banks.
"There are no U.S. banks which received an E rating. Banks with E ratings are those which have been supported (in Japan's regulated system) despite their inefficiency," he said. ($1=114 yen)
Share trading on the Tokyo Stock Exchange could more than triple to a billion shares a day, once deregulation is decided and implemented, a senior official of the Finance Ministry said.
Atsushi Nagano, director general of the ministry's securities bureau, said he is resolved to make Tokyo a more attractive place to do securities business.
"It is not just a dream to boost the volume on Tokyo's stock market to one billion shares if we make the Tokyo market more attractive," Nagano told Reuters in an interview.
Nagano declined to discuss details of possible changes in regulations, but financial industry sources said some of the measures on the agenda are: - deregulation of brokers' commissions on smaller lots, - further breaking down the wall separating banks and securities houses, - allowing sales of investment trusts at bank counters.
On Friday, turnover on the exchange's first section was about 381 million shares, compared with a scant 225 million on Thursday. Daily turnover has averaged 300 million to 400 million in the past two years.
Nagano, whose bureau is responsible for overseeing the nation's securities markets and industry, said the industry has no choice but to open up to all investors from around the world in line with global standards.
Now recovering a little from a slump in business after the collapse of the "bubble" economy of inflated stock and asset prices of the late 1980s, the securities industry has begun to consider its future, although it is still somewhat vulnerable, he said.
In the past when turnover on the stock market dwindled, the government had thought of remedies such as increasing public spending, but this would not work any more, he said.
Share trading on the exchange was worth $889 billion last year, while that in New York stood at $3.08 trillion, data from the Finance Ministry show.
Trading volume of Nikkei 225 index futures on the Osaka Securities Exchange (OSE) plunged to 7.22 million lots or contracts in 1995 compared with 21.64 million in 1991, while that on the Singapore Mercantile Exchange (SIMEX) surged to 3.16 million lots from only 361,000 in 1991.
Market sources said declining turnover of Nikkei 225 index futures was attributable to tougher trading rules the Finance Ministry imposed after the bubble burst in the early 1990s.
In June, an advisory panel to the Finance Minister, the Securities and Exchange Council, established a special committee to debate reform in the securities markets, the industry and securities policy management.
Nagano said he wanted the committee to discuss wide-ranging issues which have impeded development of Japan's securities markets. "I believe there is a lot of room to expand for this (securities) industry. While investors and borrowers need each other, there are some obstacles to matching (the needs of the two sides)."
Nagano said he did not want the committee to go into individual measures hurriedly without deep discussions about the problems facing the markets and the industry.
"It may take one or two months from now before discussions of individual issues start," he added.
The committee is expected to make proposals next June.
More Japanese finance firms braced for the bitter pill of court-protected liquidation on Thursday, but analysts said Japan's banking sector still faces a long road to recovery from its bad loan headaches.
The announcements were no surprise and more were considered likely as the banking sector struggles to get rid of troubled finance firms and regain its credibility.
The collapses highlighted, however, the growing worries that unexpected bad news may lie ahead and that Japan's slumping stock market could set back the recuperation further.
The latest victims were All Corp, with debts on borrowings worth 274.5 billion yen ($2.36 billion), Sanwa Tatemono Sogo Finance Co with debts of 66.4 billion yen ($572 million) and CS Sogo Service with debts of 71.3 billion yen ($614 million).
Ubumi Sagara, president of Tokyo-based non-bank All Corp, told reporters the firm would hold a shareholders' meeting by the end of March to seek approval for a liquidation filing.
The firm's major creditor banks -- Tokai Bank Ltd, Sakura Bank Ltd and Chuo Trust Banking &amp; Co Ltd -- were accepting its special liquidation plan, he said.
All Corp's cumulative debt exceeded its assets by 195.4 billion yen ($1.68 billion) as of September 1996 and it would be hard to improve its business despite recent restructuring efforts, he said.
"All Corp has been well-known as a troubled non-bank," said Yoshinobu Yamada, a financial analyst at Merrill Lynch Japan.
"Main creditor banks have already set aside loan loss provisions to prepare for the failure and the liquidation will have no major impact on earnings of those banks," he said.
Japan had at least five non-bank failures in 1996, including the collapse of Nichiei Finance Co, which filed for liquidation with debt liabilities of around one trillion yen ($8.6 billion). By one measure, this made Nichiei the largest such insolvency case in Japan in the postwar period.
Katsuhito Sasajima, an analyst at Nikko Research Centre, said banks in general have been well-prepared for possible failures of non-bank companies in recent years.
Banks are major lenders to non-bank institutions, which do not take deposits and largely depend on bank loans as sources of funds for their own lending.
"All Corp is not the end of the problem loan mess at credit firms and people know that. Rather, worries have grown that banks may have to write off bigger problem loans to general contractors than earlier expected," Sasajima said.
A new restructuring programme unveiled late last year by Tobishima Corp, a contractor and engineering company, fuelled concerns that banks would face new burdens as ailing firms seek added support in attempting to reshape themselves, he said.
The failures at Sanwa Tatemono Sogo Finance and CS Sogo Service were not surprising, either, as the two firms were subsidiaries of failed parent companies, banking sources said.
Banking sources said that while the impact of All Corp's liquidation would be limited, they were much more concerned about jitters in the Tokyo stock market. The closely watched Nikkei average lost about 11 percent of its value last week.
Declining stock prices whittle away unrealised profits from banks' shareholdings, reducing the amount of money available to write off problem loans and thus protracting the mess in the banking industry, they said. ($1=116 yen)
Japanese banks, already groaning under problem loans, are dangerously exposed to the volatile Tokyo stock market and a further drop in the market may finally force them into a blood-letting reorganisation, analysts say.
They say that if the weaker banks are to survive, they must trim the size of their less-profitable assets, including those overseas, cut their stock portfolios and reduce the number of their employees.
"Weak banks may be thrown into the sector-wide reorganisation unless they take a serious look at reality -- that the market is urging an aggressive restructuring, even if they have to cut the number of employees," said Yushiro Ikuyo, first vice-president at Smith Barney International Inc.
"If share prices in (weak) banks fall to very cheap levels, it might be easier for big banks to bail out those weaker banks through cheap mergers," he said.
Market sources said the recent Japanese share price plunge has been led by active selling of shares in the banking sector, which represent one-quarter of the Tokyo Stock Exchange's market capitalisation.
On Monday, the key Nikkei average of 225 leading shares closed down 609.70 points, or 3.37 percent, at 17,480.24.
Even though the market recovered slightly last week, the Nikkei is still down close to 2,000 points since the beginning of this year on worries about the economy and a lack of government measures to prop it up.
Japanese banks have traditionally held large chunks of shares in other companies, many of them customers. In the past, the unrealised profits on these holdings have helped burnish the banks' balance sheets and have provided a useful way of getting some of their problem loans off their books.
But the failure to tackle the problem more aggressively has in turn fueled scepticism about the soundness of the Japanese banking system, triggering more selloffs in the stock market, analysts said.
The analysts said banks should try to raise their profitability by focusing on specialised business fields, by developing new financial instruments and by lending to smaller firms with prospects for future growth.
Katsuhito Sasajima, an analyst at Nikko Research Centre, said: "To convince investors, banks must take the extra step to restructure, but they have made no such effort so far."
In the three business years to the end of March 1996, Japan's then top 21 banks used 8.01 trillion yen ($68.4 billion) in net capital gains from the sale of equities to help dispose of 18.96 trillion yen ($162 billion) of property-related problem loans, a legacy from the late 1980s economic "bubble" era of inflated asset prices.
But the top banks still had 17.4 trillion yen ($148 billion) of problem loans at the end of last September, the Finance Ministry said.
Moody's Investors Service said on Friday that the sharp fall in Japanese shares will affect financially weak banks.
Moody's said while it is confident Japanese authorities will keep the top 20 banks from failing in the short term, it is concerned about a growing gap between the bailout cost and the limited resources available for the protection of depositors and senior debt holders. ($1=117 yen)
Weak Japanese regional banks face a scramble to clean up their bad loan problems before oversight standards are tightened next year, but their room for manoeuvre may be limited by a sagging stock market.
This squeeze on the struggling players in the banking sector could cause more financial collapses and forced liquidations down the road, analysts and banking sources say.
The introduction of formal capital adequacy standards in April next year means banks must deal with non-performing assets or risk being taken to task or closed down by the authorities for failing the new financial health test.
Banking sources and analysts say this is putting pressure on the banks to raise capital in order to bring their ratio of capital to risk-weighted assets to an acceptable balance.
But a weak stock market raises the chances of institutions flunking the capital adequacy test, as it makes it hard for them to raise capital by issuing new shares.
"Smaller banks with a weak capital base must take measures to raise capital before the new system is introduced," said Katsuhito Sasajima, a Nikko Research Centre analyst.
One option which has already proved popular with banks is to issue new shares to existing shareholders at a price pitched midway between the market value and face value. But this is getting harder amid the stock market gloom, Sasajima said.
The slide in the stock market is hurting the banks in a number of ways, eroding the paper profits on their share portfolios that they were using to tackle bad loans, as well as narrowing their options for raising fresh capital.
The new adequacy standards, known as the prompt corrective action (PCA) system, are being introduced to bolster confidence in Japan's banking sector by keeping a closer watch on firms' health and preventing problems spinning out of control.
Under the new system, banks are strictly required to set aside loan loss provisions in line with the global accounting standards. To be classed as "adequately capitalised", financial institutions operating only in Japan must have an adequacy ratio of four percent or more, while internationally active banks must have a ratio of eight percent.
A bank can be ordered to take action to improve its health, and can be liquidated if its capital adequacy ratio falls below zero percent and inspectors pinpoint inadequacies.
At the moment there are no clear Finance Ministry standards, which has been cited as one factor in the ballooning bad loan problem after the collapse of the 1980s asset bubble.
"The imposition of a strict write-off system (via the PCA)...would force a large number of  smaller, weaker banks to the wall," said Yukiko Ohara, an analyst at UBS Securities Ltd, in a recent report.
At the end of last September, problem loans at Japan's deposit-taking financial institutions totalled 29.23 trillion yen ($247 billion), of which 7.3 trillion yen ($61.8 billion) was estimated to be uncovered loan losses, according to Finance Ministry data. But analysts believe the scale is actually much bigger than that.
To boost capital ahead of the new system, about 10 regional banks announced last year that they would issue new shares by the end of March priced halfway between the market and face value. Among them are Hokuetsu Bank Ltd, Hokkoku Bank Ltd, Miyazaki Bank Ltd, Yamagata Bank Ltd and Awa Bank Ltd.
However, analysts say that there are several regional banks with a more urgent need to increase their capital.
Japan's Nihon Keizai Shimbun reported last week that there were 10 regional banks whose capital adequacy ratio was below four percent at the end of March, 1996.
Among them was Hanwa Bank, whose operations -- except for withdrawals -- were suspended by Finance Ministry last November as it was unable to recover bad loans.
Tokyo-based regional bank Tokyo Sowa Bank Ltd has said it had a capital adequacy ratio of 3.8 percent as of March 31, 1996, compared with 4.35 percent a year earlier after going into the red to dispose of a swathe of problem loans, eroding its capital. It disposed of 130 billion yen ($1.10 billion) in problem loans in 1995/96, much more than its competitors and Tokyo Sowa said the problem was now under control.
In order to clear the four percent hurdle by April 1998, the bank will take such steps as procuring subordinated debts and issuing new shares, a bank spokesman said.
Analysts have said that before the PCA system is introduced, the Finance Ministry may have to pull down the shutters at some ailing banks that are unable to break free of bad loans and cannot boost their capital. ($1=118 yen)
Japan's third biggest securities house, Nikko Securities Co, will focus on cutting personnel and other costs as it braces for "Big Bang" financial reforms, executive vice president Masao Yuki said on Friday.
"The Big Bang reforms will mean the survival of the fittest," he told Reuters in an interview.
"The (Japanese) financial sector must correct its high-cost structure to cope with the Big Bang. If it doesn't, we will lose out to our Western rivals," he said.
The most important and urgent issue for Nikko is how to cut personnel costs while raising the salaries of talented young workers and maintaining overall morale, he said.
He acknowledged this would be a very difficult task and he had no specific ideas at this time, but Japan's manufacturers had already made impressive progress in this area.
"(Japanese) manufacturers say that brokerages and financial institutions have been living the good life. That's why they say it will be difficult for us to restructure," he said.
Tinkering with personnel practices is widely considered taboo at large Japanese companies.
Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto unveiled plans in November for a five-year "Big Bang" set of policy moves to liberalise Japan's financial markets and catch up with reforms carried out more than a decade ago in Europe and North America.
Market sources said that since late last year the Tokyo stock market has focused on the negative impact of the Big Bang reform on Japanese financial institutions, as they would heat up the competition and create losers as well as winners in the financial markets.
On Friday, the key Nikkei average of 225 leading shares ended down 220.10 points, or 1.23 percent, at 17,689.36. The index has shed nearly 2,000 points since the beginning of this year, led by the banking and brokerage sector.
Yuki said that, while Tokyo's Big Bang would eventually provide business opportunities for brokers and help revitalize Japan's financial markets, it would also pressure brokers' earnings in the near term.
"It is inevitable that we'll face a tough fight for profits in the near term," he said. "Such a severe business environment may result in an industry-wide shakeout including mergers and acquisitions."
Last week, Moody's Investors Service issued a grim rating outlook for Japanese brokerages, noting that the securities industry was faced with the dual challenges of operating in volatile markets and strategically repositioning itself in a deregulated landscape.
The likely elimination of fixed commission rates on stockbroking was cited as one move likely to undermine profitability at many brokerages, it said.
Yuki said that there would be no quick remedies to boost currently sagging bank and brokerage stocks, but policies were need to ensure Japan's economic recovery and implement drastic reforms of the nation's economic structure.
He added that the abolition of Japan's securities transaction tax, as urged by some politicians and business leaders, would also help Japan's stock market.
Japan is the only country with a securities transaction tax.
"I don't advocate any government moves to artificially prop up stock prices ... but announcing the abolition (of the tax by the end of March) would have a good effect on stocks," he said.
He said that, since Japan has already announced a sweeping deregulation of foreign exchange transactions beginning in 1998, failure to abolish the transaction tax would encourage institutional investors to go abroad to trade Japanese stocks due to higher costs here.
Japan's big securities houses have come to accept that deregulating commissions on stock transactions is essential if they are to keep their major customers, industry sources say.
"Many Japanese brokers oppose liberalisation, but it is unavoidable if they want to keep the status of the Tokyo stock market from falling," one industry source said.
The sources cited an increase in "black-eyed" foreigners -- Japanese who buy Japanese stocks through brokers overseas to avoid higher commissions charged by domestic brokers.
However, the sources also said deregulation should be done gradually so as not to jeopardise small brokerages depending on commissions for most of their revenue.
"Big Four brokers will be able to withstand the impact of liberalisation, but smaller brokers will not," the source said.
Japan's "Big Four" -- Nomura Securities, Daiwa Securities, Nikko Securities and Yamaichi Securities -- are preparing for the liberalisation of broking fees as they fear they will lose customers, who are becoming more aware that it is cheaper to place orders abroad for Japanese stocks than it is in Japan, the sources said.
Japanese brokers charge 535,000 yen ($4,908) for buying or selling a contract worth 500 million yen ($4.58 million), the sources said, while fees overseas would be less than half that.
The Big Four depended on commissions for about 30 percent of their revenue in the fiscal year to March 31, 1995.
But commissions accounted for more than 70 percent of revenues for many of Japan's 230 smaller brokerages, they said.
Earlier this year, the Pension Welfare Service Public Corp (Nenpuku), which manages about 23 trillion yen ($211 billion) in public pension funds, commissioned investment advisory companies to manage its funds.
"Those investment advisory companies set up so-called limited partnerships abroad and placed orders in London," said another industry source.
"By trading in the over-the-counter market in London, they saved money as stockbroking fees there are cheap and there is no securities transaction tax."
This triggered interest from other institutional investors, the sources said.
While no statistics are available, purchases by the so-called black-eyed investors had recently inflated figures for purchases of Japanese stocks by foreigners, they said.
Atsushi Nagano, director-general of the Japanese Finance Ministry's Securities Bureau, told Reuters the ministry was aware of the situation.
"Watching such cases, I feel like there is something wrong in the Tokyo market," he said.
When Japan liberalised broking fees for contracts of more than 1 billion yen ($9.1 million) in April 1994, the Finance Ministry said it would consider deregulating fees on smaller lots of stocks after seeing the impact of that liberalisation.
Industry sources said further deregulation would be one of the main topics at a special committee of the Securities and Exchange Council -- an advisory panel to the Finance Minister -- which is supposed to present proposals on how to reform Tokyo's securities market next June.
The second source said that even though no time frame had been set for the complete liberalisation of commissions, abolishing the securities transaction tax would help boost the Tokyo exchange.
Japan lowered the tax to 0.21 percent of the value of a sale from 0.3 percent, except for sales by securities houses, on April 1.
Broking fees were liberalised in New York in 1975 and in London in 1986. ($1=109)
A small securities house has cracked open Japan's highly regulated stockbroking commission system in a move which industry sources say should accelerate plans to deregulate the stock market.
Matsui Securities Co Ltd said on Friday it would cut its brokerage fees for stocks and convertible bonds traded over the counter by half, starting from March.
It is the first time a broker has said it will deviate from the norm in setting its fees.
Brokerage commissions for stocks listed on Japanese stock exchanges are fixed under the Securities and Exchange Act, while fees for over-the-counter trade can be set within a range fixed by the Japan Securities Dealers' Association.
But brokers have so far charged uniform fees on stocks traded over the counter, the sources said.
After Matsui's announcement, Paribas Capital Markets Ltd said it had cut its brokerage fees for stocks traded on Japan's over-the-counter market by half, effective from Friday.
Matsui said other companies in the industry had tried to pressure it into not making the change.
"Some of them tried to criticise and pressure us, but we decided to help revitalise the market by taking the steps as long as they meet the rules," a Matsui statement said.
An executive at a medium-sized Japanese broker said: "Matsui's decision will accelerate the liberalisation of stockbroking fees."
He added that both big and small brokers would have to decide by March whether to follow Matsui's example or possibly lose business to it, he said.
But Ichiyoshi Securities Co Ltd, a medium-sized broker with a strong customer base in the OTC market, said it would not cut its fees for now.
"Our strategy is to earn commissions by offering something value-added... We plan to differentiate our service by offering better information," an Ichiyoshi spokesman told Reuters.
An advisory panel to the Finance Ministry is currently discussing how stockbroking fees should be deregulated and is due to make a final proposal by June.
Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto unveiled in November a five-year plan for "Big Bang" reforms to liberalise Japan's financial markets and catch up with reforms carried out more than a decade ago in Europe and North America.
They include liberalising the stock commission system.
An official at a "Big Four" broker said the liberalisation was likely to take place sooner than the industry expected.
"As for stockbroking commissions, the liberalisation may come all at one time, rather than by gradual implementation," he said.
Industry sources said that without the deregulation, Japanese institutional investors would go abroad, where it costs less to place orders for Japanese stocks.
The Tokyo stock market's recent falls offer a preview of the pain Japan's life insurance industry will face as a result of greater competition from planned "Big Bang" financial reforms, industry sources say.
The fall in share prices means some of the insurance companies may have to post losses in the business year to March 31, increasing an already wide gap in financial strength between big and small firms, the sources said.
But the real threat is expected intense competition from other financial sectors such as banking after the Big Bang.
"The Big Bang is the real threat, as it means fierce competition among all financial sectors, including banks and Western asset management firms," said an executive at a major life insurance firm.
Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto unveiled plans in November to liberalise Japan's financial markets by 2001 under the Big Bang reforms, in which banks, brokers and insurance companies will be allowed to enter each other's turf.
In the past, Japan's life insurance industry enjoyed spectacular growth as the nation's economic success enabled people to plan for the long-term financial security of their families, analysts said.
But with the maturing of the core life insurance product market, big insurers are focusing on asset management.
The life insurers are already facing increased competition after a revision to the law governing them allowed 11 non-life insurers to set up life insurance subsidiaries last October, raising to 44 the number of life insurers in Japan.
A spokesman for Sony Life Insurance, a subsidiary of Sony Corp, said there were also concerns about how far the big commercial banks would be permitted to enter the insurance business under the Big Bang reforms.
Koya Hasegawa, an analyst at Nikko Research Center, said the life insurance industry needed to increase its efficiency, particularly to fight off a challenge from the banks.
The reforms are expected to allow over-the-counter sales of insurance policies by banks, he said.
But even before that, some life insurers are in for a tough time. "If stocks remain under pressure until the end of the current business year they will see unrealised profits on their shareholdings wiped out, forcing them to post losses," Nikko Research's Hasegawa said.
Falling stock prices reduce their unrealised profits on shareholdings. These unrealised profits are a source of funds to cover sudden losses and write-offs of problem loans and make up for negative spreads between low investment yields and already promised payouts.
The payouts are calculated based on prospective investment yields at the time insurance policies were written.
If the Nikkei average of 225 leading shares is around 19,000 on March 31, when the companies close their books for 1996/97, unrealised profits on shareholdings at three life insurers -- Toho Mutual Life, Nissan Mutual Life and Kyoei Life -- will be wiped out, the sources said.
A Nikkei fall to 18,000 would make the unrealised profits at Tokyo Mutual Life, Nippon Dantai Life and Daihyaku Mutual Life disappear, while the crucial level is 17,000 for Sumitomo Life and Chiyoda Mutual Life, they said.
On Thursday, the Nikkei closed down 471.26 points at 17,864.04. But on Friday morning the index bounced back, rising 570.68 points by midday.
Chiyoda, Nissan, Kyoei, Tokyo, Nippon Dantai, and Daihyaku all posted before-tax current losses in the year to March 31, 1995. Toho also did so, for the second straight year.
Faced with persistent market rumours that it is on the verge of collapse, Nippon Credit Bank Ltd went public on Wednesday to say that any such talk is "totally groundless".
"In the markets, unsourced rumours such as the suggestion that our bank is practically on the verge of collapse are circulating and are prompting sales of our shares and debentures," NCB vice president Shoji Nishikawa told a hastily convened news conference.
"Such rumours are totally groundless and our bank would like to declare that these rumours are not true," he said.
Finance Minister Hiroshi Mitsuzuka also came out in support of long-suffering Nippon Credit, whose failure could spark a crisis in the banking industry.
He said the government will fully support the bank, although he added that the ministry is not worried about the financial health of Nippon Credit, the smallest of the nation's three long-term credit banks.
"The ministry has had no worries about the bank. It (the bank) is doing its utmost to improve its management. We don't believe that the bank will collapse as some media reports have said," Mitsuzuka told reporters at his regular news conference.
Nippon Credit's latest ordeal began early Wednesday when traders began to sell its shares on vague talk that NCB would hold an emergency news conference. There was also a vague rumour about a possible merger involving NCB, they said.
The dumping of the bank's shares ignited renewed selling throughout the banking sector. The sharp fall in banking shares has been largely to blame for the tumble in the Tokyo stock market since mid-December.
Nippon Credit shares fell 35 yen (28 cents) to close on Wednesday at an all-time low of 181 yen ($1.47).
In the bond market, NCB's latest debentures are selling at a yield of 4.1 percent, a full 2.5 percentage points above bonds issued by other banks, reflecting the perceived risk in its debts.
Nishikawa said the sell-off was influenced by exaggerated media reports which hyped concerns over the health of Japan's financial system.
"We believe the market condition has deviated greatly from the realities of the bank. We hope market participants will calm down," he said.
He also said the bank would be able to post a current profit in 1996/97 even after disposing of problem loans as it had planned -- if Tokyo stock prices remain at their current levels.
Like other banks, NCB relies on its own share holdings to help provide needed cash so as the stock market tumbles, its situation worsens. That has created a vicious circle for the Tokyo stock market.
The bank plans to write off problem loans of 130 billion yen ($1.05 billion) in the current fiscal year ending March 31. As of the end of September, such problem loans totalled 1.39 trillion yen ($11.3 billion).
Some analysts said that it is unclear whether the news conference by NCB and the finance ministry's pledge to support the bank would help regain confidence in Japan's banking sector.
"In the long-term, the banking sector will remain under pressure until Japan completes its 'Big Bang' financial reforms," said Katsuhito Sasajima, an analyst at Nikko Research Centre. ($1=123 yen)
The vulnerability of Japan's banking sector shares to rumour-led selloffs shows that investor confidence in the sector is still thin, brokers and analysts said on Wednesday.
Bank shares tumbled after vague market talk, later denied, that Nippon Credit Bank Ltd (NCB) would hold an emergency news conference reignited worries about Japan's financial system, they said.
"We cannot say that the negative trend in the banking sector has finished," Masaaki Higashida, a strategist at Nomura Securities, said. "Markets are still sensitive about rumours, and this shows that investors remain concerned about the financial health of banks," he said.  
It was hard to predict how far bank shares will fall, analysts said, adding that there are no quick remedies to regain the lost confidence in the sector aside from improving asset quality by disposing of problem loans.
Katsuhito Sasajima, an analyst at Nikko Research Centre, said: "In the long-term, the banking sector may remain under pressure until Japan completes its Big Bang financial reforms."
"It is also difficult to become positive on the sector near-term, particularly if looking at interest rate prospects," he said, adding that interest rates have nowhere to go but up, as they have already fallen to a historically low level.  
Yoshinobu Yamada, an analyst at Merrill Lynch Japan Inc, said that the market's view of banks' financial health may further erode because land prices remain under pressure and this has cast doubts over the economic recovery.
"Financially weak banks must try harder to regain the confidence from investors by cutting non-performing loans and less-profitable assets," another analyst said.
One bright factor which may emerge is a move within parliament by some opposition politicians calling for the use of fresh public money to deal with problem loan issue, analysts and brokers said.
"If a system to use public money to bail out big banks is established, it will ease the nerves in the stock market and selective buying of strong banks will emerge," a market source said.
Last month, Moody's Investor Service lowered its ratings outlook for NCB and three other Japanese banks -- Hokkaido Takushoku Bank Ltd, Yasuda Trust &amp; Banking Ltd and Chuo Trust and Banking -- to negative from stable.
It attributed the downgrading to serious asset quality problems, and said that their respective earnings, existing capital and reserves might not provide a sufficient cushion to absorb new loan-loss provisions.
One year after its dramatic expulsion from the United States, scandal-hit Daiwa Bank is finding its misfortune may in some ways have been a blessing in disguise, analysts say.
The painful fall-out from its $1.1 billion bond-trading loss in the United States, they say, forced the bank to take some of the bitter but necessary restructuring measures that other Japanese banks have been reluctant to swallow.
"Following its expulsion from the United States and inspections by Japan"s Finance Ministry and the Bank of Japan, Daiwa was able to eliminate management risks from its corporate structure," said Yukiko Ohara, a financial analyst at UBS Securities Ltd.
"It (Daiwa) could be a model for restructuring at other banks, which still lack a sense of crisis despite the recent fall in their share prices," she said.
By the end of March, 2000, Daiwa"s restructuring efforts are likely to help boost its annual operating profits above 100 billion yen ($800 million), despite the negative impact of asset reductions overseas, Ohara said. In the year to March 1997 Daiwa forecast operating profits of 80 billion yen ($640 million).
A Daiwa official agreed that the harm done by the bond-loss scandal was not as great as initially expected.
"We feared that we might suffer substantial damage from the withdrawal from U.S. markets," Daiwa bank director Akiyoshi Otani told Reuters in a recent interview. "But the damage was not great.... Our customers stayed calm and have been supporting us."
"The strategies we have taken (since the withdrawal from the United States) have not been wrong," he added.
In November 1995, two months after news broke that a Daiwa trader in New York lost $1.1 billion on unauthorised deals, U.S. bank regulatory authorities ordered Daiwa to shut down its U.S. operations. Daiwa pleaded guilty to charges including conspiracy and fraud and paid a record $340 million in fines.
Japan"s Finance Ministry also placed temporary restrictions on Daiwa"s operations and ordered the institution, Japan"s ninth largest commercial bank, to work out a drastic streamlining programme.
Last April, Daiwa announced a two-year plan to focus on its three strengths: the Kansai area around Osaka in western Japan, where it has a strong customer base, the Asian market, and the trust business, which includes pension fund management. Daiwa manages more pension fund money than any other Japanese bank.
It also decided to shut about 36 offices, including 16 overseas, by March 1999, and by the end of last September had cut its assets to 16.30 trillion yen ($130 billion) from 19.36 trillion yen ($154 billion) a year earlier. Daiwa also plans to reduce the number of its employees by about 2,000 by March 2000, from 9,151 last September.
But some analysts insisted the bank"s restructuring had not gone far enough, noting it was still saddled with 790 billion yen ($6.32 billion) in problem loans, or 7.4 percent of loans outstanding, as of last September.
Yushiro Ikuyo, first vice president at Smith Barney International Inc"s Tokyo branch, added that the expulsion from the United States was bound to damage Daiwa"s future business.
"I doubt whether Daiwa can continue to manage its international business without U.S. operations," he said. "The business environment surrounding Japanese banks will become much tougher and Daiwa must make extra efforts to streamline its business, even halving its assets."
Several analysts have suggested that Daiwa"s woes may force it to combine with another financial institution. Last month, Moody"s Investors Service said Daiwa Bank and Nomura Securities, its largest shareholder, may join under the same holding company.
But Daiwa"s Otani dismissed such talk for now.
"We should not forget that we are still in the process of recovering our creditworthiness.... Although there is talk about mergers or a holding company, this is not an issue for us at the moment," he said. ($=125 yen)
Japan's depressed real estate market is unlikely to get much immediate help for its problems despite market euphoria over possible state purchases of land once owned by troubled financial firms, analysts said.
Tokyo's key stock index surged on Thursday, led by property-related issues, after a newspaper report saying the government was considering using public funds to buy collateralised land formerly owned by failed mortgage firms and other troubled financial firms.
The index, the Nikkei 225, ended up 2.43 percent at 19,051.71, its first close above 19,000 points for more than a month.
A Finance Ministry official told Reuters a government panel was considering using funds already set aside in the next state budget to buy land formerly owned by troubled financial firms.
Vice Finance Minister Tadashi Ogawa later confirmed the possibility, telling a news conference it was possible public-sector firms may purchase such land.
He said the plan would help ease the liquidity crisis affecting real estate.
A government panel, whose members include officials from the ministries of finance, construction and justice and the National Land Agency, was set up last October to tackle the tough issue of collecting problem loans for which land is being held as collateral.
At present, firms cannot afford to sell at market levels since they would realise their huge losses caused by the collapse of the "bubble" economy early this decade.
This has led to stagnation in the real estate market and kept the massive problem hanging over the whole financial sector.
"The panel has been discussing how to increase liquidity in the real estate market to facilitate collection of such problem loans," said an official at a bank involved in the discussions.
"But we have not talked about any details yet."
However, he said that if the government decided to buy such collateralised land, it would have a positive impact since the private sector remained reluctant to buy land.
Jesper Koll, an economist at JP Morgan Securities Asia, said public land buying was not a new initiative and no new funds were likely to be allocated for the purchases.
However, he said that more important than any public purchases was Hashimoto's promise to speed up the process of turning real estate into equity assets.
"The faster banks and real estate companies are allowed to securitise property assets, the greater their prospects for increased income generation," he said. "Prime Minister Hashimoto is getting serious about fixing Japan's real estate problem sooner, not later."
Yoshinobu Yamada, a financial analyst at Merrill Lynch Japan Inc, said that while the move by the government panel on land was not a new initiative, it would have a positive impact in the long-term.
"The government is well aware that it must take steps to stop falling land prices," he said, adding that a lack of land liquidity was at the core of Japan's bad-loan mess.
"If the government buys collateralised land formerly owned by jusen, this is likely to give psychological support to the the real estate markets and help the markets bottom out."
However, he said no concrete policy steps would be available until March so that the current euphoria on the Tokyo's stock market could be only a passing fancy.
Japan's top banks are touting a plan to lift a 50-year-old ban on holding companies as the cure for what ails their industry, but analysts say it will take more than that to solve their problems.
"We doubt that a simple change in ownership structure will result in aggressive restructuring of financial institutions," said Kathy Matsui, a strategist at Goldman Sachs (Japan).
She said restructuring was dependent on the will of managements, and it was doubtful if holding companies alone would spur the necessary changes in the troubled industry.
The banks, groaning under massive bad loan problems, fear that Japan's "Big Bang" reforms will lead to a bloodletting that could end in the collapse of financial institutions which are in poor financial health.
Many bank officials see the holding company route as the key to coping with the reforms, which are designed to liberalise the nation's financial markets by 2001.
Under a holding company, barriers between banks, brokers and insurers could be broken down and major banks could streamline their financial groups and bail out weaker affiliates.
The umbrella companies would also allow huge, inefficient corporate giants to split into several leaner operations.
But most analysts are unconvinced about the banking industry's willingness to tackle large-scale streamlining.
"The market has been becoming more critical of Japanese banks in the past one or two months as they have delayed their disclosure of problem loans," said Yushiro Ikuyo, a first vice-president at Smith Barney International.
Banks still appear to be hoping for a soft landing scenario and they lack a sense of crisis control, Ikuyo said.
Bankers, meanwhile, say they need a freer hand to establish financial holding companies.
"Concern is growing about Japanese banks' declining international competitiveness, so I would like (the government) to make sure that nothing will be done to reduce the effectiveness of holding companies," Shunsaku Hashimoto, the chairman of the Federation of Bankers' Associations of Japan, told reporters this week.
If all goes as planned, Japan will overturn the ban next year. It was imposed by U.S. Occupation forces five decades ago to break up powerful conglomerates known as "zaibatsu".
Japan's ruling Liberal Democratic Party and its policy partners are in last-ditch talks on to issue, and if they agree the government will submit a bill to parliament in March.
The Finance Ministry has also begun to work out necessary revisions in financial laws to enable the establishment of financial holding firms.
The corporate structure of a holding company will also make it easier and less costly to combine poorer-performing banks than a corporate merger, banking officials said.
In a merger, Japanese banks find it difficult to smooth relations between two distinct corporate cultures, and layoffs are also hard to justify when two banks merge, they said.
A holding company system would also allow big city banks to team up with regional banks. Regional markets offer the promise of new business for the big banks, they added.
Katsuhito Sasajima, an analyst at Nikko Research Center, said many banks saw holding companies as a tool to give them greater management flexibility. "I expect big commercial banks will benefit most from holding companies," he said.
Analysts and bankers say, however, that there are a number of obstacles involving tax, commercial and securities rules which must be addressed before holding companies can be practically implemented.
Unless Japan introduces a new corporate tax system in which tax is calculated based on the combined profits or losses of group companies, there will not be many cost benefits in setting up a holding company, they said.
Japan's ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) and its allies agreed on Tuesday to lift a ban on holding companies put in place by U.S. Occupation forces shortly after World War Two.
The repeal of the ban will help Japanese firms restructure and boost their international competitiveness, party members said.
"The three parties agreed to lift the ban, as a diversified corporate management is seen as a prerequisite when we consider international competition known as mega-competition," said Taku Yamasaki, chairman of LDP's policy-setting committee.
While the anti-monopoly law had played a major role in helping develop Japan's economy in the past 50 years, changes were needed to carry out economic and financial reform, he said.
The agreement among the three parties -- the LDP, the Social Democratic Party (SDP) and the small Sakigake party -- will enable the government to work out necessary changes to the anti-monopoly law and submit them to the current session of parliament in March.
Yamasaki said the revised law could go into effect within a year, possibly next January.
Lifting the ban is also needed to allow implementation of a plan unveiled late last year to restructure telecom giant Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp (NTT) into several companies under a holding-company umbrella.
A holding company is a firm which has control of one or more other companies, often by having a majority of shares in each subsidiary, but does not engage in a specific business.
U.S. Occupation forces introduced the ban in 1947 to break up powerful conglomerates known as "zaibatsu", which the United States believed had contributed to Japan's war effort.
In the United States and many European countries, however, a holding company is a common corporate structure.
Yamasaki said certain types of holding companies would be banned to avoid an excessive concentration of business strength and to avoid a rebirth of zaibatsu.
Under the agreement reached by the three parties, a holding company that would have assets of 300 billion yen ($2.45 billion) or more would have to notify the Fair Trade Commission, Japan's anti-monopoly watchdog, of its establishment.
The establishment of a holding company which would have total assets of 15 trillion yen ($122 billion) or more would require prior government approval.
Yamasaki said 315 firms in Japan had assets exceeding 300 billion yen ($2.45 billion) on a group basis, while even big firms such as NTT and Tokyo Electric Power Co Inc did not have assets exceeding 15 trillion yen ($122 billion).
Hideo Fujiwara, senior executive research fellow at LTCB Research Institute, said even if the ban was lifted not many firms are expected to change their corporate structure immediately.
Big companies such as Sony Corp and Canon Inc which had already split their operations were likely to set up holding companies soon, but many others were not, he said.
Many bank officials have said that holding companies could be a key to coping with "Big Bang" financial reforms, which are designed to liberalise Japan's financial markets by 2001.
Yamasaki said the government still has to work out changes in finance-related laws to enable financial institutions to establish holding companies once the amended anti-monopoly law takes effect. ($1=122 yen)
