Trading on most of China's futures markets, under pressure from Beijing to curb speculation, has now dropped so far that hedging has become virtually impossible, traders and analysts said on Tuesday.
A trader with a futures firm in Shanghai said only the metals contracts market, the Shanghai Metal Exchange, still had enough liquidity and flexibility to allow companies to hedge risk.
Beijing has recently issued two key documents encouraging the securities markets but warning the futures markets of more clean-ups and restructuring to come.
Rumours have swirled around the futures markets in recent days that Beijing plans to merge or close many of the 15 futures exchanges in the country, possibly concentrating all futures trading into five exchanges.
"From what I hear about the feedback from the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC), there is no such plan," said Xie Boxing, deputy manager of the Information Department of the Shanghai Cereals and Oils Exchange (SCOE).
"There is no change to the basic policy of developing these markets," he added.
But Xie said liquidity on the exchange, particularly in rice, had fallen off as a result of the Beijing statements on the futures markets, making it difficult for companies to use the exchange for hedging.
"The scale of trading at this point is a bit small for hedging," he said.
The irony of the crackdown on the futures markets is that it has removed the basis for hedging and left only speculators in the market, one analyst said.
A second Chinese futures company trader said the trading volume of most commodity futures contracts on Chinese exchanges was now so small that there was no opportunity for hedging operations to take place.
"The only people trading the contracts for most of these commodities are speculators," the trader said.
A spokesman for the CSRC in Beijing on Monday told Reuters that the authorities still wanted the futures markets to develop despite the recent documents on the futures markets stressing current problems.
"This does not mean that futures market should cease to develop, development is a constant theme for China's futures market," he said.
But the spokesman declined to comment on the rumours of impending closures and mergers of futures exchanges.
"I cannot say anything on measures to deal with the markets in the future, I don't know whether some futures exchanges would be closed," he added.
One trader said that while the authorities would probably not formally close any of the exchanges, they could take other measures to in effect slowly strangle them such as raising the margin requirements on various contracts.
SCOE's Xie said the authorities still viewed the futures exchanges, set up in the early 1990s, as an experiment, but he felt that in the end they would prove their value.
"There should be a bright future for futures, particularly for contracts for agricultural products. That's how the futures business began in other parts of the world, and China is a big agricultural producer," he said.
But for now, trading volumes are down significantly on the SCOE compared to last year.
Up to Monday, 6.40 million lots on all contracts changed hands on the exchange this year compared to a full-year total of 13.5 million lots last year, he said. One lot is five tonnes of commodities.
China issued another strong signal Sunday that its stock and bond markets have been given the green light for fast growth to provide the economy with more efficient means of investment.
A report in the official Shanghai Securities News was the latest in a series of indications that Beijing's previous suspicion of the securities markets has been replaced by a determination to expand and strengthen them.
Shanghai Securities News quoted a report that said the stock and bond markets must be developed vigorously to provide a stronger foundation for national economic development.
The newspaper quoted a report from the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, a think-tank, as saying the efficiency of investment channels was a key question affecting the long-term development of China's economy.
"The sluggish development of the direct investment markets is one of the factors affecting the long-term development of the national economy, so it is necessary to speed up the development of stocks, bonds and other direct investment markets," it said.
More direct investment would help to reduce the tangle of problems surrounding heavily indebted state enterprises and the state banks, which are currently forced to support the enterprises with a constant supply of loans, the report said.
"Banks are being squeezed from both sides, given the high risk (of loans to state enterprises) and the ever-growing deposits they are taking in," the paper said.
It said that it would be better for all parties if depositors put less cash into bank deposits and invested it directly in companies through the securities markets.
"Most of the money in the hands of ordinary people is currently put into bank accounts, which increases total bank deposits even as enterprises are short of money, resulting in capital being left idle and wasted," the report said.
The current small scale of the direct investment markets was a key reason for this imbalance, it said.
"So how to standardise, develop and strengthen the direct investment markets to allow for more reasonable usage of deposits is an important part of raising the efficiency of banks and making more efficient use of capital," it added.
The report gave no details on shifting the focus of enterprise investment from banks loans to securities, but Beijing has implemented a number of measures recently aimed at expanding the securities markets.
A record number of companies have been given approval this year to list shares on the country's two stock markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen.
The Shenzhen market was strongly affected last week by rumours, denied in Beijing, that securities authorities were about to release the quotas for company listings for next year.
But authorities last week did announce a major relaxation of policy on mutual funds, which are seen as an important conduit for funnelling funds from ordinary people into the securities markets.
Regulations allowing existing mutual funds to list on the stock exchanges are due to be released before the end of the year, official media reports said.
In another development, a senior Chinese official was quoted as saying Sunday that China is preparing to tap overseas capital markets by listing shares of one or two of its chemical companies abroad.
Chemical Industry Minister Gu Xiulian told Business Weekly that one or two chemical companies were getting ready for share offerings abroad, though she did not name the companies or the exchanges.
China issued another strong signal on Sunday that its stock and bond markets have been given the green light for fast growth to provide the economy with more efficient means of investment.
The official Shanghai Securities News said the stock and bond markets must be developed vigorously to provide a stronger foundation for national economic development.
The newspaper quoted a report from the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, a think-tank, as saying the efficiency of investment channels was a key question affecting the long-term development of China's economy.
"The sluggish development of the direct investment markets is one of the factors affecting the long-term development of the national economy, so it is necessary to speed up the development of stocks, bonds and other direct investment markets," it said.
The report was the latest in a series of indications that Beijing's previous suspicion of the securities markets has been replaced by a determination to expand and strengthen them.
It said more direct investment would help to reduce the tangle of problems surrounding heavily indebted state enterprises and the state banks that are currently forced to support the enterprises with a constant supply of loans.
"Banks are being squeezed from both sides, given the high risk (of loans to state enterprises) and the ever-growing deposits they are taking in," the paper said.
It said that it would be better for all parties if depositors put less cash into bank deposits and invested it directly in companies through the securities markets.
"Most of the money in the hands of ordinary people is currently put into bank accounts, which increases total bank deposits even as enterprises are short of money, resulting in capital being left idle and wasted," the report said.
The current small scale of the direct investment markets was a key reason for this imbalance, it said.
"So how to standardise, develop and strengthen the direct investment markets to allow for more reasonable usage of deposits is an important part of raising the efficiency of banks and making more efficient use of capital," it added.
The report gave no details on shifting the focus of enterprise investment from banks loans to securities, but Beijing has implemented a number of measures recently aimed at expanding the securities markets.
A record number of companies have this year been given approval to list shares on the country's two stock markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen.
The Shenzhen market was strongly affected last week by rumours, denied in Beijing, that securities authorities were about to release the quotas for company listings for next year.
But authorities last week did announce a major relaxation of policy on mutual funds, which are seen as an important conduit for funnelling funds from ordinary people into the securities markets.
Regulations allowing existing mutual funds to list on the stock exchanges are due to be released before the end of the year, official media reports said.
China's effort to push domestic investors out of foreign currency B shares on its stock markets has so far failed, but volumes on the B markets have fallen significantly, analysts said on Monday.
The official media on September 21 announced that local investors were banned from buying any more of the B shares listed on the Shenzhen and Shanghai stock exchanges and supposedly reserved for foreign investors.
Domestic investors, who in recent months have accounted for more than 50 percent of B share trading on both of China's stock exchanges, were told to sell their B share holdings as soon as possible.
But traders and analysts said local investors were still in the market and continued to be an important support for B share prices, which are dragging along at low levels.
"The ban on local people buying B shares has not been implemented very seriously, people can still buy them," said one trader. "But volumes have come down because of a fear that the authorities might make further measures to clean things up."
"Trading by domestic investors in B shares is still continuing," said a broker with China Guotai Securities. "Brokers find it difficult to check all identification cards when old faces turn up."
B share trading volumes on both the Shanghai and Shenzhen exchanges have dropped significantly since the ban was announced, and many analysts believe the market could collapse altogether if the authorities seriously press home the ban.
Foreign investors took advantage of a surge in domestic B share buying in the middle of this year to dump their shares and get out of the market, particularly in Shenzhen.
Beijing authorities are unhappy about this largely due to a fear of a serious outflow of foreign exchange if foreign investors are allowed to sell their B shares to local people, analysts say.
A Shenzhen stock analyst said he felt the ban on domestic investors buying and holding B shares would not be pushed through with any greater vigour and would anyway be relaxed after the return of Hong Kong to China in mid-1997.
"I would forecast that by the second half of next year, the B share market in Shenzhen will be gradually opened up to domestic investors," the analyst with Guotai Securities said.
"By that time, Hong Kong will be back as part of China, and the Hong Kong dollar will be a Chinese currency," he added.
B shares listed in the southern city of Shenzhen adjacent to Hong Kong are denominated in Hong Kong dollars.
A trader with Nanfang Securities said he expected further big changes to policy on the B shares markets over the next year leading to a second, and this time officially-approved, relaxation of restrictions on domestic investment in B shares.
"The B share market will undergo significant changes by the second half of next year. By then, it will be easier and easier for Guangdong people to get hold of Hong Kong dollars," the analyst said.
"By the end of next year, Shenzhen B shares should at least be open to investors in Guangdong," he added.
The Shanghai B share index closed on Monday at 48.588, up a fractional 0.302, in sluggish trading, while the Shenzhen B share index closed at 89.79, down 0.10, also in slow trade.
To hear the Shanghai Film Studio tell the story, it is a classic drama of a poor, brave underdog challenging a greedy, monopolising giant.
But the studio, one of the oldest and biggest film-making operations in China, says it is gaining ground in its cinema chain war against the main movie distributor in Shanghai, the Yongle chain.
The studio boss, Zhu Yongde, said he created his own chain of cinemas last year after Yongle refused a re-division of box offices receipts.
"I didn't want to do it but we had no choice, the Shanghai movie market is becoming more and more important," he said in an interview.
The Shanghai Film Studio has made only paper-thin profits in recent years largely due, Zhu says, to the unreasonably high demands of Yongle and other film distributors around China.
With cinema attendance well below half what it was in the days before China's 1980s television revolution, revenue has plummeted and costs have exploded.
What's a film studio boss to do but try to shave the distributor's box office share?
Zhu says he originally went to Yongle to ask for a re-division of profits, which used to be 30 percent for Yongle, 20 percent for the film studio and 50 percent for the cinema operators.
His final offer was a straight split: 25 percent for Yongle, and 25 percent for the film studio. Yongle refused, he said.
"I said to them: we spend the money to make the movies, we take all the investment risk, while you do nothing. You make profits on the basis of almost no costs. But they wouldn't do it," he said.
So Zhu went off and set up his own cinema chain instead.
Yongle's story is slightly different.
A spokeswoman said the Dongfang cinema chain was set up as part of a national process of diversifying ownership of cinemas and distribution. She said Yongle currently received only 15 percent of box office receipts.
Shanghai now has a total of 100 movie screens, ranging from some of the world's classiest picture houses dating from the golden age of cinema, to down-at-heel workers' clubs which put on movies each night in their main hall.
Yongle controls all of the top cinemas, including the magnificent Daguangming movie house on Nanjing Road, a major shopping and entertainment thoroughfare for more than a century.
Zhu's rival chain, called Dongfang (Orient), controls 22 screens which tend to be more basic and local, cinemagoers say.
"It took a lot of effort, a lot of negotiating with each cinema operator, the whole process took more than a year," said Zhu.
He said he only managed to prise many of the cinema operators away from Yongle by guaranteeing them a minimum level of income.
"Box office receipts for all of them are up since we took over their distribution, some up 70 percent, some up as much as 200 percent," he said. "The 22 cinemas used to account for eight percent of Shanghai's box office receipts, but it's gone up to 24 percent."
Yongle has been fighting back over the past year with the release of a series of blockbuster Hollywood epics, including most recently "Twister" and "True Lies", which have proved very popular.
Zhu declined to say how many movies the studio would produce this year, and a member of his staff later only said it would be less than 15, far below production levels of a decade ago.
But Zhu did say he was looking to diversify the studio's finances away from movies into a wide range of other activities including hotels, real estate, television production, advertising and a steel tube factory.
He said his aim was to make films responsible for less than 20 percent of the film studio's total profits by the year 2000.
"We can't make money out of films the way things are," he said.
China's securities authorities Tuesday ordered the takeover of a futures exchange in what analysts said was the beginning of a clean-up campaign that may leave China with only four or five large futures exchanges.
The China Securities Regulatory Commission said the Changchun United Commodity Exchange would merge with the Beijing Commodity Exchange, according to the Beijing-based Financial Times.
The Changchun exchange, which was forced to suspend trading for six months from last October after the securities authorities accused it of irregularities, would become a trading floor of the Beijing exchange, the official newspaper said.
Analysts said the merger was the first of an expected series aimed at closing many of the smaller commodities exchanges around China that have been the focus of intense market speculation.
"This shows the determination of the authorities to restrict and clean up the futures industry and is a sign of more mergers to come," said an analyst with a metals trading company active in the futures markets.
China recently launched a sweeping crackdown on its futures markets and authorities last month issued two documents stressing the need to further clean up the industry.
Rumours have circulated for weeks on the futures markets that authorities would close most of the nation's 15 exisitng commodity exchanges, mainly through mergers that would allow only four or five of the largest and best-run to survive.
The Financial Times said Changchun was selected as the first to be merged among the 15 because of rampant trading irregularities on the exchange.
Analysts said there were currently too many exchanges trading similar futures contracts, particularly cereals and metals.
But they said the takeover process would be far from easy due to opposition from local governments and a range of technical difficuties. The exchanges provided significant tax income for local governments, said one analyst, who noted that differences in the contracts and rules of trading also presented many problems for combining various exchanges.
China's top cashmere producer, Inner Mongolia Erdos Cashmere Products Co Ltd, reported good interim results on Monday and brokers expect a solid second half as raw material prices fall.
The company, a favoured stock among Shanghai's B share market bucked the trend of disappointing mid-term results with a 25 percent increase in profits over the same period last year to 67 million yuan ($8.07 million), despite lower revenue.
A spokesman for Erdos said he expected net profits for the year to rise to around 180 million yuan from 170 million yuan in 1995. Turnover in the first half fell to 252.7 million yuan from 349.4 million yuan.
"The jump in net profit was due to lower costs, primarily a drop in the price of raw materials in the first half of 1996," company director Guo Enzhe said in an interview.
He gave no further details but a foreign stock analyst based in Shanghai said the price of raw cashmere had fallen 15 percent from its 1995 highs.
The analyst said Erdos had indicated it had exhausted its stockpiles of 1995 raw cashmere and was replacing them with new stocks that were 15 percent cheaper.
"Generally we're fairly positive about the company," said Jardine Fleming's Shanghai representative John Crossman. "We will probably upgrade them from a hold to a buy.
"We're expecting a better second half because they're using cheaper raw materials and looking for really good stuff to happen in the first half of 1997," he added.
Analysts said a large portion of Erdos' sales to the United States and Europe were booked in the July-to-September period which should boost the company's position.
The positive effect of lower raw materials prices is expected to help the firm well into 1997.
Analysts said another factor helping to lift Erdos profits despite falling revenues was a move by the company into garment manufacturing, which has higher profit margins.
The company bought four textile manufacturing firms in the first half of the year, each of which has a 25 percent Japanese equity stake.
A company statement in the Shanghai Securities News on Monday said Erdos planned to establish five more joint ventures with domestic companies in the second half of 1996 for garment production.
Erdos shares closed on Monday at $0.506, up 0.006 on the Shanghai exchange. The shares were first listed last October at their issue price of $0.469.
($1=8.3 yuan)
"Why can't I access the Playboy Website?"
That, say computer experts, is one of the most common complaints from the growing number of Internet users in China.
China, which controls information more carefully than most countries in the world, is cautiously opening up access to the Internet, in spite of the problems raised by such an anarchically free information dissemination medium.
Officials said security filters were placed on the main Internet access servers in Beijing and Shanghai in the middle of this year and, after a testing period, restrictions on ordinary people opening Internet accounts have been removed.
The filters stop access to politically sensitive sites on the Internet's World Wide Web supporting such causes as independence for Tibet or release of Chinese political prisoners.
They also attempt, often unsuccessfully, to stop access to the thousands of sexually-explicit sites such as Playboy magazine's Web page.
"Our customers using the Internet have complained they can't get through to the some sites, particulary sites like Playboy," said a computer industry expert working in Shanghai. "You'd be surprised at how many customers we have calling about that."
Meanwhile, usage of the Internet in China is growing so fast that phonelines on the main services are often engaged all day and far into the night.
"Growth is out-running infrastructure investment, so the system is being inundated," the computer expert said.
"Popularity is no problem, it's super-popular, but the government is not re-investing the money at a fast enough rate. So there's still a lot of technical problems. People are having trouble with access and speed once they get on," he added.
A senior official with Shanghai's Post and Telecommunications Bureau said there were no longer any restrictions on Chinese people signing up for Internet access.
"Some time ago, our security arrangements were incomplete and there was a problem with pornographic and politically unacceptable material," said the official, Zhang Weihua.
"But our arrangements have been improved and new accounts are being added without restriction," he added.
Zhang said there were a total of 3,200 registered Internet accounts on the Shanghai server at the end of August with the number increasing at several hundred a month.
But there are indications that several other organisations are selling Internet access and the real number of users is probably much higher, analysts said.
Chinese users going through the two main servers can access the World Wide Web and use e-mail, but the Internet's freewheeling discussion news groups are restricted.
And while users are able to establish their own Web sites, they are not supposed to load the material onto the Web themselves, said an attendant at one of Shanghai's two new Internet Cafes.
"You must give us the files to allow for inspection and we will upload them for you," the attendant said.
Analysts said the main priority of the authorities at present seemed to be to control the number of lines through which the worldwide Internet material enters China to just two -- one in Beijing and one in Shanghai.
"There's is upposedly another line going through from (the southern city of) Guangzhou to Hong Kong, but for political reasons, Beijing wants to keep very tight control," said the computer expert.
"I think Beijing and Shanghai will continue to be the main filtering points because otherwise they can't filter it. If they have a lot of international links then you can forget about any kind of filtering," he added.
The question, he said, is whether the Chinese authorities can stay ahead of the ever-changing technology of the Internet and ahead of the ability of local computer whiz-kids to find ways round any barriers that are set up.
"Given the number of hackers in China, I would say there's no way in hell (they can stay ahead)," the expert said. "This is a country full of hackers. These guys have found so many holes in the (Chinese) servers it's ridiculous."
"The servers don't have the latest security equipment installed and these guys are brilliant. They can see all of our e-mails. I know there are people who have all our account names and passwords," he added.
China's state debt has become the top investment choice among local investors in 1996, thanks to a slew of market reform measures, but further reforms are needed to ensure a continued boom, analysts said on Tuesday.
Beijing ended a record issue of 195.2 billion yuan ($23.52 billion) worth of treasury bills and bonds for 1996 last Friday when it allocated the last batch of the seven-year bond to underwriters.
Analysts said the instruments had become best sellers this year mainly due to reforms of the process for issuing treasury bills and bonds.
"The most important has been the widespread adoption of a public tender system," said one T-bill trader. "This has made the coupons on state debt more reflective of market changes and needs."
Beijing had, in the past, allowed the Finance Ministry to decide the coupon rates and use adminstrative edict to allocate state debt to banks and other financial institutions for them to sell. But this year, the ministry organised public tenders for each new bond issue.
Under the new system, about 75 percent of each new batch was distributed to bidders according to the interest rates and amounts lodged by the bidders in public tenders. The rest was distributed according to adminstrative decision.
The coupons were largely based on the weighted averages of the valid bids at the public tenders, but industry sources said the ministry also "fine-tuned" them to some extent to come up with the final rates.
"The ministry usually raised the coupons to some extent to make it easier to sell the state debt," said one source. "This resulted in many underwriters retaining the bonds themselves to gain easy profits when the bonds were listed."
"Individual investors were in many cases disappointed when they were unable to buy the bonds even after standing in line for many hours," said a second T-bill trader. "This hurt their enthusiasm, with institutions making most of the profits."
Analysts said there is room for further improvement in the government's method of issuing debt.
They said they want to see a reduction in the proportion of the bond issues held back from the public tenders.
Another improvement would be if the ministry used market means to encourage the underwriters to sell a greater proportion of the bonds they obtained, and not hold them on their own account, the analysts said.
However, the market's maturity spectrum expanded as its popularity grew. A greater variety of bills and bonds have been issued this year -- three-month, seven-year and 10-year issues have been added to the traditional six-month, one-year, three-year and five-year bonds.
Also, discount bonds, sold at below face value with the pay-back at face value on maturity, were introduced for the first time.
Yet another innovation was the payment of interest on an annual basis instead of on maturity, for the first-ever seven-year bond and the 10-year bond.
"This method of payment allows investors to re-invest their interest and has been widely welcomed," said Lu Weiming, a T-bill trader with China Guotai Securities. "Its success is likely to lead the central government to use it more and more in future bond issues."
Chinese analysts believe Beijing will issue a new record amount of T-bills and T-bonds next year, probably around 250 billion yuan.
But they said this amount as a proportion of China's gross domestic product is still below that of advanced western countries.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
China's cautious and much-delayed experiment with convertible bonds as a way of raising corporate funds is expected to move forward next year with up to 6-10 foreign currency issues, brokers and analysts said on Wednesday.
Chinese securities authorities have said on a number of occasions they want to conduct test issues of convertible bonds, which give holders an option to convert the debt into stock.
Only a small handful of cases have been tried so far with very mixed results. But analysts said they believed authorities were increasingly taking a favourable attitude towards the concept of convertible bonds.
This is reflected in the many listed Chinese firms which have said in recent months they are considering or planning to launch bonds convertible into their foreign currency B shares, listed on China stock markets, or H shares listed in Hong Kong.
"The prospects for convertible bonds next year look good," said a senior analyst with a foreign brokerage in Shanghai. "I would say there could be up to 10 issues in 1997. The process has been slower than expected, but China has a need for more funds."
"There's a lot of momentum on convertible bonds at present," said John Crossman, general manager of Jardine Fleming in Shanghai. "We've been pushing the concept with companies and officials and it's now taken on a momentum of its own."
The China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) is believed to have received a pile of applications for such issues but is cautious about proceeding partly because of a number of unsuccessful past attempts at issuing convertible bonds.
"China Textile Machinery's issue of convertible bonds, for instance, was a disaster," said the senior analyst. "Nobody has converted the bonds to shares, so they have to pay back the money by the end of this year."
But a stock analyst in Shenzhen said the market was ready to accept convertible bonds as a concept.
"The overall financial environment has matured to the point where it's possible to look at convertible bonds. But the companies which issue them need to be relatively good to ensure they have the ability to repay," the analyst said.
He said the prospect of convertible bonds as a means of raising capital is extremely attractive to China's listed companies because, unlike direct equity, it does not immediately dilute earnings.
The latest Chinese company to announce a convertible bond is Zhenhai Refining &amp; Chemical Co Ltd which said last month it would issue US$200 million of bonds convertible into the firm's H shares.
Other companies that have indicated an interest include truck maker Qingling Motors Co and Shenzhen-listed Jiangling Motors
But the experience of China Textile Machinery indicates that there is risk involved in issuing convertible bonds for companies as well as for investors.
"The advantage over a straight bond is that the company is placing a bet that it will be able to pay back with shares rather than cash. But there's a risk involved," said one foreign analyst.
"The authorities want to choose large, stable companies that are going to have the cash income to repay the bonds if the conversion proves difficult because of problems with the share price," he added.
Too many futures exchanges in China are presently trading metals contracts, which should realistically be limited to just one or two given the current low trading volumes, officials and analysts said on Thursday.
Five of China's 14 futures exchanges have metals contracts but only two of them, the Shanghai and Shenzhen exchanges, see substantial trading, mostly in copper, a local broker said.
The other three exchanges which have at least some trading in metals futures contracts are the Chongqing exchange in southwestern Sichuan province, the Shenyang exchange in the northeast and Tianjin.
"Five exchanges doing metals are too many, I think one or two would be enough," Gu Jianxing, manager of information department of the Shanghai Metal Exchange, said in an interview.
"There have been rumours about mergers, but we have heard nothing official," he added.
China's securities authorities, while encouraging the stock and bond markets, have been cracking down mercilessly on the futures markets in recent months due to massive over-speculation on some contracts.
The futures exchange in the northeast city of Changchun last month became the latest casualty, being forced to merge with the Beijing futures exchange.
The Shanghai Metal Exchange's Gu said the pressure from Beijing to stamp out speculative activity had had a dramatic impact on trading volumes on the exchange.
"The restrictions have had a negative impact on market sentiment with turnover dropping," Gu said. "State-owned firms have been banned from speculating and financial institutions have been pushed out of the futures markets."
Gu said he expected trading volume on the Shanghai exchange this year to be only about 300 billion yuan ($36.14 billion), compared with 455.8 billion yuan in 1995 and a record 682 billion yuan in 1994.
"In a way, the metals trading has already been focused on one or two exchanges given the low trading volumes seen in the other three exchanges," said an analyst with a Shanghai futures trading company.
Gu said there were rumours the securities authorities planned to raise margin requirements for all futures trading from the current five percent to 15 or 20 percent, depending on the contract, to crack down further on speculation.
"If it happened, it wouldn't have a big impact on the Shanghai metals contracts, which are relatively mature and less speculative," Gu said.
But he said there was no need for the authorities to take a tough line on the Shanghai Metal Exchange.
"The speculative element in copper trading in Shanghai is relatively small and the futures trading here provides a valuable opportunity for hedging," he said.
He said that, currently, hedging accounted for about 20 percent of the trading in copper futures on the exchange, which he said was about the right level.
"The current margin requirement of metal contracts should be kept or at most increase it slightly," Gu added.
($1=8.3 yuan)
Shanghai's foreign currency B share market has been consistently hitting historic lows over the past two weeks, and there's little prospect of a recovery at least until the middle of next year, analysts said on Monday.
They said there was no sign of a bottom to the market, with the foreign investors for whom the market was created having largely sold up and left, leaving it to local investors.
The confidence of the foreign investors has been killed by an unending string of disappointing company results and by the failure of the authorities to add new, sizeable and well-run companies to the market as promised, the analysts said.
"Confidence is totally destroyed and even long-term investors have begun to liquidate their positions," said a Shanghai-based investment analyst with a Western brokerage. "A recovery of confidence will not happen overnight."
The B share index closed down 0.809 points or 1.77 percent to hit another record low close of 44.867 points on Monday. It has hit all-time lows on five separate days over the past two weeks.
"There is no hope for the market to recover at least until the middle of next year," said a B share broker. "The most important factor is that company performance for 1996 full-year is unlikely to improve."
The dismal state of the B share is in sharp contrast to the local A share market which continues to attract huge amounts of cash, setting two-year year highs on a regular basis.
It is also at variance with the general level of interest among foreign investors in participating in the Chinese economic boom that continues unabated, with national growth this year expected to hit at least nine percent.
"If they listed a good company on the B share market even at this point, people would be willing to buy it," said a stock analyst with a foreign brokerage in Shanghai.
Many B share firms were formerly state-run enterprises and the leadership, methods and attitudes of many are little changed from the days when they were accountable to no one by the state planners in Beijing.
"Unstable performance and declining profits of some key firms listed on the B shares market have made foreigners more and more doubtful about the future of the B share market as a whole," said a second B share broker. "There is no immediate support or bottom line that we can see."
"Few people are willing to buy because there is a fear that the market will just keep falling," said a Chinese analyst with a major local brokerage.
"But the falls have become meaningless with the volumes so thin," he added. "The market has no momentum to rise due to lack of positive news."
The threat of a Sino-U.S. textiles trade war is having little impact on Chinese firms as it is unlikely to go beyond words and because the companies are performing poorly, company officials and brokers said on Wednesday.
Company officials said they had got used to the continual verbal duelling between Beijing and Washington with concrete measures being avoided at the last minute.
"With the interests of both sides at stake, the verbal warnings will finally be replaced by mutual concessions," said Li Shounan, head of the general manager's office in Shanghai Lianhua Fibre Co Ltd.
"The overall amount under threat is not large and when it comes to an individual company, the impact is even less. We do not expect much effect," said an official with Shanghai Sanmao Textile Co Ltd.
But a spokeswoman for Shanghai Jiafeng Co Ltd said its products were involved in the dispute.
"There will surely be some impact if a trade war breaks out though it is hard to immediately to assess to what extent," she said.
China's annual apparel and textile exports to the United States are estimated at around $4.2 billion. About 30 garment and textile companies are listed in Shanghai and Shenzhen.
In the most recent clash in Sino-American trade relations, Beijing said on Sunday it would temporarily ban imports of selected U.S. textiles, farm goods, fruits and alcoholic drinks from December 10 in retaliation for U.S. sanctions taken against Chinese textiles.
Washington announced in September that it would cut China's textile import quota for 1995 by $19 million in retaliation after accusing China of shipping through third countries to avoid quotas agreed upon in a bilateral textile accord.
"Textile companies have performed very poorly in the past two years due to a slump of the industry and we do not expect any major impact even with a trade war," said one broker with China Shandong Securities Co.
"But a handful of firms closely linked to Chinese-U.S. trade will possibly be affected," he added.
"Who cares?" said a Shanghai-based investment analyst with a Hong Kong securities brokerage. "They (the listed textile firms) have done so poorly that few investors are interested in them."
Some Chinese officials have said they believe there is a political agenda behind the U.S. trade threats against China.
"The U.S. penalties were announced before the U.S. elections and we believe they were closely linked to (U.S. President Bill) Clinton's political needs," said one official.
Shanghai's real estate market is showing signs of recovery thanks to growing numbers of individual home-buyers and policy support from the city government, analysts and officials said on Thursday.
Increasing numbers of people are buying their own homes in the city as a result of lower interest rates, a state-run house-buying fund and the inability of many state firms to provide homes for their employees, they said.
People from other parts of China are also showing a growing interest in buying apartments in Shanghai, partly due to new rules that allow home purchasers from elsewhere to obtain residency permits in the city.
In the first nine months of 1996, private citizens bought 1.21 million square metres of commercial housing in Shanghai, or 55 percent of the city's housing space sold in the period, the city's Business News said on Wednesday.
"Two years ago, all our buyers were enterprises," said a salesman from a Shanghai real estate company. "But this year nearly half the houses we sold were bought by individuals."
A key element in this growth is a public housing loan fund set up by the city government in 1992, into which most employers and employees each pay five percent of an employee's salary.
"More people have bought and plan to buy houses with the help of these funds due to lower interest rates on loans after two cuts in bank interest rates this year," said an official of the Construction Bank of China, which administers the fund.
"In the first half of this year, we lent about 500 million yuan ($60.24 million) from the fund and expect to lend 1.2 billion for the whole year," he said.
"Between 1992 and 1994, individuals borrowed a total of only 220 million yuan from the fund and in 1995 the figure reached 440 million yuan," he added.
To encourage more individuals to buy, the city government in September cut the tax on house purchases by half and in August raised the rents on state-owned apartments by 50 percent, a Shanghai Bureau of Real Estate Administration official said.
"These measures, including allowing non-Shanghai people the right to obtain a residence permit by buying property, show the determination of the local government to help real estate become a key industry in the city," she said.
In August, Shanghai started giving residency permits to out-of-city people if they bought an apartment worth more than 400,000 yuan in the Pudong New Area, and have since extended the offer to all districts of Shanghai.
Pudong is on the east side of the Huangpu River that runs through the city. Puxi, the main area of the city, is on the west side.
Pudong has so far sold 327 apartments worth 86.2 million yuan to people from outside of the city, an official of the Pudong Real Estate Exchange said.
"Sales of property in Puxi, despite higher prices, are hotter than in Pudong which is still seen as less convenient in terms of traffic," said an official of the Shanghai Real Estate Trading Centre said.
"Buyers from outside the city, mainly successful business people and enterprises, regard Shanghai as the best place in China to do business," he said.
Shanghai's economy continues to power ahead of the rest of China, with 12.8 percent growth in the first 10 months of 1996, official figures show.
China's GDP growth this year has been officially forecast at around 9.6-9.7 percent, compared to 10.5 percent last year.
Shanghai real estate prices have changed little in the first nine months of 1996 despite the increased sales due to a parallel growth in supply.
The average price of an apartment in Shanghai is now 4,020 yuan ($484.30) per square metre and office space 6,880 yuan ($828.90) per square metre, the Business News newspaper said.
"No one doubts that prices of property in the city will rise in the coming years," an analyst said.
($1=8.3 yuan)
China is firming up a shortlist of foreign banks that will be allowed to do local renminbi currency business, foreign bankers said on Monday.
Hongkong Bank, Citibank and Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi are expected to be among the winners, they said.
Foreign banks with branches in China, currently restricted to doing business in foreign exchange, have been promised that a handful will be given the right to take deposits and make loans in the Chinese currency before the end of the year.
"The Hongkong Bank, Citibank and Bank of Tokyo are in, the Chinese have made that clear," said one banker. "There may also be a European bank and a Hong Kong-based bank added as well, but they may not. They are being very cautious."
"The decision will be made as always on a geopolitical basis -- one from America, one from Japan, one from Europe," said a Hong Kong-based European banker.
Officials from Hongkong Bank and Citibank declined to comment on their chances and Bank of Tokyo executives were not available.
But other bankers said there were still conflicting reports as to when the announcement would be made.
"It has to happen soon," said a Shanghai-based banker. "We've waited far too long. We're all tired and bored with the waiting."
Once the announcement has been made, foreign bankers said they expected it to offer only very limited renminbi business rights, restricted to taking in money from, and lending money to, foreign-funded enterprises in China.
"The funding problem is the key one," said a foreign banker. "Foreign-funded firms wouldn't generally want to put their renminbi on deposit with a bank, it's their working capital. If they did, it would be an act of charity (towards the banks)."
The foreign banks will definitely not be allowed in the foreseeable future to take in deposits from Chinese firms or individuals, bankers said.
The answer may be that the People's Bank of China, the central bank, will lend renminbi funds to the foreign banks to lend on to customers, thereby giving the central bank power to control the extent of the business, they said.
Once the first batch of banks have begun to do limited renminbi business, it could be as much as a year before any other foreign banks are allowed to join them, bankers said.
"They are being very careful; this will be an experiment that they will watch very closely before taking another step forward," said one banker.
China unveiled on Tuesday the country's first major shipping exchange which it hopes will consolidate and standardise ship chartering and cargo fixing in East China and be a focus for the shipping trade nationwide.
Officials told a news conference that all shipping and freight companies in the east China region had been told to move their business as soon as possible to the new Shanghai Shipping Exchange.
Like the Baltic Exchange in London, the Shanghai Shipping Exchange will allow ship owners and charterers to arrange deals and fix prices for carrying cargoes.
The exchange, which has the direct support from the Beijing authorities, has been under preparation for two years and has as its founding members 116 companies, mostly shipping firms in Shanghai and the adjacent provinces of Zhejiang and Jiangsu.
"The foundation of the exchange shows the government's determination to make Shanghai into an international shipping centre," said Zhang Jinxiang, an official with China's biggest shipping firm, COSCO.
"Other world shipping centres such as London and New York also have such exchanges," Zhang added. "With China's fast-growing economy and Shanghai's good location, the exchange should help attract more shipping companies here."
Zhu Yongguang, a senior Ministry of Communications official told the news conference that the Shanghai exchange was one of a number of shipping and freight exchanges planned for China.
"There will be Tianjin in the north, Shanghai in the east, Guangzhou in the south and Wuhan inland. But the focus of the business nationwide will be the Shanghai exchange," he said.
Zhu declined to speculate on how much business the exchange would attract, but said:
"This will be a gradual thing. The shipping companies (in East China) will be expected to move their business to the exchange, but it won't happen overnight."
Members of the exchange include ship-owners, mostly state-run companies in Shanghai and surrounding areas, and freight forwarders.
The exchange will handle international cargo-fixing, but most of the business in the initial stages is expected to be domestic.
The establishment of the exchange was welcomed by an official for Shanghai Haixing Shipping Co, China's second-largest shipping company and its largest in domestic trade.
"The exchange may help cut illegal competition in the shipping market," the official said. "At present, there are some small shipping firms which make use of improper relationships or offer high commissions to get business."
Exchange officials said the exchange was under the supervision of the Ministry of Communications and the Shanghai city government and would be treated for the foreseeable future as "experimental", in line with other new markets in China.
China's foreign currency B shares in both Shanghai and Shenzhen surged on Wednesday as investors piled in money on the back of rumours the government was planning measures to support the markets, brokers said.
Shanghai's B share index soared 5.49 percent to 49.689 points, while the Shenzhen index was up 8.25 percent to 111.35 in heavy trade.
"There have been widespread talk that regulators are meeting somewhere discussing ways to turn around the long bearishness of the Hong Kong dollar-denominated stock market," a broker at China Southern Securities in Shenzhen said.
"Such rumours triggered a steady inflow of fresh money," he added.
In Shanghai, brokers said the sharp rise was a reflection of the activity in the Shenzhen market with overseas investors buying selected stocks with relatively good prospects.
"B shares prices had become too cheap to drop any further, with the domestic economic situation improving," one broker said. "And recent rises in Shenzhen B shares also provided a chance for Shanghai B shares to follow."
In Shenzhen, brokers and analysts said the recent surges were linked to a report in the Shenzhen-based Securities Times last Thursday that the China Securities Regulatory Commission has been concerned about the market's prolonged bearishness.
The newspaper quoted the CSRC's chairman Zhou Daojiong as saying at an international business forum in Beijing that the poor performance of the country's B markets had negatively affected China's reform and open policy.
The buying is being led by Chinese domestic institutional investors, with increasing amounts of money from overseas investors, said brokers.
"There is also money coming from Chinese individual investors, but the amount is imposssible to calculate because it's illegal," said one analyst.
China's B shares are supposed to be for foreign investors only, but most of the trading is now done by domestic investors through a variety of means.
Stock analysts were at a loss to come up with suggestions as to what market-boosting measures may be implemented, assuming the rumours of an impending announcement from Beijing are correct.
"Beyond quietly allowing local Chinese investors to come back into the market, I can't think what they could do," said one analyst. "The problem has always been that the companies listed on the B share market are not performing well enough."
Another analyst said that the B share market will face a correction over the short term, given the fast pace of its ascent and that its medium-term trend should be decided by whether regulators announced stimulative policies.
"The rumours are responsible for the current rises but market fundamentals have changed little," said a Shanghai broker. "The upward trend can only be established after concrete governmental measures are announced. Otherwise, it will shortly be reversed."
China's personal bank deposits, which surged in the past two years to stratospheric levels, have begun to grow more slowly as a result of two bank interest rate cuts this year, bankers and analysts said on Wednesday.
But the growth rate is still high -- more than 30 percent year-on-year -- and the huge deposits in the banks still pose a threat to the economy, with the possibility of fanning inflation, if the money is released into the market, they said.
However, there is little chance that the deposits will be unleashed in the short term because the authorities are determined to maintain their tight monetary policy, they said.
By the end of 1995, individual Chinese deposits totalled 2,970 billion yuan ($3,578 billion), thanks largely to high interest rates set by authorities to drain money from the system and cool inflation, which hit a high of 21 percent in 1994, analysts said.
But the growth of the deposits began to slow down this year.
In the first quarter of 1996, individual bank deposits increased by 40.1 percent year-on-year, slowing to 34.5 percent growth in the third quarter, according to figures by the People's Bank of China, the central bank.
"The trend is changing," said a Beijing-based banker with the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC). "With the central government reducing interest rates and supporting the securities market, some money is moving elsewhere."
"Despite the change, the huge amount (of deposits) continues to be a tiger in a cage," said another banker with Shanghai-based Communications Bank. "If released into the market, it would pose a serious threat to push inflation up again."
The central bank sliced interest rates in May and August with the annual rate for one-year fixed deposits reduced to 7.47 percent after both cuts, from a very high 10.98 percent rate up to May.
In April, it also abolished an inflationary subsidy for long-term bank deposits of three years and above.
The cuts followed steady declines in the nation's inflation rate, which has dropped to about six percent this year from 14.7 percent last year.
Analysts said the interest rate cuts signalled a cautious relaxation of Beijing's tight monetary policy, begun in mid-1993 to cool an overheated economy characterised by surging inflation.
But Beijing will continue to keep a tight control on credit with the money supply remaining very high and the danger of reigniting inflation still present, they said.
"Experience since 1993 has proved that if we do not insist on tight monetary policy, high economic growth rates and the downward trend on inflation will be unsustainable," a central bank official said last week.
China's broad M2 supply increased by a year-on-year 26.9 percent by the end of September, slightly less than last year's 29.5 percent growth.
Beijing has set the M2 target at 25 percent for this year.
"The problem can only be solved when macro-economic conditions allow a complete relaxation of austerity measures and when interest rates are further cut to the level (where) the deposits can be gradually absorbed," said an ICBC official.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
China's foreign currency B shares went on another roller-coaster ride on Tuesday, with Shenzhen stocks rising 9.5 percent at midday before falling back to score a modest 1.27 percent increase on the day.
The Shanghai B share index was up 2.1 percent at the close after hitting its year-high of 54.475 at the end of the morning session.
Brokers said domestic investors were heavily in the market again in spite of a ban on the purchase of the B shares by local Chinese and selling by overseas investors was much in evidence, particularly in Shenzhen.
The B shares in both of China's stock markets have soared in the past 10 days on persistent rumours that the authorities plan to take measures to boost the market.
But one foreign analyst in Shanghai said it appeared that the implication the authorities would take no further action to limit domestic buying of B shares was enough to push them up.
"They're not going to make an announcement, but it would appear the authorities have let it be known that local investors can participate in the market," the analyst said.
"If that is true, then there will be some sustained momentum to the market," the analyst added.
The Shanghai B index rose 1.104 points or 2.10 percent to 53.766 points, on volume of 36.4 million shares worth $15.7 million, but off the intra-day year-high of 55.097 points due to profit-taking in the afternoon, brokers said.
In Shenzhen, the B index rose 1.70 points, or 1.27 percent, to end at 135.14 after touching an intraday high of 147.70 on turnover of HK$415.10 million, compared with Monday's HK$347.13 million.
"Heavy profit-taking pushed the index off its day high," said a broker at China Southern Securities. "But the (Shenzhen) index still has space to go up if there is no official denial of rumours that Beijing is considering market-boosting plans."
"With the index having gained about 50 percent over the past few sessions, the risk has become gradually higher," another Shenzhen analyst said.
Shanghai shares were pushed up largely by domestic buying of shares related to the Pudong development zone. But interest in the markets from foreign investors is gradually reviving as a result of the booming trade.
"Foreign investors are looking at China's B share markets again, encouraged by improved fundamentals of the B share companies and especially encouraged by the liquidity shown over the last few trading sessions," said Bruce Richardson of HG Asia in Shanghai.
Shanghai city is on the verge of renting out the former Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Bank building on the riverside Bund to an unnamed bank but definitely not the Hongkong Bank, a senior official said on Wednesday.
The official, Zhou Jinbao, said final negotiations were in progress with two or three contenders for the huge building, built in 1925 as a symbol of the financial might of the British Empire.
"I will invite you to the signing ceremony. It will be held very soon," Zhou, general manager of the Bund Buildings Transformation Corp, said in an interview. "The basic issues have now been basically agreed upon."
He declined to say which companies were in the final running but said he expected the winner to be a bank.
"It is not the Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Bank," he added.
The Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Banking Corp Ltd, a unit of HSBC Holdings Plc, had more than two years of discussions with Shanghai city officials on terms for resuming control of their former headquarters but finally announced that they had decided not to proceed with the proposal.
Zhou said the Hongkong Bank had wanted to demolish several buildings behind the main structure and erect a modern office tower.
But he said this proposal would have had an impact on wider development plans for the area which have not yet been fixed and are unlikely to be finalised for at least another year or two.
The main building has 24,000 square metres of space and Zhou said he was looking at around three U.S. dollars per square metre per day in rental. The lease can be for any period up to 30 or 40 years.
"The rental fee we are looking for is based on the fact the Bund should be the highest priced piece of land (in Shanghai). If other buildings are currently renting for two dollars a day (per square metre), then this building should be three dollars," he said.
At that price, the monthly rental fee for the building would be over $2 million per month. Renovation costs, he estimated, would cost around $15 million.
The building is steeped in history. After serving in effect as the East Asian financial headquarters of western imperialism for a quarter of century, it became after 1949 the Communist Party's Shanghai headquarters and city hall.
The city officials finally moved into a new building last year, leaving the old bank empty and echoing, waiting for a new tenant.
The main banking hall, with its magnificent marble pillars and curved glass roof, has had its banking counters removed and the murals which adorned the main domed entrance hall have been painted over.
The room just off the hall which served as the bank's general manager's office and later the office of a succession of Shanghai city Communist Party chiefs, is small and airless.
"This building has not only huge architectural value, but also great cultural and historical significance," said Zhou. "That is why we will only rent it. We will not sell it. It is a treasure."
Chinese authorities have closed their eyes to the booming illegal trade by domestic investors in foreign currency B shares and will not interfere unless the market becomes too speculative, analysts said on Friday.
The B shares listed on China's two stock markets, in Shanghai and Shenzhen, were created to attract funds from foreign investors.
But in the past six months the vast majority of trading has been done by domestic investors who have opened trading accounts by various means in contravention of the rules.
"The authorities have just closed their eyes to the issue," said an analyst with a foreign securities firm in Shanghai. "It looks like they will just leave it alone, as long as the markets don't become too speculative."
Given the huge volatility of the B shares over the past two weeks, it would appear the threshold of the authorities on the issue is high.
Shenzhen's B shares have risen more than 50 percent since mid-November and Shanghai's B shares are up over 15 percent in the same period, but with huge falls on some days.
Brokers have attributed the rapid rises and falls largely to rumours that the Beijing authorities plan either to allow domestic investors to buy B shares or to reaffirm the ban.
"The Beijing ban is there, but Beijing knows it is unenforceable," said another brokerage analyst. "And the brokers want local people to buy B shares because turnover would be so low without them."
A broker in Shenzhen said many domestic securities firms had opened B share trading accounts in Hong Kong, while Chinese individuals encounter no problem in opening the accounts, particularly in Shenzhen, which is just across the border from the wealthy British colony.
B-share trading is supposed to be restricted to people with foreign passports or residents of Hong Kong and Taiwan, but the Shenzhen and Shanghai exchanges are interpreting the rules with great flexibility, analysts said.
"The Shanghai exchange handled it in an interesting way," said a broker in Shanghai.
"A couple of months ago they required all B-share trading account holders to re-register, but all that they required was that people present a passport or a copy of a passport that didn't even have to be theirs," he said.
Analysts have said the basic reason for the ban on domestic investors holding B shares is to prevent an outflow of foreign exchange as foreign investors sell their holdings to local people.
But the announcement on Thursday that the Chinese yuan would become fully convertible on the current account this Sunday was taken as a sign by traders that the day was approaching when the ban on B share trading by locals would be dropped.
The Shenzhen B-share index rose 5.35 percent to 142.71 points on Friday on the news, brokers said. Shanghai B shares closed up 1.14 percent to 53.421.
"It is pretty hard for the securities regulators to curb the inflow of money from mainland Chinese into the Shenzhen B market because Hong Kong dollars are so easily available here due to the proximity to Hong Kong," said one Shenzhen analyst.
"I believe more and more Chinese will put their hard currency into the market after mid-1997 when Hong Kong reverts to Chinese rule," he added.
China is cleaning up its market for mutual funds to prepare them to become a key vehicle to channel huge bank deposits back into the economy and stabilise its volatile stock markets, analysts said on Monday.
Among the most important steps, Beijing last week lifted a three-year ban on new listings of stock investment funds and has said it will shortly promulgate a set of rules governing the management of such funds.
Three funds listed last week surged as investors sought to buy into what analysts see becoming a major focus for the market in the months ahead.
The first effort to establish investment funds in the early 1990s collapsed in disarray because of a lack of adequate regulations and supervision with many losing money.
A total of 75 funds were set up, but only a few received approval from the central bank, and only 22 have been listed on China's two stock exchanges. Investors in unlisted funds will be unable to recover their cash for years to come.
"The central government first of all wants to clean up the fund market," said Shao Jiejun, a manager at Shenyin &amp; Wanguo Securities which manages Baoding Fund, one of China's existing stock investment funds.
"The fund money is expected to gradually flow into stocks, which should benefit the market greatly," he added.
At the moment, less than 10 percent of the money in existing funds is invested in stocks, Zhou Daojiong, chairman of the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC), told a recent seminar in Beijing.
"Quality of fund managers is poor," Zhou was quoted by the China Securities as saying. "There have been many cases of irregularities and some funds have been used to participate in market manipulation and insider trading."
Most of the money was invested by the fund managers in industry and real estate projects two or three years ago when the stock markets were in a deep slide.
"Time is needed for old funds to withdraw from industrial and real estate projects and to establish new funds," said Xu Zhiling, deputy general manager of the securities trading department of China Guotai Securities.
Beijing has given strong indications that it supports the establishment of new investment funds and sees them as a major means of funnelling money from bank deposits, currently at record levels of more than three trillion yuan ($361.4 billion), back into the economy.
Experts say the authorities want to gradually replace the system of bank loans which currently support enterprises with a share system in which firms obtain money through investment rather than borrowing.
China's two stock markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen also suffer from huge volatility because of an absence of large funds and institutional money providing a non-speculative base to trading, they said.
Currently, stock funds account for less than one percent of China's stock investment with the share market being dominated by retail investors, searching for quick profits instead of long-term investment, Shanghai brokers said.
In new rules to be issued shortly, there will be provisions that require stock funds to invest at least 60 percent of their cash in securities, industry sources said.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
China has approved three foreign banks to conduct local currency business, the official Shanghai Star newspaper reported Tuesday, but bankers said the deals could not start until a thorny tax rate issue was solved.
The newspaper said the three banks -- Citicorp's Citibank, Tokyo-Mitsubishi Bank and Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Banking Corp. -- would be granted licenses to handle Chinese yuan business this month.
Until now, foreign banks with branches in China have been restricted to doing foreign currency business only, with Chinese banks retaining a monopoly on the huge local currency (yuan) loan and deposit market.
The Star said the banks will be allowed to handle yuan deposits, loans and other business, adding that the business would be opened to more foreign banks starting early next year.
Bankers have said they expect the business licenses to restrict them to taking deposits from and making loans to only foreign-funded firms for the foreseeable future.
An official with one of the three banks said they had not yet been given formal notification that their applications to do local currency business had been accepted.
"But the PBOC has let us know we have been chosen in a more informal way," he said, asking not to be identified.
The main problem is the differing rates at which the authorities tax the profits of banks in China. Foreign banks are taxed at 15 percent, Chinese commercial banks at 33 percent and the main state banks at 55 percent.
Bankers say there is still no agreement on how profits made by foreign banks doing local Chinese currency business would be taxed.
"That issue still rests with the State Council, it is beyond the control of the Shanghai city government, or even of the PBOC," said a foreign banker.
He said the authorities wanted to unify the tax rate between the various banks, but there were huge wrangles over what rate to choose.
"Until the tax rate issue is resolved, I doubt if the foreign banks will start any local currency business," said the banker. "They will want clarification beforehand."
China's B shares continued their sensational surge on Tuesday with Shanghai's index gaining 11.63 percent and Shenzhen 4.7 percent as foreign and Chinese investors poured funds into the markets.
Trading volume on the Shanghai B share market hit a 15-month high of 63.595 with the index ending up 6.525 points or 11.63 percent at 62.639 points.
Brokers said market sentiment had been boosted by the recent strong performance of the Shenzhen B share market on expectations that Beijing plans measures to boost B share trading.
The Shenzhen B share index rose 7.42 points, or 4.70 percent, to end at 165.10.
The Shenzhen market has risen far further and faster than Shanghai in the past two weeks, but dealers said there were signs that the action was now moving north to Shanghai.
"There's a feeling that foreign investors largely missed the boat on Shenzhen and they don't want to miss out on Shanghai as well," said an analyst with a foreign brokerage in Shanghai.
ING Barings said that as a result of the heavy volume of trading, the company had today activated both its seats on the Shanghai Stock Exchange for the first time ever.
"There were signs that overseas institutions are paying more attention to B shares," one broker said. "The short-term market trend is bright."
But a second broker said the sharp rises woiuld inevitably be followed by a tumble, possibly as early as Wednesday.
"The market will see a technical correction after the sharp rise today," he said.
Shanghai Dajiang was the star on the Shanghai market, surging $0.132 or 34.37 percent to $0.516 on volume of 1.1 million shares.
Shanghai Jintai followed on bargain-hunting, soaring $0.038 or 28.78 percent to $0.170 on volume of 712,000 shares.
A foreign broker said the money coming into the market appeared to be about half-and-half foreign and domestic Chinese, in spite of the theoretical ban on local Chinese investors buying the foreign currency B shares.
Given the obvious lack of measures by the authorities to revive the supposed ban, the markets appear to be gaining confidence that local investors will not face being forced out of the market, at least for now, analysts said.
"The bull run may extend into later this week with the inflow of fresh money continuing," one broker said.
China has approved three foreign banks to do local currency business, the official Shanghai Star newspaper reported on Tuesday, but bankers said deals could not start until a thorny tax rate issue was solved.
The newspaper said the three banks are Citibank, Tokyo-Mitsubishi Bank and Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Banking Corporation and that they would be granted licences to handle Chinese yuan business this month.
Up to now, foreign banks with branches in China have been restricted to doing foreign currency business only, with the Chinese banks retaining a monopoly on the huge local currency (yuan) loan and deposit market.
The Star said the banks will be allowed to handle yuan deposits, loans and other business, adding that the business would be opened to more foreign banks from early next year.
Bankers have said they expect the business licences to restrict them only to taking deposits from and making loans to foreign-funded firms for the foreseeable future.
The deputy governor of the People's Bank of China, Chen Yuan, said on Tuesday that China would grant licences for foreign banks to conduct local currency renminbi (yuan) business "very soon".
"We will very soon introduce foreign banks into the renminbi business in Shanghai," he told reporters after a Hong Kong Monetary Authority conference. "We will announce that very soon. It is a matter of days not weeks," Chen said.
He declined to say how many licences would be granted.
An official with one of the three chosen banks, said they had not yet been given formal notification that their applications to do local currency business had been accepted.
"But the PBOC has let us know we have been chosen in a more informal way," he said, asking not to be identified.
The main problem is the differing rates at which the authorities tax the profits of banks in China. Foreign banks are taxed at 15 percent, Chinese commercial banks at 33 percent and the main state banks at 55 percent.
Bankers say there is still no agreement on how profits made by foreign banks doing local Chinese currency business would be taxed.
"That issue still rests with the State Council, it is beyond the control of the Shanghai city government, or even of the PBOC," said a foreign banker.
He said the authorities wanted to unify the tax rate between the various banks, but there were huge wrangles over what rate to choose.
"Until the tax rate issue is resolved, I doubt if the foreign banks will start any local currency business," said the banker. "They will want clarification beforehand."
The Star newspaper said the three banks chosen to begin local currency business all had registered branches in the Pudong Development Zone to the east of Shanghai's city centre.
Officials had long said that only banks with Pudong branches would be considered for the licences.
China will open its domestic A share markets to overseas investors through Sino-foreign joint venture mutual funds early next year, a Hong Kong newspaper said on Tuesday, but analysts predicted a cautious approach.
Brokers and analysts in Shanghai said the long-awaited experiment in foreign investment in China's A share markets would probably involve only a handful of funds in the first few years.
The Beijing-controlled Hong Kong newspaper Wen Wei Po quoted the executive deputy governor of the People's Bank of China, Chen Yuan, as saying China will allow some foreign joint venture firms to invest in A shares from early next year.
The newspaper quoted Chen as saying regulations governing Sino-foreign investment funds would be issued soon.
"Rumours on this have been circulating in the markets since the start of this year," said one A share trader. "It is certain that the regulations are under consideration, but a timetable has yet to be confirmed."
Officials at the central bank and the China Securities Regulatory Commission, the top securities watchdog, declined to comment.
Shanghai's A share index surged 9.94 percent on Monday, partly on speculation that Beijing was considering opening the A share market. It consolidated down 1.02 percent on Tuesday on a technical correction.
Analysts said a major problem is the Chinese yuan. While convertible on the current account since December 1, it is still a long way from full convertibility, and officials have given no hint as to the timetable for making it convertible.
"Solving the convertibility issue is a major obstacle," said a broker with a Chinese brokerage.
"There are also no definite candidates for establishing the funds. In the initial stages, the impact will be more psychological than real," said the broker.
An analyst with a foreign brokerage in Shanghai said the Chinese would probably seek to establish joint ventures with U.S. firms in the initial stages to learn from the highly developed and sophisticated U.S. mutual fund industry.
Without convertibility, it is unclear how foreign money will be exchanged for yuan to invest in A shares, and how funds being retrieved by foreign investors would be shifted back into foreign currency, analysts said.
"The key issue is how much liquidity from the funds the authorities will allow to be invested in the markets," said Xu Zhiling, deputy general manager of the securities trading department of China Guotai Securities.
Traders said introduction of joint venture funds would help stabalise the highly-volatile A share markets and create a secure vehicle for long-term investment.
"Funds from developed countries are often very large, seeking long-term investment," said a broker with China Finance Trust and Investment Co. "Their entrance into the market will alleviate a trend of excessive speculation."
China's biggest electronics investment, a $1.2 billion integrated circuit (IC) production facility in Shanghai, is looking for foreign joint venture partners, the firm's president said.
Lu Dechun, director and president of the Shanghai Hua Hong Microelectronics Co Ltd, said the firm was in discussion with a number of major IC makers to find a partner to supply IC production technical know-how in return for an equity share.
"We are discussing joint venture possibilities with a number of companies, we want to do some kind of JV," Lu said in an interview on Monday.
"But the JV partner's share won't be large. This project is too big for anyone to bear the cost," he added. He declined to name the companies involved in discussions.
China's IC production lags far behind the world standard in both quantity and quality, and the five plants now in operation can meet only 20 percent of the country's demand for ICs.
The new Shanghai IC production plan, known as Project 909, will put China closer to the cutting edge of IC development when production begins in the second quarter of 1998, Lu said.
"But we will still be behind the highest international levels," said Lu. "We will produce eight-inch wafers of 0.5 microns in thickness, but by the time production begins the world standard will probably be down to 0.3 microns."
The production factory at the core of Project 909 involves four billion yuan in investment, with 2.1 billion yuan from the central government and 1.9 billion from the Shanghai city government.
The project has the support of the highest levels of the Chinese government -- Premier Li Peng attended the opening ceremony for the project last week in the Pudong Development Zone to the east of Shanghai's city centre.
But Lu said he was treating the project very much as a commercial venture.
"From Beijing's point of view, this may be a strategic policy project, but we have to run it as a commercial proposition," he said. "IC production is too expensive, the state is not going to keep giving us money."
It will have a monthly production capacity of 20,000 wafers, each one packed with IC chips.
Lu said output would fall into three categories, each with big potential in the China market -- IC "smart" cards, ICs used in communications equipment, and micro-controllers used to control household electrical appliances.
If things go smoothly it should move into profit in 2001, three years after production starts.
"But this is a highly competitive business, I know it won't be easy to make money," Lu said.
The factory itself is being designed by a Dutch firm, Crystal Consulting Engineers B.V. based in Eindhoven, which specialises in IC plant design.
Discussions are also under way with major producers of IC production equipment around the world. Lu declined to say which companies, but said most of the equipment would probably come from the United States.
Asked if the equipment could fall within the category of technology restricted for export from the United States to China, Lu said:
"There are some pieces of equipment that would require export approval. But relations between China and the United States seem to be getting better these days."
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
China is expected to end the year without loosening its three-year old tight credit policy as rampant local fixed asset investment continues to threaten economic over-heating, analysts said on Thursday.
Earlier this year, China seemed poised to modify the austerity measures, but a surge in fixed asset projects since July has led Beijing to change its mind, they said.
In the latest high-level clue to credit policy, Vice-Premier Zhu Rongji was quoted by the official media on Thursday as saying there was a need to strictly control new fixed asset investment projects.
"There is the need to continue to curb inflation and strictly control new industrial projects," Zhu was quoted as saying during a recent visit to the eastern coastal province of Fujian.
The People's Daily, mouthpiece of the ruling Communist Party, on Wednesday also criticised a rush by provinces to invest in high-profile industries, citing 22 provinces that had listed car production as one of their key industries.
"There is still the threat of a resurgence of inflation and of the economy over-heating with fixed asset investment climbing again since the central bank cut bank interest rates earlier this year," said a Beijing-based official with the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC).
Growth in retail price inflation is expected to slow to six percent year on year in 1996 against 14.8 percent last year.
Official figures show that local governments around the country have allowed 700 new fixed asset investments since July.
China's State Planning Commission estimates that fixed asset investment will hit 2.3 trillion yuan ($277.1 billion) this year, about three times the level of 1992.
"The resurgence of fixed asset investment in the second half of this year seems to have made the central bank more cautious about loosening credit," a banker with the Bank of China said. "The most important signal is that the much-discussed bank reserve ratio cut now seems to be off the near-term agenda."
In mid-July, Dai Xianglong, president of the People's Bank of China, said the central bank would shortly cut bank reserve ratios by a margin possibly as large as three percent. This would release huge amounts of money into the market.
Chinese banks and other financial institutions are required to place 13 percent of their deposits with the central bank and keep another five to seven percent themselves as reserves.
Between July and October, central bank officials talked frequently about cutting the bank ratios, which were set eight years ago and have never been changed.
"But now they are focusing on the need to continue the austerity measures," said an analyst with the Communications Bank of China. "The main concern is the large amount of money in the system beyond the direct control of the central bank."
China's central bank has direct control of the four major state banks -- the ICBC, the Bank of China, the Agricultural Bank of China and the Construction Bank of China.
Credit supplied by the four banks once accounted for more than 90 percent of total loans but this proportion has now shrunk to around 70 percent and is still falling.
Analysts said the impact from a cut in bank reserve ratio could be balanced by other policy controls such as the credit quota system.
But the bulk of money liberated from other banks and financial institutions would inevitably enter the markets with the central bank being unable to directly intervene.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
China's financial markets have made significant steps towards maturity in 1996, with Beijing more willing than ever to allow them to gradually take on the mantle of economic control, analysts said on Friday.
But the Chinese securities, futures and money markets, less than six years old and still suffering the volatility of youth, have a long way to go to reach the level of standardisation and stability found in many other Asian countries, they said.
"In the past the central government always used the word 'experimental' when referring to the markets, but this year they instead started saying they are 'in the initial stages of development'," said a Chinese brokerage analyst.
"This shows that it is more determined than ever before to let the markets survive and develop," he said.
Beijing gave its official blessing to the stock markets in April, and since then, the exchanges in Shanghai and Shenzhen have expanded faster than ever before, adding a total of 178 companies between them so far this year.
Total market capitalisation of the two markets is now 1,271 billion yuan ($153 billion) compared with 350 billion yuan at the start of the year.
The treasury bill market also boomed in 1996 with a record issue of 195.2 billion yuan worth of debt.
An interbank market for local currency, set up in January, has become an indispensible mechanism for banks to swap short-term funds, and has started the process of making interest rates responsive to market forces.
The developments all take China significantly further along the road from the state-planned past towards the market-influenced future.
Analysts said that while the Beijing leadership remains highly cautious about relaxing its controls over the main economic levers, it understands that it must do so eventually.
"The key motive behind the new approach is to gradually relieve the central government of the heavy burden of (the) money-losing state sector," said one economist.
"Beijing has urged state enterprises to resort more to market means to develop themselves instead of relying on loans from the state banks."
But this year, the authorities have also made it very plain that they will not allow rampant irregularities in the markets.
China's futures exchanges, which have largely operated as speculative casinos for years, have been firmly brought to heel over the past year.
The "hot money" which until early this year used to shift at lightning speed from Beijing green beans to Hainan plywood and on to Tianjin red beans has been squeezed out of the futures exchanges and shifted into the share markets, analysts said.
In the past month, branches of virtually all of China's top banks, securities houses and financial institutions have also been publicly accused of running illegal securities scams of one kind or another, with fines and warnings liberally dispensed.
"Serious efforts have been made to standardise the market," said a treasury bond trader. "No one, even the influential banks and key securities houses, are exempt from punishment if they breach the rules."
Analysts said the main shortcoming at the moment is the legal framework for the markets, which consists of a series of overlapping and often contradictory regulations.
The overall Securities Law and Futures Law, which will provide the basis for the future development of the markets, has been trapped in Beijing's bureaucracy for more than three years now with no sign of emerging soon, they said. ($1= 8.3 yuan)
China's top securities watchdog on Monday issued new requirements for exchanges and securities houses to strengthen risk control with the aim of cooling its over-heated domestic A share markets.
But the markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen responded with fresh rises in active trading with the A share indices hitting new 1996 highs, and analysts said the warnings would have little impact on the current active trading.
The China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC), in a circular, ordered the two stock exchanges to investigate the risk control mechanisms of their members, the Shanghai Securities News reported.
All securities houses must now display in their business halls warnings about the risks of trading on the stock markets, the circular said.
"The exchanges must quickly organise several groups to investigate the risk control systems of their members and report the results to the CSRC," it said.
It also ordered designated newspapers and magazines to report more on the risks of stock investment.
"Any comments on stock markets must avoid encouraging speculation in order to prevent investors being misguided," it added.
The new instructions follow dramatic surges on the domestic A share markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen this year.
Beijing announced a new positive policy towards the stock markets in April, and since then Shanghai's A share market has risen more than 100 percent and its Shenzhen counterpart more than 250 percent.
By the end of November, China had 20 million retail investors in stocks, double the number at the end of 1995, according to media reports.
"The central government is concerned about surges on the markets which might be out of control," said Yuan Ji, an A share trader with China Guotai Securities. "It hopes the markets will rise more steadily."
The surges apparently have been beyond the expectations of the securities authorities and, to cool the over-heated markets, the CSRC has over the past few weeks issued a series of new rules and punished many brokerages for irregularities.
But, despite the fresh warnings, Shanghai's A share index hit a new 1996 high of 1,312.295 points in the morning session on Monday and its Shenzhen counterpart a high of 486.22.
"Investors believe the authorities do not want to depress the markets, but are just worried over prices rising too fast," said a trader with a major Chinese brokerage. "Because of this belief, the new warnings will have only a slight impact."
The CSRC in the circular also ordered local securities authorities to ensure the securities institutions have displayed the information by January.
Shanghai B shares soared a stunning 12.22 percent on Tuesday as new money poured into the market from both local and foreign investors, and analysts said there was a lot more capital waiting to enter the market.
The Shanghai foreign currency B share index closed at 84.534 points, its highest level since September, 1994, with the supply of shares unable to meet the demand, traders said.
One foreign analyst said he expected the B share index to top the 100-point mark before the end of the year, with investors increasingly confident the authorities had decided to allow local Chinese investors to stay in the B share market.
"What we're seeing is a lot of stir-frying of dog stocks," said Bruce Richardson, chief Shanghai representative for HG Asia, referring to widespread buying of weaker counters.
"There's nothing in the fundamentals to justify this. But this is liquidity-driven and there's a lot more money waiting to come in," he said.
Shenzhen B shares, however, which surged a week or so earlier than Shanghai, fell back 2.15 percent on Tuesday to end at 193.87 on profit-taking after steep rises over the past few sessions, brokers said.
A fundamental factor in the Shanghai B market is a growing feeling that the merger of the foreign currency B shares and the A shares denominated in local currency on China's two stock exchanges will come sooner than expected.
"The spread between the A and B share P/Es is substantial," said a foreign analyst in Shanghai. "The market average for the Shanghai A shares is 55 and 19 for the B shares, so local investors see the opportunity for capital gains in a unification of the two."
A Chinese broker agreed.
"Every day we are seeing so much fresh capital flowing into the market because investors believe the B share prices are going to move closer to their counterparts in the A share market," he said.
The Chinese authorities have so far made no predictions on when the two types of shares might be merged, saying only that the day is a long way off.
John Crossman, general manager of Jardine Fleming in Shanghai, said both locals and foreigners wanted to get into the Shanghai B share market.
"For locals, it is an easy decision when B shares are at a 75 percent discount to A shares," he said. "Foreigners are well disposed to China in 1997 and 1998 and do not want to be net sellers of Chinese equities."
He said the current bull run could continue for another couple of months.
But other analysts said the extreme volatility of the market posed a threat, particularly for holders of many of the weaker and smaller B shares, when the correction begins.
"Locals are not so discriminatory in the shares they buy and have bought shares simply because they were cheap," said one analyst.
"But for some poor-quality shares the prices are not sustainable. As soon as the momentum peters out, there will be a lot of sifting and these shares will go down quickly," the analyst added.
China's Shanghai Pudong Development Bank will rent the former headquarters of the Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Banking Corp, the most impressive building on the city's waterfront Bund, an official said on Tuesday.
The official said a signing ceremony would be held on Thursday in the grand main hall of the building, opened in 1925 as a symbol of the financial might of the British Empire.
"The building will be leased to the Pudong Development Bank," said the official with the Shanghai city government office set up to find new tenants for the old banks and trading houses along the Bund.
The Pudong Development Bank is a state-owned Chinese bank based in the Pudong Development Zone, across the Huangpu River from the Bund. It is majority owned by the bank building's landlord -- the Shanghai city government.
An official with the Pudong bank said they had agreed to a lease of 30 years duration. But he declined to give details of the lease terms for the building, which has a total floorspace of 24,000 square metres.
The general manager of the Bund Buildings Function Transformation Office, Zhou Jinbao, said last month that he believed the property was worth at least $3 per square metre.
A real estate analyst said he felt it was unlikely a Chinese bank, particularly one closely linked to the Shanghai city government, would pay anything close to that figure.
Another businessman said he understood the new tenant would be allowed to sub-let space in the building to other companies.
The lease announcement marks the failure of the city authorities to find a foreign bank that would be willing to lease the most prestigious building in Shanghai.
The building was the main office of the Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Bank until the Communist takeover in 1949 and then served as the Shanghai headquarters of the Chinese Communist Party until last year when the city officials moved into a new building.
Since then, the building, with its huge main banking hall featuring magnificent marble pillars and curved glass roof, has been empty.
The Hongkong Bank had more than two years of discussions with Shanghai city officials on terms for resuming control of their former headquarters but finally announced that they had decided not to proceed with the proposal.
Zhou said the Hongkong Bank had wanted to demolish several buildings behind the main structure and erect a modern office tower.
But he said this proposal would have had an impact on the wider development plans for the area which have not yet been fixed and are unlikely to be finalised for at least another year or two.
China's B share markets in both Shanghai and Shenzhen slid on Wednesday on profit-taking following huge increases in recent weeks and reports of tighter controls in Shenzhen, analysts said.
The Shanghai B share index fell 3.649 points or 4.55 percent to 80.685 on Wednesday, with volume heavy at 95 million shares worth $44 million.
Shenzhen's B index lost 7.42 points or 3.83 percent to close at 186.45 largely on talk of tighter control over local investors trading B shares, traders said.
"It's a technical correction," said a foreign brokerage analyst in Shanghai. "Shanghai and Shenzhen have risen substantially over the past few weeks, so it's a natural move by investors to take profits."
"Today's loss was a technical correction partly sparked by a fall on the Shenzhen market," said a trader. "The correction is likely to continue for the rest of this week. But market sentiment is good and the index will recover next week."
Shenzhen securities authorities have warned brokerages in the city not to allow local investors to buy B shares unless the money comes from outside the country, an official of the Shenzhen Securities Management Office (SSMO) said on Wednesday.
A senior official at the SSMO said the notice had been released at the urging of the Foreign Exchange Management Bureau under the People's Bank of China and the China Securities Regulatory Commission.
"The inflow of fresh money into the market will definitely slow with the implementation of the policy, but many Chinese can still enter the market by some means or other," a broker said.
Brokers in Shanghai said they did not know of any such notice being distributed to brokers in Shanghai. Officials of the central bank and the national regulator in Beijing declined to comment.
"We've heard such reports (about crackdowns) from Shenzhen from time to time," said the Shanghai-based foreign analyst. "Whenever such reports come out, the B shares go down but after a while, speculation resumes again."
In Shanghai, all 42 B shares traded, with 34 down, one flat and seven up. Cheap stocks with poor results led the falls after speculative jumps in the past few days, brokers said.
"Technical charts indicate the market has entered a correction phase and the index is likely to test the 75-point support level," one broker said.
"The market trend mainly depends on the attitude of the securities authorities," he added.
Shanghai Erfangji was the biggest loser, plunging $0.060 or 21.42 percent to $0.220, on volume of 3.8 million shares.
Shanghai Rubber Belt followed, tumbling $0.054 or 17.08 percent to $0.262, on volume of 718,000 shares. Shanghai Jintai traded the most on institutional liquidation, down $0.012 or 4.28 percent to $0.268, on volume of 6.2 million shares.
The Shanghai A share index rallied after falls on Tuesday, but the market was still in a mood of consolidation amid uncertainty over its direction, brokers said.
The index rose 17.559 points or 1.37 percent to 1301.322 points, on volume of 1.1 billion shares worth 13.8 billion yuan ($1.66 billion). The SSE 30 blue-chip index jumped 99.013 points or 3.34 percent to 3064.238 points.
($1=8.3 yuan)
Shanghai copper futures, which have fallen steadily over the past year, will see further declines in early 1997 with fundamentals poor and domestic demand stable, analysts and traders said on Wednesday.
Shanghai copper has fallen from its record high of around 32,000 yuan a tonne in mid-1995 to the 20,000-yuan level, although it is slightly up on its lowest levels of below 19,000 yuan touched in October.
"The downward trend in copper prices is world-wide with the supply of copper rising fast due to higher prices a couple of years ago, while demand is increasing more slowly in line with the world economy," a local metals analyst said.
The analyst, who works for a financial markets consulting firm, said the current price trend could conceivably continue for more than a year.
"From a long-term view, copper will not stop its downward trend until the middle of 1998 as there is usually a three- to five-year cycle of prices on the world market," the analyst said.
China's domestic demand for copper is also stable due to the government's continued tight monetary policy in place since 1993 to prevent the economy from over-heating, analysts said.
In the first nine months of 1996, China's consumption of copper was about 530,000 tonnes, about the same as the 1995 level, local traders said.
"In China, a shortfall of 250,000 tonnes of copper is expected in 1996," a local trader said. "But if you include imports, supplies are sufficient."
China imported 177,500 tonnes of copper in the first nine months of this year, up 60,900 tonnes from the same 1995 period, official figures show.
A local trader said Shanghai copper is likely to fall further to 19,000 yuan, possibly hitting a low of 17,000 yuan before the end of the year.
"In 1997, Shanghai copper will continue its steady downward movement, but it is possible for particularly sharp falls or rebounds in futures prices in certain periods of high speculation," he said.
"The recent rebound in prices both in London and Shanghai, triggered by falls in stockpiles on the London Metal Exchange, is a good example of such speculative movements," he said.
"Mature Chinese speculators will not miss any chances to make prices fluctuate for profits," he said.
($1=8.3 yuan)
China's B shares fell once again on Thursday with investors running scared in the face of reports that securities authorities would restrict mainland Chinese from trading in B shares, traders said.
Shanghai's foreign-currency B share index closed down 5.127 points or 6.35 percent to 75.558 points while Shenzhen's B index fell 11.23 points, or 6.02 percent, to 175.22.
Securities authorities in Shenzhen have contacted brokerages in the city, located across the border from Hong Kong, telling them to not accept money from domestic investors for stock purchases unless they had proof the money came from abroad, traders said.
An influx of funds from local investors has been at the heart of the spectacular rise in B shares over the past month, and fears that the tap would be turned off is making investors re-assess their positions, analysts said.
Chinese authorities have in the past expressed concern at domestic investors buying B shares, which were intended for foreign investors, saying it left locals vulnerable to the inflows and outflows of foreign money.
Shanghai stocks reacted on Thursday to the Shenzhen reports, but analysts said Shanghai securities authorities had so far not issued the same warning to the city's brokerages.
"The Shenzhen crackdown has triggered fears it will spread to Shanghai," said a trader. "Sentiment has been badly hurt."
"We have not heard of any crackdown in Shanghai. There is no indication of a crackdown here," said one foreign broker.
The broker said other factors in the Shanghai B market's fall were profit-taking and the issue of new Shanghai Diesel Engine Co Ltd B shares, which started trading today at a lower price than the company's existing shares.
He said the three largest brokerages in Shenzhen were believed to have stopped opening B share accounts for Chinese nationals.
"But large punters have ways to circumvent these regulations and have capital offshore," he said, adding that many retail investors could also easily call relatives abroad or in Hong Kong to arrange transfers.
"The CSRC (China Securities Regulatory Commission) is going for one weak link in the trading arrangements... the flow of funds," said Bruce Richardson, chief representative of HG Asia in Shanghai.
The Shanghai B index has risen 80 percent over the past month on expectations that Beijing would take measures to support the market.
"Profit-taking focused on cheap shares which rose the most during the surges of recent weeks," a trader said.
Shanghai Sanmao Textile was the biggest loser, plunging $0.072 or 20.11 percent to $0.286 on volume of 643,700 shares.
Shanghai Lianhua Fibre, which had surged 200 percent in recent weeks, was the second biggest loser, shedding $0.044 or 13.75 percent to $0.276, on heavy volume of 1.4 million shares.
Shanghai Diesel Engine, which listed an additional 85 million shares on Thursday, had the highest volume in inter-institutional trading, traders said. It lost $0.036 or 6.21 percent to $0.544 on volume of 6.0 million shares.
Shanghai's A share index closed down 70.491 points or 5.42 percent to 1230.831 points on a technical correction after repeatedly hitting three-year highs over the past few sessions, traders said. The Shanghai Stock Exchange's 30-share blue-chip index lost 111.482 points or 3.64 percent to 2952.753 points.
Brokers said A share market sentiment was still good and the index would recover next week after the powerful correction.
The most magnificent building of old Shanghai -- the former Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Bank headquarters on the waterfront Bund -- became a bank once again on Thursday, with a state-run Shanghai bank renting it from the city.
In a signing ceremony in the huge main banking hall of the building, first opened in 1925, the Shanghai Pudong Development Bank took out a 30-year lease on the structure.
The ceremony marked the failure of the city's search to find a foreign bank to rent or buy the structure, long the city's main landmark.
The city had tried to interest a foreign bank in the 24,000-square-metre building, and spent two years discussing terms with Hongkong Bank.
But they failed to reach agreement and Hongkong Bank, which is owned by HSBC Holdings Plc, finally announced it would not to take it back.
Bankers said the city asked for an unrealistically high price and that the building was unsuited for modern banking.
The bank, once a symbol of the financial power of the British empire, was also the Shanghai headquarters of the Chinese Communist Party from 1949 until last year, when city officials moved out, leaving it empty and echoing.
The chairman of the Pudong bank, Zhuang Xiaotan, told reporters that his bank would pay an annual rent of 145 million yuan ($17.47 million) for the building, amounting to about $2 per square metre per day.
Pudong, Shanghai's main development zone across the Huangpu River from the Bund and the bank building, is earmarked to become the new financial heart of the city.
The Pudong Development Bank is building its own multi-storey headquarters there that will be ready in about the year 2000, Zhuang said.
"We will use this building as the bank's headquarters until the new building is ready," Zhuang said.
The building and the Pudong development bank are both basically owned by the Shanghai city government, and some analysts said the lease agreement had little significance.
"It's the left hand moving money to the right hand," said one analyst with a foreign bank in Shanghai.
But Zhuang denied this was the case.
"We are an independent economic unit and this is a commercial deal," he said, adding that the bank would consider sub-letting space in the huge building.
($1=8.3 yuan)
The Chinese authorities acted decisively on Friday to stop extraordinary price movements on the country's two stock markets by imposing a limit of 10 percent in the movement of any stock on one day.
In announcements made after the market closed on Friday, the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchange set daily movement limits for all shares and investment fund units at 10 percent in either direction, with effect from next Monday.
"From Monday on, all bids and asks exceeding the limits are null and void," the announcement said. "No brokerage must accept invalid bids and asks."
The announcements followed several days of dramatic falls in the B share indices of both Shanghai and Shenzhen, which on Friday alone plunged 12.26 percent and 14.75 percent respectively.
On Friday, the exchanges also ordered brokerages to make public the top losing and gaining stocks on any one day and the names of the key institutions involved in trading.
Brokers said the order would tend to limit institutional speculation, adding that while restriction of market manipulation was good, the move would also hinder the activity of the markets.
The announcements all made clear that they had been approved by the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC), which supervises all securities and futures markets.
Chinese brokers generally welcomed the new limits, saying they would effectively help control erratic trading on the fledging markets founded in 1990.
"The decisions indicate the securities authorities are determined to standardise the markets and will be a key step in stabilising share prices," said Xu Zhiling, deputy general manager of the securities trading department of China Guotai Securities.
But some brokers said setting the limits would benefit buyers and help creating buyers' markets.
"Unlike futures contracts, investors cannot build short positions on the stock markets," said one broker. "Price limits thus will help buyers who can build large positions without much risk of price plunges."
A foreign broker in Shanghai said the limits were overall not beneficial to the market or its development.
"Trading limits generally distort markets rather than rationalise trading," he said. "But the real question is how long can this can go on."
Shanghai's B share index ended down 9.267 points or 12.26 percent at 66.291 points on Friday on fears that Beijing would crack down on domestic investors trading B shares, traders said.
The fears were sparked by news reports that the securities authorities in Shenzhen had ordered local brokerages not to accept foreign exchange to buy B shares from local people unless they could prove the money originated from outside China, they said.
Shanghai's A share index lost 67.781 points or 5.51 percent to 1,163.050 on news that checks had begun in some parts of China on the risk management systems of securities brokerages.
Meanwhile, Shenzhen's B share index plunged 25.85 points or 14.75 percent to end at 149.37 in heavy trading because of the crackdown by local securities authorities on mainland Chinese buying B shares, brokers said.
The Shenzhen A share index lost 23.60 points, or 4.84 percent, to 463.81 on turnover of 9.26 billion yuan compared with 14.24 billion on Thursday.
A sudden crackdown on China's fledging stock markets pushed most shares to limit-down levels on Monday and triggered an outcry from securities brokerages and retail investors.
The People's Daily, mouthpiece of the Communist Party, said in a commentary on Monday that the country's stock markets had overheated on widespread speculation and warned that Beijing would not step in to help if the stock markets plunged.
Virtually all shares on the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock markets fell 10 percent, the daily limit announced by the authorities last Friday afternoon to prevent sharp fluctuations.
"This is very, very disappointing and outrageous," said one local stock analyst. "With this simple decision they can wipe out nearly all the gains in the securities business in a hard year."
"I can't understand it," said a trader. "Such administrative edicts will eventually kill the markets one day."
Analysts said they were shocked by the sudden change of direction by officials in Beijing.
Since April there have been many official statements, messages and hints indicating clearly that the stock markets had the official blessing of Beijing.
China's foreign currency B share market in Shanghai soared by about 80 percent between November 11 and December 10 while the bourse in the southern boomtown of Shenzhen rose by about 100 percent before sharp falls in the final days of last week.
Shanghai's A share index had surged more than 100 percent and Shenzhen's A share index nearly 300 percent since April.
"They had been talking about encouraging stock invesment and suddenly here comes the new policy," said a retail investor. "Most of us will have our money caught in the markets. It looks like prices will plunge and no one wants to buy."
Foreign brokers and analysts also slammed the sudden official intervention, saying it went counter to the trend in China of gradually allowing market forces and controls to play a greater role.
"Foreign investors will not welcome such administrative interference in the markets," said a Shanghai-based brokerage analyst. "What is worse is that it seems from the People's Daily editorial that they wanted to force prices down."
Shanghai's domestic A share index plunged 9.92 percent to 1,047.680 points and the foreign currency B shares fell 9.6 percent to 59.929 points.
In Shenzhen, the B share index dived 10 percent to 134.43, and the A share index also 10 percent to 417.20.
Brokers and analysts said they expected another 10 percent limit-down day for the markets on Tuesday, with virtually no buyers in sight, and a great sense of unease amongst investors about how quickly the market can be turned by officials edicts.
"For Shanghai B shares, tomorrow will be another 10 percent, but on the third day it may be less," said another foreign brokerage analyst. "Buying interest is very limited."
"Panic selling occurred in many securities trading halls in major brokerages," said one trader. "But nobody wants to buy. Investors believe current prices are very high taking into account the changed market fundamentals after the crackdown."
A second trader said market confidence was destroyed. "We can see no support for the time being," he said. The B index is likely to head for a historical low at around 45 points shortly."
In Shenzhen, local brokers said most Shenzhen-listed stocks were likely to register limit-down closes over the next few sessions as investors have been intimidated by the People's Daily commentary.
"They could have adopted other measures such as an effective ban on widespread illicit trading by institutional punters to cap share prices," a Shenzhen trader complained. "Instead, this method sacrifices many innocent, small investors."
Many investors, including institutions, were sitting on heavy losses on today's fall and investor confidence was unlikely to recover over the short term, brokers said.
($1=8.3 yuan)
China's crackdown on stock markets this week is partly fuelled by fears in Beijing that the volatility of the exchanges could lead to social instability, analysts said on Tuesday.
They said the move was also aimed at avoiding disruption caused by foreign and domestic speculators planning to pump money into the markets up to the mid-1997 handover of Hong Kong from London to Beijing and then pull it out again.
"In a transitional period when the ailing leader Deng Xiaoping is gradually moving out of polical arena, social stability is the primary concern of the leadership," said one executive with a Chinese brokerage.
"Stock boom and bust cycles do not fit in with the aim of social stability," he added.
A Shenzhen-based broker said there had been many rumours that the surges on the Shenzhen market were supported by overseas funds from Hong Kong and Macau.
"Some rumours said that foreign funds wanted to push up the Chinese markets before the (Hong Kong) takeover and depress them afterwards," the broker said.
The People's Daily newspaper, mouthpiece of the Communist Party, said in a harshly-worded commentary on Monday that China's stock markets had overheated on widespread speculation. It warned that if the markets crashed, the government would not step in to support them.
In anticipation of the response to the commentary, the stock exchanges last Friday evening introduced a 10 percent limit on movements of prices for individual shares.
On Monday and again on Tuesday, most shares on both the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges plunged to the 10 percent limit-down level.
Shanghai's domestic A share index lost 100.964 points or 9.64 percent to 946.716 points after falling 9.92 percent on Monday. The B share index shed 1.431 points or 2.39 percent to 58.498 points.
In Shenzhen, the A index plummeted 9.99 percent to 375.51 points while the B index dived 9.51 percent, to 121.64 points.
Most shares hit the daily limit-down of 10 percent shortly after the opening, as on Monday, and stayed there for the whole session, brokers said.
Since April, both domestic and foreign currency share prices on the two markets have surged on average by well over 100 percent.
"The central government has chosen the right time," said one political analyst. "There are still a few months to go before the Hong Kong takeover and stock prices had not surged so far that falls would push investors out on to the streets (to demonstrate)."
Some stock traders said that by talking down the markets, Beijing had effectively prevented heavy fresh liquidity flowing in.
"The inflow of hot money (speculative funds) has been cut off with retail investors frightened away and institutions taking heed of the warning," one trader said.
"It seems now that the markets will be stable around the date of the Hong Kong takeover," he added. "Prices are expected to move little after the impact of the crackdown is gradually digested."
China's crackdown on the stock markets this week is partly fuelled by fears in Beijing that the incredible volatility of the exchanges could lead to social instability, analysts said on Tuesday.
They said the move was also aimed at avoiding disruption caused by foreign and domestic speculators who had planned to pump money into the markets up to the mid-1997 handover of Hong Kong to Beijing, then pull their funds out again.
"In a transitional period when the ailing leader Deng Xiaoping is gradually moving out of political arena, social stability is the primary concern of the leadership," said one executive with a Chinese brokerage.
"Stock boom and bust cycles do not fit in with the aim of social stability," he added.
A Shenzhen-based broker said there had been many rumours that the surges on the Shenzhen market were supported by overseas funds from Hong Kong and Macau.
"Some rumours said that foreign funds wanted to push up the Chinese markets before the (Hong Kong) takeover and depress them afterwards," the broker said.
The official People's Daily said in a harshly worded commentary on Monday that China's stock markets had overheated on widespread speculation. It warned that if the markets crashed, the government would not step in to support them.
In anticipation of the response to the commentary, the stock exchanges last Friday evening introduced a 10 percent limit on movements of prices for individual shares.
On Monday and again on Tuesday, most shares on the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges plunged to the 10 percent limit-down level.
Since April, both domestic and foreign currency share prices on the two markets had surged on average by well over 100 percent.
"The central government has chosen the right time," said one political analyst. "There are still a few months to go before the Hong Kong takeover and stock prices had not surged so far that falls would push investors out on to the streets (to demonstrate)."
Some stock traders said that, by talking down the markets, Beijing had effectively prevented heavy fresh liquidity to flow into the markets.
"The inflow of hot money (speculative funds) has been cut off with retail investors frightened away and institutions taking heed of the warning," one trader said.
"It seems now that the markets will be 'stable' around the date of the Hong Kong takeover," he added. "Prices are expected to move little after the impact of the crackdown is gradually digested."
On Tuesday, a spokesman of the China Securities Regulatory Commission was quoted by local media as saying that the crackdown was aimed at protecting retail investors and that Beijing would continue to develop the markets.
"Our government has always insisted on the principle of steady development of the securities markets on the basis of their standardisation," he was quoted as saying.
"We do not care what kind of development the central government chooses," said one investor. "But periodic policy changes reflected in official statements really make us frustrated."
The strong surge in prices on China's two stock exchanges since April had been largely fuelled by expressions of support for the share markets from Beijing.
China's stock markets surged anew on Wednesday following two days of dramatic falls, as investors recovered from the shock of an official crackdown on speculation, traders said.
Shanghai's B share index closed up 9.84 percent at 64.252 points and the A index was up 7.34 percent at 1016.241.
In Shenzhen, the B share index closed limit-up 10 percent at 133.8 points while the domestic A index gained 4.37 percent to 391.92 points.
The gains followed two days of precipitous falls after an announcement from Beijing that the stock markets were overheated and that the authorities would not step in to help investors if they collapsed.
"Investors are recovering from the shock," one trader said. "Reassurances to investors from exchange officials and local media that Beijing will continue to develop the markets has helped."
The China Securities newspaper on Tuesday quoted the presidents of the Shanghai and Shenzhen exchanges as welcoming the crackdown, saying the markets needed stability to develop.
The newspaper also urged investors to be fully confident that the central government would continue to develop the stock markets on the basis of standardisation.
"Active buying emerged in the early afternoon, with an increasing number of investors reluctant to reduce their B share holdings after the nosedives of the past couple of days," a Shenzhen-based broker with Shanghai Guotai Securities said.
"Institutional buying targeted shares of firms with strong earnings records," he added.
Traders said that both domestic institutions and overseas investors built new positions on the B share market in the belief that the impact of the crackdown would be limited.
They said many investors believed B share prices were now very cheap and would rise in the short term. One analyst said Shanghai's B shares on average were priced at only one-third the level of their A-share counterparts.
Most B shares mostly ended limit-up on Wednesday.
Traders said A-share trading was dominated by speculators who wanted to take advantage of plunges in the past two days to build positions.
Some retail investors who had bought at higher levels also built positions on Wednesday to reduce the average cost of their shares, they added.
Several A shares, mostly blue-chips, closed limit-up. Market giant Shanghai Petrochemical rose 0.50 yuan to 6.50 yuan on volume of 42.5 million shares, making it the day's most active stock.
"The markets might be over-speculative on the whole, but blue chips have not been the target of excessive speculation," said one trader. "Shanghai Petrochmical, for instance, had a P/E (price-earnings) ratio of only 18 percent against an average of 40 for the market."
Traders believe the B share market is likely to continue to rise in the next few days, but that A share rises will be limited.
China's domestic A shares continued to plummet on Thursday with investor confidence still in tatters following the rude shock of a government crackdown on the markets on Monday, traders said.
Shanghai's foreign currency B share index ended little changed at 64.343 points with bargain-hunting support prices, but A shares on the market fell 7.54 percent to 940.548.
On the Shenzhen stock market next to Hong Kong, the A share index plunged 8.7 percent to 357.85 points, while the B shares were also down sharply, losing 5.42 percent to 126.54 points.
"A growing number of investors want to leave the A and B markets, at least for a while," a Shenzhen trader said.
Brokers said Shanghai A shares plunged on unstable market sentiment and reported seeing some panic selling on rumours that more negative market news could be announced at the weekend.
"Retail investors used the opportunity of a technical rebound on Wednesday to offset their positions," said one broker. "Sentiment is still weak."
The Shanghai B share market is looking the healthiest of the China share markets in the wake of the crackdown in which the Beijing authorities said stock trading was overheated and warned of a crash if speculative trading was not stopped.
"Technical charts show the B share index is likely to consolidate between 63 and 65 points in the short term with investors targeting stocks with strong profits records," a second broker said.
Inner Mongolia Erdos Cashmere was the star on expectation of good results, rising $0.052 or 9.84 percent to $0.580, on volume of 1.7 million shares.
Shanghai Tyre &amp; Rubber followed on institutional buying, up $0.034 or 8.21 percent to $0.448, on volume of 1.2 million shares.
In Shenzhen, brokers said the market was hit by institutions taking profits on the B share market with investors still jittery over Beijing's crackdown.
"Investors offset their positions whenever prices rose because they have little confidence in the market's short-term outlook after the falls earlier this week," an analyst said.
Many Shanghai B shares closed at the 10 percent limit-down with Dadonghai falling HK$0.36 to HK$3.20 on volume of 5.84 million shares on institutional selling, brokers said.
Changan Automobile traded the most on volume of 11.86 million shares, losing HK$0.20 to HK$3.55.
The A market plummeted with the majority of A shares closing at the 10 percent limit-down due to heavy selling in "rubbish stocks" -- shares of smaller firms with poor business results over the past few years, brokers said.
One Shenzhen broker predicted that the A shares could have a long way further to fall given their strong gains in the past few months.
But several Shenzhen counters with strong earnings records were seen being supported by institutional demand, brokers said.
Guangdong Power's A shares rose 0.93 yuan or 5.72 percent to 13.49 yuan, with its B shares up HK$0.35 or 6.36 percent to HK$5.85 per share, making them the best performers on the city's A and B share markets on Thursday.
The crackdown on China's young stock markets has triggered huge losses in share values and highlighted problems, particularly widespread irregularities and the lack of a regulatory structure, analysts said Friday.
The week of losses on the exchanges in the wake of a Beijing warning on speculation was also a re-run of the age-old Chinese boom-and-bust cycle: controls are relaxed, rule-breaking surges, the screws are tightened and the machine almost breaks.
"Widespread irregularities are partly a legacy of the old planned economy," said one economist. "But given the power of administrative edicts to influence the markets, some firms have no choice but to resort to irregularities to survive."
The sudden announcement of Beijing's wrath at the unruly stock markets, expressed in a People's Daily commentary on Monday, aimed to dampen speculative trading, but ironically could have the opposite effect, some analysts said.
"Policy changes have always been a key speculative topic on China's stock markets," said one trader. "To regulate the markets with official orders like this time might temporarily depress the speculative mood, but in longer term, it will further add weight to the speculative fever on policy shifts."
Market sources said that had Beijing used market means rather than administrative edicts to check the dangerous roller-coaster trend in share trading, the response of the markets would have been much less volatile.
As it was, Shanghai's domestic A share index plunged 20.07 percent to 922.34 points at the close of Friday's trading against Friday's close last week, while the foreign currency B index was down 3.84 percent to 63.743 points.
In Shenzhen, the A share index nosedived 29.07 percent on the week to 328.96 points, while the B index lost 15.94 percent to 125.56.
"Most investors are pessimistic about the short-term trend with turnover sharply down this week against last week," said one broker. "We had nearly no new accounts opened this week."
"The inflow of fresh money into A shares has almost stopped completely," a Shenzhen-based trader said. "Many investors are in despair seeing the price of their shares diving nearly every day."
Analysts said the dramatic changes this week sparked reflections on the bust-boom cycle which has dominated China's stock markets since they were re-established in 1990.
At its height, Shanghai's A share index had surged more than 100 percent and its Shenzhen counterpart over 300 percent since April when Beijing announced that it supported stock market development.
"The markets are poorly regulated," said one stock analyst. "One of the reasons for this is the lack of a national securities law governing the stock market."
The draft Securities Law, the topic of hot debate in the corridors of power in Beijing for years, is not expected to be enacted soon, analysts say.
Irregularities, including manipulation of selected share prices, have been rife in the Chinese markets for years.
In an effort to bring the industry to heel, authorities over the past month have punished branches of nearly all major state-run banks and securities houses for involvement in shady stock dealings.
The crackdown on China's young stock markets has triggered huge losses in share values and highlighted problems, particularly widespread irregularities and the lack of a regulatory structure, analysts said on Friday.
The week of losses on the exchanges in the wake of a Beijing warning on speculation was also a re-run of the age-old Chinese boom-and-bust cycle: controls are relaxed, rule-breaking surges, the screws are tightened and the machine almost breaks.
"Widespread irregularities are partly a legacy of the old planned economy," said one economist. "But given the power of administrative edicts to influence the markets, some firms have no choice but to resort to irregularities to survive."
The sudden announcement of Beijing's wrath at the unruly stock markets, expressed in a People's Daily commentary on Monday, aimed to dampen speculative trading, but ironically could have the opposite effect, some analysts said.
"Policy changes have always been a key speculative topic on China's stock markets," said one trader. "To regulate the markets with official orders like this time might temporarily depress the speculative mood, but in longer term, it will further add weight to the speculative fever on policy shifts."
Market sources said that had Beijing used market means rather than administrative edicts to check the dangerous roller-coaster trend in share trading, the response of the markets would have been much less volatile.
As it was, Shanghai's domestic A share index plunged 20.07 percent to 922.34 points at the close of Friday's trading against Friday's close last week, while the foreign currency B index was down 3.84 percent to 63.743 points.
In Shenzhen, the A share index nosedived 29.07 percent on the week to 328.96 points, while the B index lost 15.94 percent to 125.56.
"Most investors are pessimistic about the short-term trend with turnover sharply down this week against last week," said one broker. "We had nearly no new accounts opened this week."
"The inflow of fresh money into A shares has almost stopped completely," a Shenzhen-based trader said. "Many investors are in despair seeing the price of their shares diving nearly every day."
Analysts said the dramatic changes this week sparked reflections on the bust-boom cycle which has dominated China's stock markets since they were re-established in 1990.
At its height, Shanghai's A share index had surged more than 100 percent and its Shenzhen counterpart over 300 percent since April when Beijing announced that it supported stock market development.
"The markets are poorly regulated," said one stock analyst. "One of the reasons for this is the lack of a national securities law governing the stock market."
The draft Securities Law, the topic of hot debate in the corridors of power in Beijing for years, is not expected to be enacted soon, analysts say.
Irregularities, including manipulation of selected share prices, have been rife in the Chinese markets for years.
In an effort to bring the industry to heel, authorities over the past month have punished branches of nearly all major state-run banks and securities houses for involvement in shady stock dealings.
China's futures markets, which fell deeper into the gloom of official disapproval in 1996, look set for an even tighter year in 1997 with some small exchanges likely to be swallowed by bigger ones, analysts said on Friday.
There is still no sign of the long-awaited Futures Law being unveiled, but the analysts said the securities authorities have promised some new regulations in the first half of 1997 to provide a stronger regulatory basis for futures trading.
The markets, set up in the early 1990s, quickly became casinos with huge trading on commodities with often very small physical quantities for delivery, making the use of the markets for hedging -- the original purpose -- virtually impossible, analysts said.
In the past two years, trading volumes on China's futures exchanges have plummeted in the face of a relentless campaign by the securities authorities in Beijing to squeeze speculative activity out of the markets.
"The official measures, especially the ban on many institutions from trading futures, have pushed large amounts of money out of the markets and dramatically pulled down trading volumes on most exchanges," a local futures analyst said.
The Shanghai Metal Exchange, which is the least speculative of the 14 futures exchanges left open, expects total trade volume of 230 billion yuan in 1996, down from 455.8 billion yuan in 1995 and a high of 682 billion yuan in 1994, an exchange official said.
The authorities have ruthlessly hounded the speculative "hot money" which used to chase its way round from Suzhou red beans to Zhengzhou green beans and Hainan coffee, and have largely succeeded in killing the enthusiasm of speculators for futures.
In March, the China's Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) banned securities brokerages, trust and investment firms and state-run enterprises from trading commodities futures, forcing many traders out of the industry, traders said.
All commodity futures exchanges have been ordered to cap daily price movements and total holdings.
In October, the CSRC also abolished limits on the total amounts of goods for physical delivery, which was used to make it possible for wealthy institutions to build up huge long positions and then short-squeeze the market.
"Beijing has stressed restrictions rather than development for the futures markets because officials are angry about the repeated violations of rules and rampant irregularities," a local trader for metal futures said.
"No new money is coming into the futures markets," he added. "There are several safer investment methods, such as stocks and treasure bonds. Why take the extra policy risk?"
"Few people will pay much more attention to China's futures markets until the long-awaited Futures Law is introduced, which will indicate that the government has accepted the industry," a second trader said.
"It will still take some time for the Futures Law to be completed," a local exchange official said. "But the CSRC has said it will announce five new rules for the industry in the first half of the next year to fill up the regulatory vacuum."
Analysts said some of China's 14 existing futures exchanges will probably be closed down, merged or taken over in 1997 as the authorities continue their efforts to clean up the industry.
It is believed the authorities want to end up with four or five big exchanges.
In October, China's securities authorities ordered the Changchun United Commodity Exchange to merge with the Beijing Commodity Exchange, which was seen as the first of an expected series of mergers of exchanges, the analysts said.
"There are too many exchanges in China with most of them trading similar contracts and trading volumes for most contracts are too thin for hedging," a Shanghai-based dealer said.
Last week's stern crackdown on China's stock markets has increased the speculative instinct of investors to trade on rumours of policy shifts rather than on fundamentals, analysts said Monday.
The share markets started their latest bull run in April when Beijing announced it would support the markets.
Rumours and guesses about Beijing's attitude and plans have been the primary trading factor ever since, the analysts said.
While the Beijing authorities have been trying to convince investors to look more at long-term investment based on the fundamentals of the economy and of individual companies, they again chose an old-fashioned means of reining in the markets.
"The crackdown has shown again the risk of policy changes for China's stock markets," said an executive with a major Chinese securities house.
"Policy changes have been a very hot speculative topic in the past and the use of administrative orders like this to cool down the markets will make them an even hotter topic in the long run," he added.
Beijing last Monday charged that China's two stock markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen were overheated and warned that Beijing would not come to investors' rescue if the markets crashed.
"The action has cooled speculative activity for now," said an analyst with a foreign brokerage in Shanghai. "But the investment pattern has not changed. It is still political issues which drive the stock market up and down."
In the shake-out last week, investors generally took refuge in blue-chip shares and dumped the so-called "rubbish shares" that have soared in recent months on the basis of little more than an impression that Beijing wanted the markets up.
Analysts said market psychology could have been better influenced if the authorities had pulled share prices back down using market means such as the issue of more shares or the listing of some state or institutional shares.
One key problem of the Chinese stock markets is the lack of suitable supervisory mechanisms and regulations, leading to widespread irregularities such as share price manipulation and the use of credit for stock trading, the analysts said.
"With a stock market law lacking and regulations incomplete, many trading activities are in a legal no-man's land, making it difficult to check irregularities," said one analyst.
The draft Securities Law, the topic of hot debate in the corridors of power in Beijing for years, is not expected to be enacted any time soon, due partly to differences over who will have the final say on securities policy, the analysts said.
Responsibility for securities policy at present overlaps between the Securities Commission under the State Council (cabinet), the China Securities Regulatory Commission and the People's Bank of China, or central bank.
Shanghai's domestic A share index rose 17.606 points or 1.91 percent on Monday to end at 939.946 after losing about 20 percent in last week's trading. The foreign currency B share index was up 0.944 points or 1.48 percent to 64.687.
In Shenzhen, the A share index fell 6.71 points or 2.04 percent to 322.25, while the B share index soared 6.11 percent or 7.68 points to 133.24.
Last week's stern crackdown on China's stock markets has increased the speculative instinct of investors to trade on rumours of policy shifts rather than on fundamentals, analysts said on Monday.
The share markets started their latest bull run in April when Beijing announced it would support the markets.
Rumours and guesses about Beijing's attitude and plans have been the primary trading factor ever since, the analysts said.
While the Beijing authorities have been trying to convince investors to look more at long-term investment based on the fundamentals of the economy and of individual companies, they again chose an old-fashioned means of reining in the markets.
"The crackdown has shown again the risk of policy changes for China's stock markets," said an executive with a major Chinese securities house.
"Policy changes have been a very hot speculative topic in the past and the use of administrative orders like this to cool down the markets will make them an even hotter topic in the long run," he added.
Beijing last Monday charged that China's two stock markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen were overheated and warned that Beijing would not come to investors' rescue if the markets crashed.
"The action has cooled speculative activity for now," said an analyst with a foreign brokerage in Shanghai. "But the investment pattern has not changed. It is still political issues which drive the stock market up and down."
In the shake-out last week, investors generally took refuge in blue-chip shares and dumped the so-called "rubbish shares" which have soared in recent months on the basis of little more than an impression that Beijing wanted the markets up.
"Retail investors have turned more to blue-chip shares," said a trader. "Their prices have been stable despite the crackdown."
Analysts said market psychology could have been better influenced if the authorities had pulled share prices back down using market means such as the issue of more shares or the listing of some state or institutional shares.
One key problem of the Chinese share markets is the lack of suitable supervisory mechanisms and regulations, leading to widespread irregularities such as share price manipulation and the use of credit for stock trading, the analysts said.
"With a stock market law lacking and regulations incomplete, many trading activities are in a legal no-man's land, making it difficult to check irregularities," said one stock analyst.
The draft Securities Law, the topic of hot debate in the corridors of power in Beijing for years, is not expected to be enacted any time soon partly due to differences over who will have the final say on securities policy, the analysts said.
Responsibility for securities policy at present overlaps between the Securities Commission under the State Council (cabinet), the China Securities Regulatory Commission and the People's Bank of China, or central bank.
Shanghai's domestic A share index rose 17.606 points or 1.91 percent on Monday to end at 939.946 after losing about 20 percent in last week's trading. The foreign currency B share index was up 0.944 points or 1.48 percent to 64.687.
In Shenzhen, the A share index fell 6.71 points or 2.04 percent to 322.25, while the B share index soared 6.11 percent or 7.68 points to 133.24.
Chen Yifei, China's top-selling modern artist, is back home in Shanghai, basking in the glow of his international success and planning a shift in subject matter -- this time to illustrate China's Generation X.
The artist, best known for his almost photographic paintings of Chinese beauties, opened his first-ever retrospective exhibition on Saturday in the new Shanghai Museum.
The show, running through to January 19 before going on tour to other cities, is Chen's first exhibition in China.
It brings together more than 40 works from a variety of public and private sources, including drawings from Chen's youth during the 1960s Cultural Revolution, through to his latest paintings depicting the strong faces of Tibetan peasants.
But his next artistic goal is to capture on canvas the feel of Chinese urban youth in the mid-1990s, increasingly influenced by trends and concepts from beyond the borders of China, particularly Western culture.
"I want to do something on the life of the new generation, the ones I see dancing at the Hard Rock Cafe or New York New York (a Shanghai disco)," Chen said in an interview.
"This is a new generation of China after the revolution. I look at them and I think about the value of life. They look very happy, but maybe thinking a different way," he said.
MODERN CHINA'S TOP-SELLING ARTIST
Chen holds the record for the highest price paid at auction for a modern Chinese painting -- 2.86 million yuan ($344,000) for a Tibetan-theme painting called Wind of the Mountain Village, now owned by a Chinese securities firm.
Now 50 years old, Chen left China in 1980, the first mainland Chinese artist to emigrate to the United States in modern times.
But in spirit and in terms of artistic inspiration, he never really left.
His most famous paintings so far are a series of life-like portraits of Chinese women dressed in traditional garb, while his paintings reflecting the atmosphere of old Shanghai are well-known.
He continues to produce landscapes showing the canals and villages of the east China region that is his ancestral home and looking at his Tibetan portraits, you can almost smell the yak butter.
China is also at the heart of his other artistic interest -- making movies. In recent years, he has directed several movies with mixed commercial success but he says he is determined to press on with this branch of the visual arts.
He is currently working on three film projects, the first of which will be a documentary on the Jews who lived in Shanghai in the years before the Communist take-over in 1949, most of them refugees from repression in Europe.
CHINA'S NEW GENERATION OF ARTISTS
Chen said he was impressed by the standard of younger Chinese artists, particularly in Beijing and Shanghai, but declined to name any favourites.
"Many of the new generation are very hopeful. China will become very important on the world art market, the standard is really very high," he said.
He maintains apartments in New York and Shanghai, but there's an important difference.
"In my heart, Shanghai is my home," he said. "This is where I grew up. In New York, it's just a room."
He said he was really happy to see Shanghai developing so fast and so strongly.
"Everyone is watching Shanghai. If it can continue this level of development, this place has a lot of hope."
More foreign firms are finally beginning to realise the dream of the China market that has long tantalised traders -- selling goods to the world's largest slice of mankind and making money from it.
Many foreign companies remain stuck in China ventures that are loss-making and frustrating, but the number turning a profit or at least gaining solid market share is increasing, along with the market, according to analysts and businessmen.
In the 16 or so years since China opened its doors to the global economy, the country has become the second-biggest recipient of foreign investment funds in the world, after the United States.
Foreign brands such as Coca-Cola, Kentucky Fried Chicken and Lux soap have become household names throughout China, and the shelves of convenience stores from Harbin to Hainan are stuffed with foreign brand soaps, chocolates and cigarettes.
PERSISTENCE PAYS OFF
"Overall more and more companies are coming, which is not necessarily to say they're making money yet," said a Western diplomat in Shanghai. "But there's now a general view that there's not only great potential but also an increasingly good track record for companies that have persisted."
"You can now see that if you stick it out, you can make money and you can get good market share. Coca-Cola is now a household name thoughout China," he added.
Coca-Cola came back to China after a 30-year absence in 1979, and the company booked its first accounting profit for its China operations 11 years later, said John Farrell, head of China operations.
"You cannot afford not to be in China. It's just the reality of opening a country of this size and the size of the economy and population," Farrell said.
"But it takes a lot of patience and you need to be very diligent to build your business. It's not easy by any means."
Coca-Cola has 18 bottling plants across China, and with sales volume doubling every three years this is just the beginning.
Coca-Cola declines to say just how profitable the China market is. Like most other companies, it does not issue figures on its China operations.
MARCHING WITH THE CONSTRAINTS
"You have to march along with the constraints that you're given," Farrell said.
"The main thing for us was living up to the commitments we'd made on building plants, transferring technology and training people. The more we did that, the longer we did that, the more people would believe and trust us and allow us to expand a little bit more."
Among the sectors that have done well so far are communications equipment firms, such as Motorola and Ericsson, and low-priced consumer product makers.
"Generally speaking, the easiest place to make a profit tends to be in the consumer industry, usually fairly small-scale operations," said Anne Stevenson-Yang, director of China operations for the U.S.-China Business Council.
"That is, assuming the deal is done right," she added.
There are big variations on market access and ease of business for foreign companies depending on the sector they are trying to storm.
The restraints are few in areas such as consumer products, while in sectors such as banking, distribution and insurance, foreign firms are kept on a very tight leash.
BIGGER INVESTMENT EQUALS BIGGER RISK
Overall, companies involved in high-cost, long-term projects seem to bear a proportionately bigger risk, analysts said.
"Big heavy industry projects are a problem," said one foreign broker in Shanghai.
"Generally foreign businesses in trouble have a bad business plan, or they're doing things which China is not famous for -- like trying to build aeroplanes or something."
The automobile industry has seen its share of troubles for foreign firms who have ventured in.
Chrysler Corp had a famously difficult relationship when it set up a joint venture in Beijing in the early 1980s, and France's PSA Peugeot Citroen is looking at closing one of its two China plants.
"We're having some difficulties -- all Western carmarkers are having difficulties in China," said a Peugeot official in early December.
General Motors, which has been close to completing negotiations for a $1 billion automobile factory in Shanghai for months, is well behind schedule on its plans and could have trouble ever making a profit in China, according to some analysts.
"It's going to be very difficult for them to make money. But they're coming in because they feel they have no choice," said the Western diplomat. "It they don't do the deal, Ford will."
Hong Kong and Taiwan businessman have generally done much better in their investments than non-Chinese, said a representative for a Hong Kong trading group in Shanghai.
"But more people make money than they would admit," he added. "People find ways to shift profits to Hong Kong or from one company to another to make things look like break-even."
CHOOSING MARKET SHARE OVER PROFITS
Making money is anyway not a top priority for many companies in the China market, at least in the initial stages. Many are happy to break even or lose money for many years in order to gain market share.
The Canadian insurance company Manulife, for instance, which set up a joint venture last month, said it doesn't expect to see a profit for at least seven years.
"Many companies are ploughing everything back into expansion and advertising," said a Western diplomat. "In many cases, headquarters doesn't care if you make money, it's whether you're getting greater market share."
"If you're a global company you have to be here, and the potential risk of not being here is greater than losing your shirt for a while when you come in," said Richard Graham, representative of ING Barings in Shanghai.
Success and failure for a foreign company in China is also closely related to who they work with.
"The reasons for people failing are usually related to joint venture problems. Choosing the wrong partner is the source of a lot of difficulties," the diplomat said.
But analysts said profits and market share aside, major advances have been made by foreign firms in recent years in the areas of experience and staffing.
"There are many companies now which have a lot of experience of operations in China, their staff are more used to operating in Chinese ways, and local staff are more used to operating under international practice," said Barings' Graham.
"This should allow them to go forward more positively."
China on Monday named the first four foreign banks, based in Shanghai, to be allowed to conduct business in the local Chinese currency, ending months of speculation.
The four banks are the Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Banking Corp, Citibank, Tokyo-Mitsubishi Bank and the Industrial Bank of Japan.
A spokesman for the Shanghai branch of the People's Bank of China, the central bank, said the foreign banks would be allowed to do Chinese currency loans, deposits and some other business.
"The scope of the business was defined in the rules issued recently," he said but declined to give further details.
A report from the official Xinhua news agency two weeks ago said the chosen foreign banks would not be allowed to have oustanding local currency loans exceeding 35 percent of their foreign currency loans.
All foreign banks in China are currently restricted to do business in foreign currency and have been eager to gain a share of the huge local market for Chinese yuan deposits and loans.
Foreign banks doing China yuan business would have to adopt the regulations that applied to Chinese financial institutions, Xinhua said.
It did not elaborate, but that appeared to mean foreign banks would have to accept the same tax rate used for Chinese banks -- one of the key obstacles to implementing the policy change.
Foreign bank profits are currently taxed at a 15 percent rate while Chinese commercial banks are taxed at 33 percent and the main state banks at 55 percent.
A foreign banker working with one of the chosen banks said formal confirmation had been received today.
"But there were no details at all, no conditions of business given," he said.
A foreign banker with one of the other banks said he had not yet received formal notification.
"There has been no news," he said. "But even after we hear, it will still be at least a month or two before business would start. My impression is it will take quite a while. There are many things to sort out."
The tax rate issue remains unclear and is still the main obstacle to foreign banks starting up local currency business, he said.
The China manager of Credit Lyonnais, Jacques Bertholier, said he hoped his bank would be included within the second batch of banks to be granted approval to do yuan business, hopefully within a couple of months.
"It is not perfectly clear what the terms of business are, but there appears to be a good scope for activity," he said.
