Inco Ltd's huge nickel, copper and cobalt property at Voisey's Bay in remote Labrador keeps getting bigger, with 11 drill rigs working around the clock to define three enormous deposits that promise to upset the world's metals markets.  
"There are a couple hundred million tonnes for sure, close to proven," said Greg Soper, a drill manager for Archean Resources, which has an exploration contract until the end of the year at the Northern site on a sub-Arctic land mass that is closer to Greenland than to much of the rest of Canada.
"This here is a world class deposit. Every week we're hitting stuff," said Soper, waving his arm to point at the vast stretch of bog and thin forest surrounding the round, rocky hill where metals were discovered two years ago.  
Inco's most recent calculations, compiled in an internal report at the end of August, showed 138 million tonnes of resource (corrects from "proven or probable reserves") spread out over three different deposits at the Voisey's Bay property. Resources are potential reserves.
On average, the deposits graded 2.09 percent nickel, 1.24 percent copper and 0.99 percent cobalt, the report said.
At the Ovoid deposit, found close to the surface of a bog close to the Labrador Sea, drilling has outlined 37.5 million tonnes. Exploration is finished at the Ovoid and Inco now plans to mine the area through an open pit mine.  
The Eastern Deeps, which lies under a series of hills covered with sparse trees and lush moss, has not yet been defined.
Recent calculations showed 75.5 million tonnes of ore, but the deposit was open in all directions.
To the west of the Ovoid, in the Western Extension, drills are uncovering another rich deposit. The mineralization was uncovered last April, after Diamond Fields Resources Inc, the owner of Voisey's Bay, accepted Inco's C$4.3 billion takeover offer.  
So far, drilling has defined 24.7 million tonnes, but the deposit is growing steadily.
Both the Eastern Deeps and the Western Extension need extremely deep holes to strike significant metal, and each major hole takes about three weeks to drill, said Soper.
More than 340 holes have been completed so far, with a total drilling meterage of more than 135,000 metres, Inco said in its recent mine and mill project description.
"Over half of our holes are good. They're mineralized," said 25-year-old geologist Mary Vaughan as she examined a new box of core samples just brought in from the Eastern Deeps.  
"It just blows you away. It's an explorationist's dream."
Archean Resources plans to keep drilling at a breakneck pace until its contract ends in December.
Inco has not said whether it will extend Archean's contract, but the Toronto-based company has promised to spend C$20 million over the next four years on exploration.
Only five percent of the property has been explored so far, but small exploration companies that have claims surrounding Inco's 495-square-kilometre site have not found anything significant.  
New resource calculations are expected within the next month, Rick Gill, spokesman for Inco subsidiary Voisey's Bay Nickel Co told Reuters in St. John's, Newfoundland.
Mining at Voisey's Bay is expected to last at least 20 years, with a concentrator on site handling 15,000 tonnes of ore a day. Mining will likely continue all year round, despite high winds, extremely cold temperatures and thick ice that locks in the site for a few months every winter.
"The information that we have at this time suggests it will be possible to operate year 'round with ice breaker support," said Gill.
-- Reuters Toronto Bureau 416-941-8100
Production at the huge nickel deposit at Voisey's Bay in remote Labrador is still years away, but already it risks falling behind schedule because of environmental concerns and pressure from aboriginal groups.
Inco Ltd, the Toronto-based nickel giant that won control over the spectacular nickel, copper and cobalt property after a bidding war last spring, planned to start open pit production by 1998 and full-scale underground mining by 2000.
Weak metals prices will undermine third-quarter earnings for many North American metals producers, analysts surveyed by Reuters said.
"In most cases, we'll see they're going to be down, either year over year or quarter over quarter," said Manford Mallory, analyst for Research Capital. "Metal prices are down a long way and volumes in some cases are down too. The conditions are not as good as they were a year ago."
Copper is in the doldrums after having fallen sharply since mid-June, while nickel and aluminum have slid steadily.  
Gold has been anemic, hovering around US$380 an ounce.
"It's not going to be a buoyant trend," Mallory said. "Most of them are going to be reporting profits, but there will be a few losses as well."
Earnings in the mining sector were disappointing in the first quarter and dropped off in the second quarter when the copper scandal at Japan's Sumitomo Corp sent base metals downward.
The third quarter will be even worse, said base metals analyst David Davidson with Wood Gundy. He estimated earnings would be 10 to 15 percent lower than in the second quarter.  
"The more leverage you have to copper, the bigger the loss," he said in a phone interview.
Phelps Dodge Corp led the way on Thursday when it reported third-quarter net income of US$80.2 million or US$1.22 a share, compared to US$211.8 million or US$3.03 a share a year earlier.
Most large gold companies hedge part of their production, curbing their exposure to the low gold prices of the third quarter this year, said Davidson.
"But those who haven't much in the way of hedging are certainly suffering in the market," said Mallory.  
Investors should keep their eyes on Inco Ltd, said Davidson, who predicted "the earnings are not going to be great."
"You're going to have the impact of diluted earnings with the Diamond Fields Resources purchase," he said. Inco, the western world's largest nickel producer, completed the C$4.3 billion takeover of Diamond Fields Resources Ltd in August.
The takeover, along with a 10-day lockout at its Thompson, Manitoba facility and a smelter out of commission in Indonesia, will hurt earnings.
A chill swept through the Canadian village of Nain this month when a small plane carrying two mineral explorers disappeared in a snow squall.
Prospectors passing through the town near the huge Voisey's Bay nickel deposit, believed to be one of the largest in the world, spoke quietly about the missing men from Vancouver-based Castle Rock Exploration Corp., speculating about what happened, imagining themselves in their position.
"I fly a lot over this area, and you just never know," said Capt. Luc Plourde at the military base in Goose Bay, Labrador. "It's a rugged terrain. You can't imagine what it's like to survive out there."
Two hundred exploration companies are active in Labrador, staking more than 250,000 claims in the past two years and investing about C$85 million ($62.9 million U.S.) so far this year. About 184,000 diamond drill holes have been plunged into the dome-shaped hills that dot the sparse landscape, and only one site, Voisey's Bay, has revealed anything significant.
The nickel, copper and cobalt deposits at Voisey's Bay are among the biggest base metals discoveries ever. The world-class finds boosted stock in Vancouver-based Diamond Fields Resources Inc. from pennies to more than C$42 ($31) before the company was taken over by Toronto-based nickel giant Inco Ltd.
Exploration companies and investors from all over Canada want their own Cinderella story. The discomforts at most camps are tempered by hot running water, radio, videos, laundry facilities and good, hearty food, but stories of people being blown off cliffs, tents torn by the wind, and bad exploration luck persist.
"The feeling is another Voisey's Bay will be found, but at great depth," said geologist Kevin Brewer, who heads an exploration management service and works with several companies in the area.
The Voisey's Bay deposit was discovered in late 1993 by a pair of explorers who initially set out to look for diamonds. As the story goes, they spotted a rusty outcrop of mineralised rock, tested it and hit the jackpot.
No one else has been that lucky, noted Brewer.
"When you fly over the country, you see hundreds of really large rusty zones," he said in an interview in St John's, Newfoundland. "You see similar brilliant rusty hills, oxidised rocks that look tremendous. But there's nothing in them."
Many of the mining companies are giving up, but a few have made long-term financial commitments to continue drilling.
"It's really hard for a junior mining company now," observed Brewer. "You have to have more than a really good showing on the surface. People want drill results."
But David Barbour, in charge of exploration for Vancouver-based NDT Ventures Ltd., is still optimistic.
"There's lots of mineralisation kicking around out there," he said in an interview in the warm and spacious kitchen tent at one of NDT's snowy sites near Nain.
"The biggest setback to actually finding something is there's not much known about the geology of the area. There's so much land that hasn't been touched," said Wayne Jenkins, a Nain-based expediter for exploration companies.
The millions of dollars and influx of people in this forgotten patch of Canada have changed the isolated region permanently.
Residents of Nain and Goose Bay, about 250 miles (400 km) away, have started investing in junior mining stocks. Housing starts and new businesses in Goose Bay are booming.
In Nain, rents have soared. Expansion of the village is impossible because of a border of huge cliffs and hills as well as a shortage of municipal money for water, sewerage and electricity. What little space is available can command thousands of dollars a month in rent.
Helicopters and aircraft fly into Nain in a constant stream. Some new businesses have appeared along Nain's pot-holed, muddy streets.
The noise and activity have offended many of the Inuit, or Eskimos, who live in Nain. "There is the mindset that when you come to Labrador, you can do anything you want," said William Barbour, president of the Labrador Inuit Association, which acts as a regional government.
The Inuit have been trying to negotiate a land claim with the provincial government for 19 years, but mining companies seem to get permission to lay claims as a matter of course, he complained.
"It seems like the mining companies come first, not the community," added Fran Williams, who heads a local aboriginal radio station.
The Labrador Inuit Association has started issuing report cards to exploration companies as a reminder that they are under close scrutiny.
Before the huge nickel, copper and cobalt deposits at Voisey's Bay were discovered two years ago, the mainly aboriginal population of Nain did not know much about mining.
But as hundreds of prospectors flooded their snug coastal village in the northern Canadian province of Labrador, the inhabitants figured they had better learn fast.
"It fell on us like a ton of bricks in 1994," said William Barbour, president of the Labrador Inuit Association, which represents the Inuit -- or Eskimos -- who populate the frozen territory, which is on the Canadian mainland but is part of the Atlantic province of Newfoundland.
"There was panic. We felt completely ignored. So we educated ourselves in terms of the mining industry," Barbour told Reuters.
Now, even people with little education can keep up a steady conversation about massive sulphides and tailing ponds.
But that does not mean everybody sees things the same way as Inco Ltd, the Toronto-based nickel giant that owns the deposit. The tight-knit community of 1,200 is split over whether mining will help their remote town.
Adam Igloliorte, a 32-year-old Inuit from Nain, sees development as a chance for a good job. He has worked his way up to general labourer from janitor at the Voisey's Bay site.
Steady work and decent pay are hard to come by in the poor and troubled northern coast of Labrador, especially if, like Igloliorte, you only have six years of schooling.
"I got suspended (from school) and never went back," he said. Now he wants to upgrade his skills to land a permanent job with Inco once it takes over management of operations in January. "That would be excellent."
Igloliorte has improved his standard of living, is able to support his girlfriend and his one-year-old son and buy spare parts for his snowmobile.
He said he trusts Inco to be responsible as it develops the huge metals deposit that sits hidden underneath the moss which caribou graze on.
COMMUNITY FEARS OF WHAT MINING WILL BRING
Others are not as optimistic. They fear mining in the area will bring disease and drugs, destroy their aboriginal culture, eradicate their language, corrupt their daughters and upset the delicate balance of the vital ecosystem.
"Everybody sees some economic benefit. All the talk has been jobs," said Fran Williams, the director of an aboriginal radio station and local activist. "But there's still no focus on what the impact is on culture and tradition."
The effects are already starting to show in Nain, a town accessible only by plane, boat or snowmobile.
The community has struggled since the 1970s, when fish, the main resource, became scarce. Residents have experimented with a fish plant, commercialised caribou hunting and a nearby quarry, but so far nothing has overcome the dependence on government assistance or solved the alcohol and drug abuse, violence and suicide that so often stem from isolation and hardship in the region.
Williams feels mining and exploration are pulling her community further from a solution. Young men have been leaving to work in exploration camps, while women and the older generation stay behind to care for the huge number of children.
The men are too busy to hunt for the winter's supply of caribou, forcing their families to shop for the tasteless, outdated and costly canned food at the Nain grocery store.
"It's already having an impact on women," said Williams. "They are the ones with the least to gain and the most to lose. This activity will be a big disruption of family life."
The older people complain about the constant drone of airplanes and helicopters overhead.
Many of those earning large salaries at Voisey's Bay and other exploration camps have not learned how to handle the money. "We're not wage earners," said Williams. "We get it, we spend it."
While social services and courses may resolve some of the problems, the long-term effects of mining could be devastating.
"Drug abuse is already on the rise," said Williams, adding that she expects an increase in unwanted pregnancies, sexually transmitted diseases and violence as strangers bring their bad habits to town.
"It's incredible how all of Labrador has all of a sudden become dots of mining claims," she said. "You no longer feel like you're an inhabitant of your own land."
One 25-year-old from Nain who has worked at the Voisey's Bay site for about two years, is in an ideal position to gain from the development.
The man, who preferred not to be named, said he was kicked out of school, fathered two children when he was in his teens and has a criminal record for a string of alcohol-related assaults.
He was glad to get a position at Voisey's Bay after years of drifting between odd jobs. But he has no plans to make a career of it.
He does not trust Inco to treat him properly or respect the land, he said. And he resents the tight controls of managers, who ban liquor and keep close tabs on the workers.
He said he has seen an influx of drugs on the site, and he has become part of a chain of people who smuggle alcohol into Voisey's Bay for the workers.
Nain's transition to a mining town from a troubled, dependent community is bound to be bumpy, noted John Igloliorte, an elected elder and Adam's father. But he feels the results will be positive for his people.
"In the community, a lot of young people had nothing to do," he said in his native Inuktitut. "They were doing mischief, break and enters. That seems to have stopped a bit now that they have jobs."
Igloliorte and the other elders were opposed to exploration and development when it started, but most have changed their minds as they become better informed, he said.
"The companies are doing a good job. They're looking after the land and the environment," he said. "If they keep doing that, everything will be all right."
Poor metal prices hurt earnings at Canadian base metal miners in the third quarter, with profits down at Inco Ltd., Falconbridge Ltd. and Cominco Ltd.
Nickel giant Inco said on Monday its third-quarter profit fell to $29 million, or 19 cents a share, from $44 million or 33 cents a share a year earlier. The earnings per share for the 1996 third quarter were worse due partly to shares issued in the takeover of Diamond Fields Resources Inc.
Inco's rival, Falconbridge, earned $30.1 million ($22.3 million) or C17 cents (13 cents) a share excluding extraordinary gains, a steep drop from last year's C$84.5 million ($62.7 million) or C47 cents (35 cents) a share.
Vancouver-based Cominco, which produces zinc, nickel, copper and other metals, said earnings were C$5.2 million ($3.86 million) or C6 cents (4 cents) a share, down sharply from C$22 million ($16.4 million) or C25 cents (19 cents) a share last year.
All three cited copper as the main culprit.
The average price for copper on the London Metal Exchange in the third quarter was 90 cents a pound, vs. $1.37 at the same time last year, Cominco said.
The copper price plummeted in June after a copper scandal at Japanese metals giant Sumitomo Corp. The red metal has just begun to regain some of its strength.
All three companies also pointed to lower nickel prices as a major source of weakness in the third quarter.
The average nickel price for the quarter fell to $3.26 a pound from $3.92 at the same time last year, Cominco said.
Analysts said investors were now taking advantage of the lower stock prices to buy more shares.
Inco rose C$1.15 to C$41.90 in Toronto and by $1 to $31.125 in New York in late afternoon trading on Monday. Falconbridge rose 75 cents to C$29 ($21.48) and Cominco gained C45 cents to C$30.65 ($22.70) on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
Copper and nickel have strengthened recently, putting a shine on the fourth quarter, said mining analyst Tony Hayes at the Credifinance brokerage.
"I'm astounded that copper has not already risen. It will go very rapidly when it does move."
North America's largest gold producer, Toronto-based Barrick Gold Corp, reported lower third-quarter earnings on Tuesday due to an after-tax charge and higher operating costs.
Barrick's net income for the quarter fell to $21 million, or 6 cents a share, from $67.7 million, or 19 cents a share, in the same period a year earlier.
Earnings were slightly below analysts' expectations.
"I think their quarter clearly underscores that Barrick has made the transition from a growth company to one that's trying to maintain its existing base," said mining analyst Barry Allan of Gordon Capital.
Barrick pointed to higher cash costs, which rose to $203 an ounce from $194 an ounce a year earlier.
The company also took a $38 million hit to bail out of its Cerro Corona exploration project in Peru.
Barrick hiked its exploration budget more than 50 percent, to $46.4 million for the first nine months of the year, compared with $30.9 million previously.
Investors seemed to shrug that off. Barrick's shares rose C50 cents to C$36.15 in heavy trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange. In New York, the stock rose 37.5 cents to $26.875.
The market seemed positive to Barrick's plans to develop its Pascua mine in Chile and its new Pierina property in Peru, analysts said.
Barrick bought the Pierina deposit last summer through its $800 million takeover of Arequipa Resources Ltd, based on a minimum of 4.5 million ounces of gold. According to the company, recent drilling on the property suggests the number was conservative.
Barrick said production at Pierina should begin in late 1999 at a rate of 500,000 ounces of gold a year. Costs should be below $100 an ounce thanks to a substantial silver credit and high grade gold.
Capital costs should be about $200 million, the company said. It has eight drills on the property working to define the deposit.
"They are proceeding very aggressively on Pierina," Allan said. However, he cautioned that it was risky to make such claims while drilling was still underway and a feasibility study is still a long way off.
At Pascua in Chile, recent exploration suggests the deposit may extend across the nearby border into Argentina, Barrick said. Production is expected to begin in 1999, totalling 400,000 ounces a year at an operating cost of $240 per ounce. Capital costs are expected of about $475 million.
North America's largest gold producer, Toronto-based Barrick Gold Corp, reported lower third-quarter earnings on Tuesday due to an after-tax charge and higher operating costs.
"I think their quarter clearly underscores that Barrick has made the transition from a growth company to one that's trying to maintain its existing base," said mining analyst Barry Allan of Gordon Capital.  
Barrick's net income for the quarter fell to US$21 million, or US$0.06 a share, from US$67.7 million, or US$0.19 cents a share, in the same period a year earlier.
Earnings were slightly below analysts' expectations.
Barrick pointed to higher cash costs, which rose to US$203 an ounce from US$194 an ounce a year earlier.
The company also took a US$38 million hit to bail out of its Cerro Corona exploration project in Peru.
And Barrick hiked its exploration budget more than 50 percent, to US$46.4 million for the first nine months of the year, compared to US$30.9 million previously.  
Investors seemed to shrug that off. Barrick's shares rose C$0.50 to C$36.15 in heavy trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange. In New York, the stock rose 3/8 to US$26 7/8.
The market seemed positive to Barrick's plans to develop its Pascua mine in Chile and its new Pierina property in Peru, analysts said.
Barrick bought the Pierina deposit last summer through its US$800 million takeover of Arequipa Resources Ltd, based on a minimum of 4.5 million ounces of gold. According to the company, recent drilling on the property suggests the number was conservative.  
Barrick said production at Pierina should begin in late 1999 at a rate of 500,000 ounces of gold a year. Costs should be below US$100 an ounce thanks to a substantial silver credit and high grade gold.
Capital costs should be about US$200 million, the company said. It has eight drills on the property working to define the deposit.
"They are proceeding very aggressively on Pierina," analyst Allan said. However, he cautioned that it was risky to make such claims while drilling was still underway and a feasibility study is still a long way off.
At Pascua in Chile, recent exploration suggests the deposit may extend across the nearby border into Argentina, Barrick said. Production is expected to begin in 1999, totaling 400,000 ounces a year at an operating cost of US$240 per ounce. Capital costs are expected of about US$475 million.
-- Reuters Toronto Bureau 416 941-8100
Canada's Bre-X Minerals Ltd., moved on Monday to resolve a dispute over its huge Busang gold discovery in Indonesia, forging an alliance with a company controlled by the eldest son of Indonesia's President Suharto.
"This is an important first step to the resolution of Bre-X's problems," said gold analyst John Ing of Maison Placements Canada.
The stock jumped C$3.50 to C$24.30 on the Toronto Stock Exchange, topping actives on more than 6.4 million shares. On Nasdaq, Bre-X rose $2.625 to $18.25.
Bre-X said it will pay $40 million for a deal with PT Panutan Duta, part of the Panutan group run by Sigit Harjojudanto, Suharto's eldest son.
Analysts said the alliance with Panutan Duta, part of the Panutan group involved in energy, mining and telecommunications, should help Bre-X clear up a widely publicised dispute over the ownership of its glittering Busang gold discovery.
Bre-X stock has taken a beating in recent weeks because of the dispute.
One of Bre-X's Indonesian partners, Jusuf Merukh, is seeking a 40 percent stake in Busang, which has estimated gold reserves of 47 million ounces.
The Indonesian government has said it will delay issuing the crucial contracts of work to Bre-X until the dispute is resolved. Without the contracts, Bre-X cannot advance its work on the Busang deposit.
The dispute has also clouded Bre-X's quest to find a major mining partner to develop and operate Busang.
Panutan will receive a 10 percent interest in the richest parts of the Busang gold deposit on the island of Kalimantan, Bre-X said.
In return, Panutan will act as a consultant for Bre-X in Indonesia and help the Calgary, Alberta-based company deal with administrative and technical matters. The deal is conditional on Bre-X's receiving essential permits from the Indonesian government.
"Having an arrangement with this fellow is a bonus," said Ing, the analyst. "The key in Indonesia is who you know."
"They seemed to have teamed up with a partner with high standing," said mining analyst Michael Fowler of brokerage Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion.
"This should clear up most of the (ownership) claims that are out there."
Merukh told Reuters in Jakarta on Monday that he was optimistic a deal would be reached in November.
But Bre-X's hold on the Busang discovery is shrinking as it works out its problems, said Ing.
He said Bre-X will probably have to give away another slice of the deposit to Merukh and his Australian supporters, Golden Valley Mines NL.
"Slowly and salami-like, Bre-X is getting cut back," said Ing.
Officials at Bre-X did not return phone calls to discuss details of the alliance.
Major mining companies may have second thoughts about teaming up with Bre-X Minerals Ltd in its huge Indonesian gold discovery because of Bre-X's new strategic alliance, analysts said.
Bre-X announced this week an alliance with PT Panutan Duta, an Indonesian company controlled by Sigit Harjojudanto, the son of President Suharto.
Part of the deal forms a support services company to be owned 60 percent by the Bre-X group and 40 percent by Panutan.  
"There will be certain companies that look at this and shake their heads," said mining analyst Doug Leishman of Yorkton Securities.
The support services company will provide utilities, petroleum products and limestone for the Busang gold discovery on the island of Kalimantan, Bre-X said.
The new company could have control over major parts of operating and capital costs, said Leishman.
"If these things aren't done at normal world market prices, it could add on unwarranted capital and operating costs," he said in a telephone interview from Vancouver.  
Any major mining company considering a bid for Bre-X would have to take into account the potential extra costs and the loss of control over supplies that the new alliance brings, he said.
Bre-X is in the middle of a search for a major mining company to act as its partner to help develop the Busang discovery.
"Certain major companies will not like this. It ties them to a supplier, and no one likes that," Leishman said.  
Canadian gold giants Barrick Gold Corp and Placer Dome Inc, both said they needed more details about the supply company before they could judge whether it would be a factor in bidding for Busang.
"Does this change things? Unless you know the details of the agreements, you don't know if this changes things or not," Barrick spokesman Vince Borg said in an interview. "It could and it could not."
Bre-X would not return repeated telephone calls this week to ask for details of the Panutan agreement.  
Analyst Catherine Gignac at Deacon Capital Corp said the agreement is vital to Bre-X's progress.
"I think it's something they should have done two years ago," she said in an interview. "You need a local company that's on side. You need local connections."
Bre-X stock shot up C$3.50 to C$24.30 on Monday after the alliance was announced, but has slid back to C$22.40 since then as investors began to realize that the Panutan deal does not solve all Bre-X's problems, analysts said.
Bre-X has been plagued by a dispute over the ownership of Busang. One of its Indonesian partners is claiming up to 40 percent of the discovery and has said he will not back down despite Bre-X's alliance with Suharto's son.
The Indonesian government has vowed not to issue essential contracts of work until Bre-X sorts out its problems. The alliance with Panutan is also contingent on Bre-X receiving the permits.
--Reuters Toronto Bureau 416 941-8100
Barrick Gold Corp. completed its C$1 billion takeover of the promising smaller exploration company Arequipa Resources Ltd. Tuesday, solidifying its position as the world's third biggest gold producer.
"We are pleased that Arequipa shareholders have chosen so overwhelmingly to accept this offer," Barrick Chairman Peter Munk said in a statement. "We now have the opportunity to realize the potential of Arequipa's excellent assets."
A total of 93 percent of Arequipa shareholders accepted Barrick's C$30 ($21.94) a share bid overnight, and Barrick said it plans to exercise its right to buy the remaining shares.
Barrick said it will have to spend at least C$512 million ($374 million) and issue about 13.4 million shares to complete the takeover, giving the deal a total value of C$1.02 billion ($745 million) based on the closing price for Barrick stock Tuesday.
The acquisition gives Barrick, North America's largest gold mining company, ownership of Arequipa's prize possession, the Pierina gold deposit in Peru.
While exploration on the property is in its early stages, some experts have speculated the deposit has potential reserves of up to 12 million ounces of high-quality gold.
Barrick originally offered Arequipa shareholders C$27 a share July 11 to take over the Vancouver-based company. Analysts initially saw the offer as generous since exploration at Pierina was preliminary.
But Arequipa recently released a fresh batch of drill results from the property, attracting interest from other potential bidders.
On Aug. 16, Barrick raised its offer to C$30 a share to pre-empt a takeover battle.
More drill results were expected soon.
Hours after Barrick officials got the news that the takeover offer had succeeded, two top executives in charge of exploration left to take a closer look at their new treasure.
"They're on their way to Lima right now, to start work on Pierina," said company spokesman Vincent Borg. "What's next is to get a handle on the ore body."
Drilling on the property will continue at an accelerated pace, he said. Barrick also plans to send in additional drill rigs and prepare for engineering work leading up to an eventual feasibility study.
"Things will start kicking in," Borg said.
Analysts were also on their way to Vancouver to scrutinize data collected by Arequipa that Barrick has not yet seen.
Funding the takeover will not be a problem, Borg added. "We've got a very strong balance sheet. We've got no long-term debt."
But the company will have to pay interest on its line of credit and bump up its exploration budget to uncover the metal at Pierina, cutting into earnings, one analyst said.
The Arequipa acquisition was a very "aggressive" move for Barrick and signals the start of a bold, new expansion strategy for the gold giant, mining experts said.
"I don't think they'll stop here. I think they'll continue on the acquisition track," one said.
Barrick would not say if it had its eye on another property. But the company has said in the past it plans to make more than one acquisition.
Canadian gold giant Barrick Gold Corp is the most likely contender to partner junior mining company Bre-X Minerals Ltd in developing its huge Indonesian gold deposit, analysts polled by Reuters said.
"We really only have one potential front runner: Barrick," said gold analyst Barry Allan with Gordon Capital.
Barrick has demonstrated its interest in Indonesian gold by investing more than US$10 million in exploration and amassing a large land position in Indonesia, analysts said.  
And Barrick's association with a construction company run by the daughter of Indonesia's President Suharto suggests Barrick is carefully setting up its network to control a piece or all of the Busang, Bre-X's 47-million-ounce discovery in the middle of the jungles of Borneo.
"They're trying to position themselves the best they can," said one analyst who did not want to be named.  
Analysts who have been closely watching developments around Busang,said Barrick stands the best chance of bidding successfully for a stake in the property because Barrick's own high-priced stock, relative to the value of its assets, will look attractive to Bre-X shareholders.
"In order to pay the sort of multiples Bre-X is trading at, you have to have a high gold multiple in order to land the company or the property at these prices," said Rick Cohen at Goepel Shields in Vancouver.  
Bre-X shareholders will likely look for a combination of cash and shares so they can keep a stake in the fortunes of Busang, analysts said.
Bre-X is looking for a heavyweight mining company to buy all or part of the Busang discovery and act as operator of what is expected to become one of the world's biggest gold mines. But the search has been dogged by a dispute with Bre-X's Indonesian partners over ownership.
The spat has caused the Indonesian government to delay granting Bre-X essential contracts of work needed to develop Busang. Without the contracts, analysts said a bid for Bre-X would be unlikely.  
Bre-X has refused to speak to the media since it forged an alliance with Indonesian President Suharto's son last week. But some analysts said Bre-X told them recently the dispute should be cleared up this month.
While Barrick is at the top of the list of companies who could afford to buy into Bre-X, Vancouver-based Placer Dome Inc also has the resources and the attractive stock price to make a bid, analyst Cohen pointed out.
"The size of this deposit and the potential involved here sort of limits it to those two," he said.
Others said the Bre-X play was not Placer Dome's style.  
"Definitely Placer has the capability to do it. I just don't think they have the stomach for it," said Allan.
Newmont Gold Co, RTZ Corp PLC, Minorco SA and Freeport-McMoRan Copper and Gold Inc could also be in the running for Bre-X. However, their chances are not as good as Barrick's, analysts said, noting that Newmont, Freeport and RTZ already have large exposure in Indonesia.  
While the Luxemburg-based Minorco, controlled by Anglo American Corp of South Africa  ANGL.J., has recently raised US$400 million, the company's stock lacks the high multiple that would make it attractive to Bre-X shareholders.
Minorco could run into political problems if it were to make a bid for Bre-X, said one South African analyst who follows Minorco closely.
"The South Africans might not want to get into a situation that's so blatantly political," he said. "It might backfire on them."  
If Barrick does eventually succeed in controlling the Busang deposit, it would go a long way to fulfilling Barrick chief executive Peter Munk's dream of building the world's largest gold company to supplant Anglo American, analysts said.
"It fits very nicely with Munk's strategy," said one analyst. "Munk is not driven by money. He wants to have a legacy. He wants to be able to say he started with nothing and ended with the largest gold company in the world.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency lost a bid on Tuesday to freeze shares in Inco Ltd. worth $152 million belonging to international mining financier Robert Friedland.
The EPA had said that Friedland should be held responsible for environmental problems at a former gold mine in Summitville, Colorado. It requested an injunction on the shares until it could sue Friedland for $152 million in costs to clean up the Summitville site.
But an Ontario Court judge Tuesday shot down the EPA's arguments and scolded the agency for the "nondisclosure and misrepresentations" that he said riddled its case.
"The evidence has led me to the conclusion that the liability of Robert Friedland is anything but clear," Justice Robert Sharpe of Ontario Court's general division said as he read his decision.
He ordered that the Inco shares be held by Friedland's lawyers until Friday afternoon to give the United States a chance to apply for an appeal.
Lawyers for the United States would not say if they would appeal.
"This is the most devastating judgment they've ever had," Friedland lawyer Alan Lenczner said in an interview. "This is just unprofessional."
Friedland gained the Inco stock as part of Inco's takeover last August of Diamond Fields Resources, a company run by Friedland, which controlled the huge Voisey's Bay nickel deposit in remote Labrador.
In the 1980s, Friedland founded and ran Galactic Resources Ltd., the company that controlled the Summitville mine and the firm the EPA said was responsible for the pollution.
The EPA wanted Friedland's assets frozen since it said it had a strong case against Friedland in Colorado.
But the Ontario judge said the EPA's case was far from strong. The EPA failed to show that Friedland was directly responsible for any pollution in Summitville, he said.
"In my view there are serious shortcomings in the case of the United States," he said.
More important, the United States did not present the court with the full and fair information required for an injunction, making it hard for the judges who granted the injunction to make a fair decision, the judge said.
"This is a serious departure from the fundamental integrity of the judicial process," he said.
A previous ruling from Sharpe ordered the United States to disclose all documents related to the case, not just the ones the agency had presented voluntarily.
Those documents showed the EPA had doubts about its ability to win the case against Friedland, the judge said.
"The extent of nondisclosure of the United States in this case is serious and fundamental."
Galactic mined gold at the Summitville mine in the 1980s, using open-pit heap leaching methods where ore is placed on top of rubber pads and then sprayed with a cyanide mixture. Cyanide leaked through the pads, threatening the area's rivers.
Royal Oak Mines Inc is reshaping its operations to concentrate on its low-cost gold deposits in the Timmins area and British Columbia, the company president said Wednesday.
"We have refocused our strategy to bring on very low-cost production," Peggy Witte said in an analysts' conference call. "It's very clear that's where Royal Oak's future lies."  
The Kirkland, Washington-based gold producer said Wednesday it will close down its mine in Hope Brook, Newfoundland, and write down the reserves at its Colomac mine in the Northwest Territories.
Royal Oak expects to take C$37.4 million in charges because of the Hope Brook and Colomac decisions. After tax, the charges will amount to a decrease in net income of about C$27 million or C$0.19 a share in the fourth quarter of 1996.
The company plans to move most of the mining and mill assets from Hope Brook to its Matachewan project in northern Ontario.  
"It's a very positive story for us being able to redeploy those assets, and we did not want to spread our senior management too thin," Witte said, explaining the decision.
Hope Brook will shut down in the third quarter of 1997, while Matachewan is expected to start production in the second half of 1998, Royal Oak said.
The company recently increased its gold reserves at its Timmins and Matachewan properties, decided to expand its Pamour Mill and is putting together a feasibility study for an expanded open pit in the area.  
The northern Ontario mines, along with production expected in 1998 from the Kemess copper and gold mine in British Columbia, will boost production and decrease costs significantly for Royal Oak, said chief financial officer Jim Wood.
The company expects to produce 375,000 ounces at a cash costs of US$325 an ounce in 1997. In 1998, production will rise to 500,000 ounces at a cost of US$250 or US$260 an ounce. By 1999, the company expects up to 750,000 ounces at about US$240 an ounce, and in 2000, production should be almost one million ounces with costs in the low US$200s, Wood said.  
"Although we have closed out Hope Brook cash costs are somewhat disappointing at Colomac, the future of the company, with the Pamour expansion, looks very bright for us in terms of production and our average cash costs," he said.
The company reported third quarter profits of C$10.2 million or C$0.07 a share, up from C$6.2 million or C$0.05 a share a year earlier.
Gold production rose 13 percent in the quarter to 104,012 ounces from 92,159 ounces during the third quarter last year.
The increase came from the Pamour mine in Northern Ontario, which produced higher grade ore.  
Revenue was 48 percent higher in the third quarter, mainly because of a successful hedging program. The company realized a gold price of US$543 per ounce, compared to US$418 an ounce at the same time last year.
Royal Oak expects to produce about 400,000 ounces of gold in 1996 at a cash cost of US$335 an ounce. The lower production level and increase in cash cost from previous estimates are a result of lower grade ore at Colomac.
-- Reuters Toronto Bureau 416 941-8100
Everything old is new again in the aging gold zone near Timmins in Northern Ontario.
Exploration has exploded in the area, which has been mined since the early 1900s.
While most Canadian exploration companies are off making inroads in South America and Asia, a handful of innovative and optimistic junior companies are staying behind, hoping to strike gold on their home turf.
Everything old is new again in the ageing gold zone near Timmins in northern Ontario.
Exploration has exploded in the area, which has been mined since the early 1900s.
While most Canadian exploration companies are off making inroads in South America and Asia, a handful of innovative and optimistic junior companies are staying behind, hoping to strike gold on their home turf.
Established producers in the area, 438 miles (700 km) north of Toronto, are expanding and sinking millions of dollars into new exploration.
"We've had lots of speculative money coming in. It's got a lot of people interested," said Lorne Luhta, geologist for the Ontario Ministry of Northern Development and Mines. What better place to look but around Timmins, where there's been a history of gold."
Junior explorer Band-Ore Resources Inc. has attracted the most attention, after hitting mineralisation last February just outside the traditional mining camp.
"We kind of went against the trend," said Bruce Durham, vice president of Band-Ore. As everyone else was going off to Chile and Mexico and Africa and Asia, we sat here in Timmins and put together a large land position."
Band-Ore's find inspired other exploration companies to set up in the area and a couple of them have drilled some "interesting" holes, said mining analyst Barry Allan with Gordon Capital.
Major companies with established mines in the area have also been exploring and expanding.
Royal Oak Mines Inc. said this autumn it discovered more gold on its Timmins and nearby Matachewan holdings and decided to expand production. It is now reshaping operations to put Timmins at the centre of its production.
Echo Bay Mines Ltd. is considering an open pit mine at nearby Night Hawk Lake and Kinross Gold Corp. has been steadily increasing its reserves at its Hoyle Pond Mine and it has set up a separate exploration company to search out more prospects in the area.
Gold giant Placer Dome Inc. is turning its old underground deposit into a huge, low-cost, low-grade open-pit.
"One of the things that's rejuvenating the area is Placer Dome looking at their operation as a large, low-grade open pit as opposed to an underground operation," said Band-Ore's Durham.
A new emphasis on large, low-grade deposits has changed the way Placer Dome approaches mining in the area, confirmed Paul Burchell, senior geologist for Placer Dome in Timmins. "Our ideas have changed, and certainly the economics have changed for us."
The major producers have created an intricate infrastructure in the Timmins area that makes it attractive for exploration companies, said Durham. "We've got roads, workforce, cheap power and reliable workers. It can really help to keep the cost down."
But new technology has been the biggest boost for exploration in Timmins. Most of the old discoveries in the area were found where mineralised rock lies near the ground surface, said Burchell.
The areas being explored are covered with a thick layer of sand, gravel and clay. "It acts as a very effective mask. The gold has no signature," said Burchell.
With new exploration equipment, junior mining companies -- their pockets lined with the riches of the ongoing boom in exploration stocks -- can find fresh drilling targets.
But exploration in the area is expensive. And it takes more than money and persistence drilling to hit gold.
Band-Ore disregarded the traditional beliefs about geology in the area and explored in new directions.
"We kind of went contrary to that, reinterpreted some geophysical data and some of the old work done in the area, and came up with some new ideas," said Durham.
"It's one of those ideas that paid off."
Canadian mining company Bre-X Minerals Ltd has been in hiding since it announced 17 days ago that it has formed a partnership with the son of Indonesian ruler Suharto, prompting a flurry of comment on its ethics. (Corrects description of Suharto.)
Despite a constant whirl of rumors and persistent questions that have sent the company's shares on a roller coaster ride, Bre-X is maintaining a dogged silence. 
The Calgary-based company that controls one of the world's biggest gold prospects in Indonesia has not talked to the financial press for weeks. Company officials will take calls only from a handful of favoured analysts, according to market sources.
"I haven't had any calls returned," said gold analyst Rick Cohen with Goepel Shields in Vancouver. "There seems to be a certain number of people they talk to. Everybody's a bit in the dark." 
Bre-X sent out a news release on October 28 about its alliance Suharto's son, Sigit Harjojudanto, whose business influence is pervasive in Indonesia.
Since then, instead of directly addressing material questions about its business in Indonesia -- many of which are playing havoc with its stock price -- Bre-X has opted instead to leak to the market carefully selected press material.
On Sunday, for example, the company faxed the media, analysts and shareholders a copy of a story from the Far Eastern Economic Review detailing its links with Sigit. 
The article referred to Sigit's possible ties with the Indonesian army, stated flatly that one of Bre-X's Indonesian partners has been bought out and asserted that Canadian gold giant Barrick Gold Corp had tried to push Bre-X into a bad deal.
Despite questions about the article, Bre-X refused to respond and still has not said whether it endorses the story or puts any faith in the statements contained in the story.
"I've certainly suggested a few times that they talk to the media and clear things up," said Neil Winchester, manager of surveillance at the Toronto Stock Exchange. 
"It would be advantageous to the marketplace," he added.
Rumors have surrounded Bre-X since the Indonesian government said last month it would not issue essential contracts of work until Bre-X cleared up an ownership dispute with some of its Indonesian partners.
The dispute has placed a cloud over Bre-X's search to find a major mining partner to help it develop the rich Busang gold deposit in East Kalimantan, but the alliance with Suharto's son was expected to help the company clear up its problems. 
"They're optimistic that they can get everything (the permits) within a couple of weeks," said gold analyst Michael Fowler of Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion, who said he spoke with Bre-X on Tuesday.
But he said Bre-X would not comment on the article it distributed. "They just sent it out for general interest purposes," he added.
Still, the rumors in the article and other rampant gossip are taking a toll on shares linked to Bre-X. Other exploration companies in Asia have complained the uncertainty has spilled over and hurt their stocks. 
Minorca Resources Inc, a Canadian junior mining company that has an interest in the Busang deposit through an alliance with Bre-X's Indonesian partner, PT Askatindo Karya Mineral, has found itself on the defensive.
Talk about Askatindo being bought out is unfounded, Minorca president Roland Horst said in an interview. "They have no intention to sell out," he said.
Minorca's chairman is in Indonesia this week meeting with Askatindo officials and verified the company's intentions.
"There were discussions, but they were rebuffed," said Horst. 
He added that he also had a slew of unanswered questions about Bre-X's arrangements with Suharto's son.
"To be frank, the relationship between Minorca and Bre-X is relatively cool."
--Reuters Toronto Bureau 416 941-8100
Bre-X Minerals Ltd. has been silent since it said last month that it formed a partnership with the son of the Indonesian ruler Suharto, a move that has worried shareholders and prompted regulators to seek more information.
Despite a whirl of rumours and persistent questions that have sent the Canadian mining company's shares on a roller-coaster ride, Bre-X has maintained a dogged silence.
The Calgary-based company that controls one of the world's biggest gold prospects in Indonesia has not talked to the press for weeks. Company officials will take calls only from a handful of favoured analysts, according to market sources.
"I haven't had any calls returned," said gold analyst Rick Cohen with Goepel Shields in Vancouver. "There seems to be a certain number of people they talk to. Everybody's a bit in the dark."
Bre-X on Oct. 28 announced its alliance with Suharto's son, Sigit Harjojudanto, whose business influence is pervasive in Indonesia.
Since then, instead of directly addressing questions about its business in Indonesia -- many of which are playing havoc with the stock price -- Bre-X has opted instead to leak to the market carefully selected press material.
On Sunday, for example, the company faxed the media, analysts and shareholders a copy of a story from the Far Eastern Economic Review detailing its links with Sigit.
The article referred to Sigit's possible ties with the Indonesian army, stated that one of Bre-X's Indonesian partners has been bought out and asserted that gold giant Barrick Gold Corp. tried to push Bre-X into a bad deal.
Despite questions about the article, Bre-X refused to respond and still has not said whether it endorses the story or puts any faith in the statements.
"I've certainly suggested a few times that they talk to the media and clear things up," said Neil Winchester, manager of surveillance for the Toronto Stock Exchange. "It would be advantageous to the marketplace."
Rumours have shrouded Bre-X since the Indonesian government said last month it would not issue essential contracts for work on the project until Bre-X cleared up an ownership dispute with some of its Indonesian partners.
The dispute has put a cloud over Bre-X's search to find a major mining partner to help it develop the rich Busang gold deposit in East Kalimantan, but the alliance with Suharto's son was expected to help the company clear up its problems.
"They're optimistic that they can get everything within a couple of weeks," said gold analyst Michael Fowler of Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion, who said he spoke with Bre-X on Tuesday.
But he said Bre-X would not comment on the article it distributed. "They just sent it out for general interest purposes."
Still, statements in the article and other gossip were taking its toll on shares linked to Bre-X and other exploration companies in Asia have complained the uncertainty has hurt their stocks.
Minorca Resources Inc., a Canadian mining company that has an interest in the Busang deposit through an alliance with Bre-X's Indonesian partner, PT Askatindo Karya Mineral, has found itself on the defensive.
Talk about Askatindo being bought out is unfounded, Minorca President Roland Horst said in an interview. "They have no intention to sell out," he said.
Minorca's chairman is in Indonesia this week meeting with Askatindo officials and verified the company's intentions, Horst said.
Horst said he had a slew of unanswered questions about Bre-X's arrangements with Suharto's son too. "To be frank, the relationship between Minorca and Bre-X is relatively cool."
Canada's Bre-X Minerals Ltd could face a multi-billion-dollar lawsuit over the ownership of its spectacular Busang gold deposit in Indonesia.
The young Calgary-based company said Friday that one of its Indonesian partners, PT Krueng Gasui, threatened it and 19 others with legal action in Canadian courts, claiming damages of US$1.9 billion.
"I find it curious that PT Krueng Gasui has chosen to threaten a lawsuit in Canada relating to matters that allegedly occurred in Indonesia," Bre-X chief executive David Walsh said in a statement. "However, we will sit down with them and listen to what they have to say."
Krueng Gasui owns an undisputed 10 percent of one section of the Busang discovery. It claims it owns up to 40 percent of the entire deposit, but Bre-X says the Indonesian company does not have the documentation to back up its claims.
Bre-X, which closed down C$1 at 20.90 in heavy trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange, said Friday it had received a letter from its Indonesian partner demanding a meeting before November 22 to resolve the dispute. If Bre-X refuses or does not make an attempt to settle the argument, Krueng Gasui will sue, the letter said.
Bre-X said it has asked its lawyers to arrange a meeting.
"In my opinion, this (threat of a lawsuit) appears to be a last minute act of desperation," said gold analyst Chad Williams of Research Capital Corp.
"My question is, why have they waited so long? And why did they choose to do this in Canada?"
The dispute between Bre-X and Krueng Gasui, who is backed by Australia's Golden Valley Mines NL, became public at the beginning of October.
The argument prompted the Indonesian government to delay issuing vital contracts of work until the two parties worked out their difficulties. Without the contracts, Bre-X cannot proceed with work on Busang and has had to stall its search for a major gold producer to operate or buy the discovery, analysts say.
"The key is how the Indonesian government will react" to the lawsuit, said Williams.
The threat of a lawsuit gives Bre-X a strong incentive to settle with Krueng Gasui and Indonesian businessman Jusuf Merukh, who controls Krueng Gasui, said gold analyst Catherine Gignac of Deacon Capital.
While most analysts said it was too early to tell whether the Indonesian case would stand up in Canadian court, they said the threat of a lawsuit will definitely force Bre-X to treat the claims more seriously.
"It reinforces the uncertainty with respect to Bre-X," said gold analyst John Ing of Maison Placements. "My sense is this thing is not going away. This is more of a manoeuvring than an actual threat, but it does not look like this will end any time soon."
Krueng Gasui said in its letter that it will also sue the other Indonesian partners of Bre-X, some Bre-X officers and Canada's Minorca Resources Inc., which has a small stake in the discovery.
Minorca president Roland Horst said his company has no reason to be involved.
Exploration at Busang has outlined 47 million ounces of gold so far, and some analysts predict there could be up to 100 million ounces.
Canada's Bre-X Minerals Ltd could face a multi-billion-dollar lawsuit over the ownership of its spectacular Busang gold deposit in Indonesia.
The young Calgary-based company said Friday that one of its Indonesian partners, PT Krueng Gasui, threatened it and 19 others with legal action in Canadian courts, claiming damages of US$1.9 billion.
"I find it curious that PT Krueng Gasui has chosen to threaten a lawsuit in Canada relating to matters that allegedly occurred in Indonesia," Bre-X chief executive David Walsh said in a statement.
"However, we will sit down with them and listen to what they have to say."
Krueng Gasui owns an undisputed 10 percent of one section of the Busang discovery. It claims it owns up to 40 percent of the entire deposit, but Bre-X says the Indonesian company does not have the documentation to back up its claims.
Bre-X, which closed down C$1 at 20.90 in heavy trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange, said Friday it had received a letter from its Indonesian partner demanding a meeting before November 22 to resolve the dispute.
If Bre-X refuses or does not make an attempt to settle the argument, Krueng Gasui will sue, the letter said.
Bre-X said it has asked its lawyers to arrange a meeting.
"In my opinion, this (threat of a lawsuit) appears to be a last minute act of desperation," said gold analyst Chad Williams of Research Capital Corp.
"My question is, why have they waited so long? And why did they choose to do this in Canada?"
The dispute between Bre-X and Krueng Gasui, who is backed by Australia's Golden Valley Mines NL, became public at the beginning of October.
The argument prompted the Indonesian government to delay issuing vital contracts of work until the two parties worked out their difficulties.
Without the contracts, Bre-X cannot proceed with work on Busang and has had to stall its search for a major gold producer to operate or buy the discovery, analysts say.
"The key is how the Indonesian government will react" to the lawsuit, said Williams.
The threat of a lawsuit gives Bre-X a strong incentive to settle with Krueng Gasui and Indonesian businessman Jusuf Merukh, who controls Krueng Gasui, said gold analyst Catherine Gignac of Deacon Capital.
While most analysts said it was too early to tell whether the Indonesian case would stand up in Canadian court, they said the threat of a lawsuit will definitely force Bre-X to treat the claims more seriously.
"It reinforces the uncertainty with respect to Bre-X," said gold analyst John Ing of Maison Placements.
"My sense is this thing is not going away. This is more of a manoeuvring than an actual threat, but it does not look like this will end any time soon."
Krueng Gasui said in its letter that it will also sue the other Indonesian partners of Bre-X, some Bre-X officers and Canada's Minorca Resources Inc, which has a small stake in the discovery.
Minorca president Roland Horst said his company has no reason to be involved.
Exploration at Busang has outlined 47 million ounces of gold so far, and some analysts predict there could be up to 100 million ounces.
Canada's Trade Minister Art Eggleton is in good health and will leave Tuesday night for an international conference in Manila, despite being taken to hospital earlier Tuesday after he collapsed at a meeting here.
"The last thing I heard was he's still going to Manila," Eggleton's spokeswoman Elaine McArdle told Reuters by telephone from in Ottawa. "His health is great. It doesn't appear that anything is broken."  
Speakers had just finished addressing a luncheon audience of businessmen and trade officials at Toronto's Westin Harbour Castle Hotel when Eggleton, 53, tripped as he got up to leave the head table.
"There was a gap in the floorboards and he went right through them," McArdle said.
Other dignitaries helped Eggleton, pale and shaky, to a chair where he waited with his head resting on a table until ambulance attendants arrived. The attendants strapped on an oxygen mask and carried Eggleton out on a stretcher.  
Witnesses said he twisted his ankle as he fell and landed on his knee.
Eggleton had been expected to speak at the luncheon with Chilean President Eduardo Frei. Canada and Chile signed a free trade pact in Ottawa on Monday.
Eggleton plans to leave for Manila on Tuesday night for the Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation (APEC) annual meeting and leaders summit.
He is scheduled to accompany Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien to China and Japan after the APEC conference.
The world potash market is churning, and Canada's huge Potash Corp of Saskatchewan Inc is in the middle of the upheaval.
Since Potash Corp, the world's biggest potash producer, said last week it had entered into talks to buy a controlling stake in a major European potash firm, its stock has zigzagged as the market comes to terms with a quickly changing picture of the potash world.  
"You're getting into an interesting part of the fertilizer world, and I don't know what will happen," said James Searls, a potash analyst for the U.S. Geological Survey in Virginia.
"It's going to be really curious."
Potash Corp wants to acquire a 51 percent interest in Kali und Salz AG from German chemical conglomerate BASF AG. If it succeeds, Potash Corp would control 25 percent of Germany's four-million-tonne-per-year potash market.
The deal would boost the Saskatchewan company's share of world production capacity to about 50 percent from 35 percent, analysts have said.  
But there is another player waiting in the wings, promising to make Potash Corp's consolidation plans more intriguing.
Asia Pacific Resources Ltd of Vancouver has made an important potash discovery in Thailand. The company says exploration so far has shown at least one mine is economical.
"We believe we've got the potential for than one," Asia Pacific president Gerry Wright said in an interview. "It may be two, it may be three or whatever."  
Wright believes the property will be producing about two million tonnes of potash by the turn of the century and between four and six million tonnes by 2005 -- a sizable chunk of the world's current production of about 40 million tonnes last year.
While Asia Pacific plans to take develop the mines itself, it has signed confidentiality agreements with eight companies in the hopes of finding a partner, said Wright.
Potash Corp is not among them, he said.  
He hopes three of the eight will sign non-binding agreements with Asia Pacific by October and one will emerge as a partner by the first quarter of 1997.
The attraction of Asia Pacific's find is its location, said analyst Sam Kanes with ScotiaMcLeod in Toronto.
"These mines appear to have twice the margin per tonne that Saskatchewan Potash gets, because it's so close to the market that imports all of it," Kanes said.
China and the Pacific Rim are growing potash consumers, he said, and the Thai deposits are convenient.  
But Wright has no plans to take on Potash Corp for its market share.
"We have no interest in getting into a tussel with existing suppliers to that region," he said.
The growing market will be big enough for everyone, he said.
But market growth depends on healthy economic growth in Asia, said Michel Prud'homme, senior minerals analyst for federal department Natural Resources Canada.
In 1995, the type of potash produced by Potash Corp had a surplus supply capacity of about 7.5 million tonnes, he said.  
"Any new major project would be jeopardizing current supply arrangements."
The recent developments have the stock market in a tizzy. Potash Corp shares soared on news of its negotiations in Germany, but it has been a volatile ride for the stock since then.
The stock dropped off Wednesday after a U.S. brokerage downgraded it from a buy to an outperform. But it was up C$2.50 to C$104 on Thursday, due to hedge buying by fertilizer distributors trying to sidestep an expected potash price increase, analysts said.  
"It will remain volatile until this deal with Germany is settled and until APQ is settled," said Kanes.
Asia Pacific lost C$0.10, falling to C$10.15, but the stock has been climbing steadily on news from Thailand.
-- Reuters Toronto Bureau 416 941-8100
Gold giant Barrick Gold Corp. is negotiating with Canada's Bre-X Minerals Ltd. to gain control of Bre-X's huge Busang gold discovery in Indonesia, the two companies said on Tuesday.
The companies were negotiating under the "guidance" of the Indonesian government, which asked Bre-X to form a joint venture with Barrick, Bre-X said.
Calgary, Alberta-based Bre-X discovered Busang, one of the world's biggest gold deposits, in 1994.
Official estimates of Busang have outlined 47 million ounces of gold so far, but analysts have said that number could rise to 100 million ounces.
"This is a result of Barrick working very hard behind the scenes to circumvent Bre-X's sale process," one analyst said of the news. Bre-X has been seeking a partnership with a major gold producer to operate Busang.
To satisfy Indonesia, Bre-X would keep 25 percent of its stake and 75 percent would go to Toronto-based Barrick, the world's third largest gold producer.
Bre-X said that the Indonesian government "would appreciate it if the parties could consider a 10 percent participation being given to the Indonesian government."
The Indonesian government wants Barrick and Bre-X to reach a deal by December 4 or else the government "will take steps to prevent a delay in the development" of Busang, Bre-X said.
Development of Busang has been held up by disputes between Bre-X and its Indonesian partners over ownership of the discovery.
Bre-X, which controls 90 percent of Busang, said it asked Indonesia's Mines Ministry if other deals would be acceptable, but had not yet received an answer.
A deal between the two companies was not a sure thing, Barrick spokesman Vince Borg said in an interview.
He said he had no details about how much money or stock would change hands or when a deal would be reached.
With the Indonesian government guiding the Busang negotiations, Bre-X's powers to negotiate a favorable deal were curbed, analysts said.
"There have been some constraints imposed on Bre-X," said mining analyst Chad Williams at Research Capital Corp. in Montreal. "That's going to negatively impact on how much Bre-X can receive for its interest."
But Barrick has an international reputation at stake and will have to be seen to treat Bre-X fairly, analysts said.
"Given the possible questions that may be raised over how Barrick obtained this special status, it will be essential that they are viewed as treating Bre-X shareholders fairly in any negotiations going forward," said an analyst who did not wish to be identified.
Barrick shares soared on the news, gaining C$2.30 to C$38.85 by mid-afternoon on the Toronto Stock Exchange. They rose 2-1/4 to 29-3/8 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Bre-X shares fell in Toronto before the news and held steady in active trading at C$20.10, down C$2.45, after the market digested the news.
Its stock has been volatile lately, clouded by the ownership dispute over Busang.
Busang would set Barrick well on its way to achieving its dream of becoming the world's biggest gold company.
In 1995, the company -- already North America's largest -- produced 3.1 million ounces of gold and had gold reserves totaling 43.3 million ounces.
It has become increasingly aggressive in moving towards its goal, analysts said.
Last summer, Barrick acquired Arequipa Resources Ltd. and its promising Pierina gold property in Peru for about $800 million.
-- Reuters Toronto Bureau 416-941-8100
North America's largest gold producer, Barrick Gold Corp., is negotiating with Canada's Bre-X Minerals Ltd. to gain control of Bre-X's huge Busang gold discovery in Indonesia, the companies said Tuesday.
Acquiring a stake in Busang would set Barrick well on its way to becoming the world's biggest gold producer, industry analysts said. It is currently ranked third.
Barrick has become increasingly aggressive in moving toward its goal, analysts said. Last summer, it acquired Arequipa Resources Ltd. including its promising Pierina gold property in Peru, for about $800 million.
The companies were negotiating under the guidance of the Indonesian government, which asked Bre-X to form a joint venture with Barrick, Bre-X said.
Calgary, Alberta-based Bre-X discovered Busang, one of the world's biggest gold deposits, in 1994.
Official estimates of Busang have outlined 47 million ounces of gold so far, but industry analysts have said that number could rise to 100 million ounces.
"This is a result of Barrick working very hard behind the scenes to circumvent Bre-X's sale process," one analyst said. Bre-X has been seeking a partnership with a major gold producer to operate Busang.
To satisfy Indonesia, Bre-X would keep 25 percent of its stake and 75 percent would go to Toronto-based Barrick.
Bre-X said the Indonesian government "would appreciate it if the parties could consider a 10 percent participation being given to the Indonesian government."
The Indonesian government wants Barrick and Bre-X to reach a deal by Dec. 4, or else the government "will take steps to prevent a delay in the development" of Busang, Bre-X said.
Development of Busang has been held up by disputes between Bre-X and its Indonesian partners over ownership of the discovery. Bre-X, which controls 90 percent of Busang, said it asked Indonesia's Mines Ministry if other deals would be acceptable, but had not yet received an answer.
A deal between the two companies was not a sure thing, Barrick spokesman Vince Borg said.
With the Indonesian government guiding the Busang negotiations, Bre-X's powers to negotiate a favourable deal appear to be curbed, analysts said.
"There have been some constraints imposed on Bre-X," said analyst Chad Williams at Research Capital Corp. in Montreal. "That's going to negatively impact on how much Bre-X can receive for its interest."
Barrick has an international reputation at stake and will have to be seen as treating Bre-X fairly, analysts said.
"Given the possible questions that may be raised over how Barrick obtained this special status, it will be essential that they are viewed as treating Bre-X shareholders fairly in any negotiations going forward," said one analyst who asked not to be identified.
Barrick shares soared on the news, gaining C$2.45 ($1.82) to C$39 ($29.05) on the Toronto Stock Exchange. They rose $1.75 to $28.875 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Bre-X shares fell in Toronto before the news and held steady at C$20.35 ($15.16), down C$2.20 ($1.64) afterward. The stock has been volatile lately, clouded by the ownership dispute over Busang.
In 1995, Barrick -- already North America's largest gold miner -- produced 3.1 million ounces of gold and had gold reserves totalling 43.3 million ounces.
Canada's gold giant Placer Dome Inc said it is poised to become a more powerful player in the Asia-Pacific region with its late Wednesday US$600 million takeover bid for Highlands Gold Ltd and the rest of its subsidiary, Placer Pacific Ltd.
A takeover of Papua New Guinea's Highlands would make Placer the main company involved in the rich Porgera gold deposit in that country,  Placer Dome spokesman Hugh Leggatt said in an interview from Vancouver.
"We think exploration at Porgera will be very prospective in the future," he said.
"It simplifies our structure and we believe it gives us more bang for the buck in terms of future exploration."
Highlands owns 25 percent of the Porgera joint venture. Placer Pacific also owns 25 percent of the gold deposit and is the mine's manager. The takeovers would give Placer Dome a 50 percent stake.
If the takeovers are successful, Placer Dome's yearly gold production would be boosted by 430,000 ounces to more than three million ounces a year by 1998, Leggatt said.
Reserves would go up by four million ounces to a total of 30 million ounces, he said.
"It clearly consolidates Placer's position in Porgera," said gold analyst David Christensen of Merrill Lynch in San Francisco.
"It's a very high quality operation with low production costs."
But Highlands' initial reaction to the takeover bid was to advise shareholders not to sell their shares.
"At the moment, the advice would be not to sell," Highlands company secretary Phillip West told Reuters in Sydney. "But the directors are considering the offer and are expected to make a statement later today," he said.
Placer has offered A$0.75 (corrects from A$0.25) a share for Highlands and has offered one Placer Dome share for every 15 Placer Pacific shares.
"We think it's a very fair bid. We have no intention of changing it," said Leggatt.
Placer already owns 75 percent of Placer Pacific and 33 percent of Highlands Gold.
It said its bid for Highlands represents a 36 percent premium to the price of Highlands shares on November 26, and its bid for Placer Pacific has a premium of almost 50 percent.
"This is about growth for Placer Dome shareholders and a golden opportunity for the shareholders of Highlands Gold and minority shareholders of Placer Pacific," John Willson, Placer's chief executive, said in a statement.
"We have great confidence in the Asia Pacific region. Placer Dome is consolidating its presence to compete more effectively."
Canada's Barrick Gold Corp seems poised to supplant two South African mining giants to become the world's biggest gold producer through an unprecedented deal which will give it a majority share in Indonesia's rich Busang gold discovery.
Barrick, whose high-profile board of directors includes a former U.S. President George Bush, on Wednesday confirmed weeks of rumors it was negotiating with Bre-X Minerals Ltd for a stake in the Busang deposit, which contains at least 47 million ounces of gold, possibly more.
The unusual negotiations were requested by the Indonesian government, which has urged Bre-X to hand over 75 percent of its Busang stake to Barrick and form a joint venture.
"If this thing comes off, it makes Barrick the leading gold producer in the world," said Fred Ketchen, vice-president of Toronto brokerage ScotiaMcLeod.
"It indicates the advantages to major companies in having such high profile people on their board as George Bush and (former Canadian prime minister) Brian Mulroney."
Exploration at the Busang property is still in its early days, but already the potential promises to catapault Barrick's production above that of the world's two leading gold companies, Anglo American Corp of South Africa Ltd and Gold Fields of South Africa Ltd.
Barrick started with basically no gold production in 1983 and grew through acquisition and exploration to produce about 3.1 million ounces a year.
Barrick's flamboyant chairman Peter Munk, a fabulously wealthy risk taker well connected in both business and politics, has made no secret of his ambition to make his company number one.
While neither Barrick nor Bre-X would comment on how Barrick managed to persuade the Indonesian government to virtually mandate a deal with Bre-X, pieces of an intriguing jigsaw are beginning to fit together.
Bre-X bought the Busang properties in 1993 and made the huge gold find in 1995. The discovery propelled the company's stock from pennies to over C$200 before a stock split.
After Bre-X announced it would search for a heavyweight mining partner in Busang, the Cinderella story turned sour.
One of Bre-X's Indonesian partners claimed rights to up to 40 percent of the deposit and threatened to sue. The Indonesian government then delayed granting Bre-X its vital mining permits because of the ensuing disputes. "It's quite clear that Bre-X did not follow protocol in its ownership issues," said an analyst who asked not to be named.
So Bre-X set up a strategic alliance with the eldest son of Indonesia's President Suharto, hoping the alliance would help sort out its problems. At the same time, Barrick was worked behind the scenes to gain the upper hand, sources said.
"Peter Munk is a pretty smart guy," said Ketchen. "No grass grows under his feet."
Barrick developed a relationship with Suharto's eldest daughter, hiring her construction company for future mining work. It developed ties with the Indonesian government, probably using Bush and Mulroney's influence, sources said.
"They (Barrick) really did the end run. There was lots of arm twisting," said an executive at a rival mining company.
Spokesmen for both Bush and Mulroney declined comment.
With the Indonesian government almost forcing Bre-X into Barrick's arms, Bre-X has lost much of its bargaining power. "The government is God here. It holds most of the cards," said Michael Fowler with brokerage Levesque Beaubien Geoffiron.
Jakarta has given the companies until December 4 to come up with an arrangement. If they do not, the Indonesian government could take matters into its own hands.
But on Wednesday Bre-X investors seemed confident that Bre-X would win a reasonable deal. They pushed the stock up C$0.65 to 21.00 in heavy trading. Barrick rose 0.75 to 39.65.
"At the end of the day, I believe Barrick will be fair," said Fowler. Barrick has an international reputation to uphold and could face lawsuits from Bre-X shareholders if it tries to undermine Bre-X. Barrick may buy part of Busang and act as operator, rather than bidding for Bre-X, analysts said.
"None of the parties involved here will walk away completely unscathed," said analyst David Christensen with Merrill Lynch in San Francisco.
With all the intrigue and rumor clouding the Busang developments, investors will always wonder if they've heard the whole story, he said.
Shareholders are troubled about negotiations between Barrick Gold Corp and Bre-X Minerals Ltd over the huge Busang gold deposit in Indonesia.
Some Bre-X shareholders are concerned they may be pushed into a bad deal; while some Barrick shareholders are worried they could emerge from any deal with a poor reputation.
"Shareholders are very vocal at this point," gold analyst Michael Fowler of brokerage Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion said Friday. "And you've got some influential shareholders here."
Many big institutions hold both stocks, he noted.
"I think it's the responsibility of Barrick to be responsible here, given that Bre-X has a gun to its head."
Earlier this week, Calgary-based Bre-X said the Indonesian government had told it to negotiate with gold giant Barrick Gold to carve up Bre-X's stake in Busang.
Jakarta wants Barrick to control 75 percent and Bre-X to control 25 percent, while both are to consider giving a 10 percent stake to the Indonesian government, Bre-X said.
"It's got to be a fair deal. Barrick can't screw Bre-X shareholders or there will be hell to pay," said Fowler.
If Barrick makes what is seen as a fair deal with Bre-X, shareholders may be prepared to ignore the fact that Bre-X is negotiating with a gun to its head, oberved a portfolio manager at one Canadian institution that has significant holdings in both companies.
"Everybody can sort of hold their nose and say, this thing smells, but it doesn't smell too badly," said the source, who asked not to be indentified.
However, if Barrick takes advantage of its favorable position and does not treat Bre-X fairly, "then it smells very, very bad," the portfolio manager said.
"The constraint on Barrick is that they have to go back to the capital markets from time to time doing other deals. "It's a question of sawing off somewhere where it smells but doesn't smell too bad," he told Reuters.
Retail shareholders are expressing their worries too.
One Bre-X shareholder, Gregory Chorny, who said he and his family owned about one percent of Bre-X's issued shares, circulated a letter to other shareholders on Friday, urging them to register their concerns by faxing a form letter to Barrick and Bre-X.
"I wish to register my concern with these developments and put both Bre-X and Barrick on notice that any transaction struck between them must fully represent full and fair value to Bre-X shareholders," the letter reads.
"I and other like-minded Bre-X shareholders plan to watch developments closely and are prepared to take appropriate action to ensure the rights of Bre-X shareholders are fully respected."
The letter demands access to any internal or external resource calculations so that shareholders can better judge the fair value of any deal between the two companies.
"We've had 4 1/2 months of drills working on that site and no published results. How can anyone possibly comment on the value?" Chorny told Reuters.
While Chorny acknowledged it is too early to judge the success of campaign, he said he had consulted with  "several dozens" of concerned Bre-X shareholders.
A fax machine at Bre-X was reportedly spewing out letters from shareholders at full tilt. Barrick spokesman Vince Borg said his company's fax machines were no busier than usual.
Consolidated Eurocan Ventures Ltd , a small Canadian mining exploration company, was poised to gain control of one of the world's largest unexplored copper-cobalt discoveries on Friday.
The Zaire government agreed to a deal with the Vancouver-based company backed by Geneva-based Swedish financier Adolf Lundin, spokesmen from both sides told Reuters in Zaire. The deal gives Gecamines, Zaire's state-owned mining company, a 45 percent stake in the huge Tenke Fungurume deposit. Eurocan will have a 55 percent stake, sources said.  
A spokeswoman for Eurocan in Vancouver said she expected official confirmation by Monday morning.
Eurocan has said it expected to win the property for US$250 million and a commitment to develop the property.
"It's a very satisfactory deal for Eurocan, if they've got it," said Andrew Milligan, president of Cornucopia Resources Ltd, a Vancouver-based company that had also had its eye on Tenke Fungurume.
"It's one of the best projects anywhere in the world."  
Cornucopia had formed a tentative consortium last spring with metals giants Inco Ltd and Phelps Dodge Corp, hoping to submit a proposal for the project.
But Eurocan's pact freezes Cornucopia out of the running.
The deal gives a hint of some stability in Zaire's business world, said Ken MacLeod, president and chief executive of International Panorama Resource Corp, another Vancouver-based company exploring in Zaire.
"It gives a signal that the government is working and it's in business," he said in an interview. "From an investment perspective, it's a powerful message.  
"It means when Gecamines gets involved in an agreement, the government backs them up."
But some analysts were concerned about the high risks involved in doing business in Zaire, a country plagued by political uncertainty and overrun by crowds of refugees from neighboring Rwanda.
"Zaire is a basketcase," said mining analyst Tony Hayes at brokerage Credifinance in Toronto.
The amount of money Eurocan will have to invest and pay for the project is "ridiculous" for the return and the risk the company can expect, he said.
Milligan estimated it would cost about US$300 million for initial development of Tenke Fungurume and up to US$3 billion in total capital costs.
The project was previously explored by a consortium led by Anglo American Corp of South Africa Ltd, which invested almost US$300 million in the project in the 1970s but walked away because of political risk.
-- Heather Scoffield, Reuters Toronto Bureau 416 941-8104
Inco Ltd's huge Voisey's Bay nickel deposit will help turn the company into a 750-million pound a year low-cost nickel producer by the year 2001, company executives said on Monday.
The new discovery will propel the company's growth by 86 percent over 1995 when Inco produced 403 million pounds of nickel, Inco chairman and chief executive Mike Sopko said in a speech to media and analysts.
"We want to remain the world's leading nickel producer in a growing nickel market," he said.
Costs will decline by 23 percent because of Voisey's Bay, from $1.30 a pound in 1995 to 0.89, said chief financial officer Tony Munday.
But capital costs for Voisey's Bay will be higher than initially thought, said Stuart Gendron, president of Voisey's Bay Nickel Co, a unit of Inco.
The company now expects to spend US$1.4 billion on facilities until the year 2000, up from earlier estimates of US$1.1 billion, he said. The company expects to finish a feasibility study by the end of this year, he added.
Inco took over Diamond Fields Resources Inc last summer for US$3.3 billion and won control of the giant Voisey's Bay resource. The company expects to be producing 270 million pounds of nickel a year from the property by 2001.
In the near term, Inco said its production should grow in 1997 to 430 million pounds, up from 415 million in 1996. By 1998, nickel production should reach 450 million pounds, the company said.
While world nickel supply and demand were in balance in 1996, nickel demand should slightly outpace supply in 1997, said Peter Salathiel, vice-president of marketing.
"I would argue that in the near term, 97-98, the supply-demand fundamentals for nickel look very good," he said.
He said it was mystery to him why nickel prices have been trending down recently, but he pointed to a glut in the stainless steel market.
"The stainless steel industry is going through kind of a crisis right at the moment," he said.
He said he did not expect any increase in Russian production of nickel in the next three to four years.
But Salathiel, who will retire at the end of the year, would not predict a nickel price for next year.
"The one thing I've learned is it's impossible to predict nickel prices," he said.
Inco plans to spend US$68.6 million on exploration next year, up from an expectedUS$55.1 million this year, said Bob Horn, vice-president of exploration.
((Heather Scoffield, Reuters Toronto Bureau 416 941-8104))
Some of the world's most influential gold producers are upping the ante as a December 4 deadline edges closer for Canada's Bre-X Minerals Ltd to make a deal with gold giant Barrick Gold Corp.
At stake is the rich Busang gold deposit in Indonesia. New estimates released on Tuesday suggest the discovery contains more than 57 million ounces of gold that can be mined at the low cost of US$96 an ounce.
The Indonesian government has virtually mandated that Bre-X must carve up its find, with Barrick getting 75 percent of Bre-X's stake and Bre-X 25 percent.
And the government of President Suharto has also made it plain it would "appreciate" a stake of 10 percent in Busang.
But now, some major figures in the gold mining world are protesting that the deal ordered by Indonesia is unprecedented and unfair. They are pressuring Jakarta to allow rival bids.
"I think it's Bre-X's natural right to have a say who their partner will be," John Willson, chief executive officer of Vancouver-based Placer Dome Inc, told Reuters in an interview on Tuesday.
Placer Dome, Canada's second biggest gold company and one of the world's largest, wants to bid on Busang, and Willson said Newmont Mining Corp and Teck Corp have also been at the negotiating table for months.
The three heavyweight mining companies were abruptly shut out of the process last month when Indonesia forced Bre-X into Barrick's arms.
Analysts have suggested Barrick used its business connections with Suharto's eldest daughter, as well as political connections through Barrick advisers former U.S. President George Bush and former Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, to sway the Indonesian government.
"We were clearly disappointed -- that's a nice way of putting it -- that all of a sudden the thing went away from us," Willson said in an interview. "Something has been going on that is not kosher in the West."
Willson said he believes the Indonesian government can be persuaded to consider other offers for Busang. Otherwise, the country would face international condemnation and risk losing foreign investment, said Willson.
"This is indeed unusual," he said. "The message to the whole market is we risk our money big time to find gold, and if we really find the jackpot, somebody's going to come along and tell us what to do with it.
"It would put a great big red flag on Indonesia," he added.
Placer, Newmont and Teck must now await word from Indonesian government on whether they will be allowed back into the bidding process.
Indonesia's consulate in Toronto declined to comment on the matter on Tuesday. Newmont Mining also would not comment.
Teck's chief financial officer, John Taylor, said the company would consider bidding for Busang if Indonesia opens the door to an auction process, but would likely seek a partner in any bid.
"That's a pretty big bite," said Taylor.
Willson, however, noted Placer Dome could comfortably afford to take on Busang alone, despite a recent US$600 million bid for a larger stake in Papua New Guinea's Porgera gold deposit.
He would not say what price Placer was willing to offer, but "it's clearly worth considerably more that what's being contemplated," he said after looking at the new resource calculations for Busang.
The resource calculations are in line with analysts' expectations, said mining analyst Bruno Kaiser with CIBC-Wood Gundy in Toronto, who noted that most analysts believe Busang holds a lot more gold than has already been outlined.
Kaiser said he was not concerned about the December 4 deadline ticking past without news from Jakarta.
"My take on it is that the Indonesian government imposed this December 4 deadline primarily as a means to facilitate bids and get the process moving," he said. "You get everyone who is interested and serious stepping up."
But analyst Catherine Gignac with Deacon Capital in Toronto expressed doubts about the Indonesian government soliciting more suitors for Bre-X. "Why should the Indonesian government provide the market with a bidding process just because we want them to?" she said.
North America's gold miners are not alone in seeking a piece of Busang. Bre-X's Indonesian partner Jusuf Merukh has claimed up to 40 percent of the deposit. And the former Australian owners of the property say they also have rights to part of the riches.
Barrick closed at C$37.85, down C$1.70, on the Toronto Stock Exchange on Tuesday. Bre-X was halted at C$18.70, up 0.95, when trading was halted for the new resource calculation. Placer Dome lost 0.45 to close at 30.60.
Some of the world's most influential gold producers are upping the ante as Wednesday's deadline edges closer for Canada's Bre-X Minerals Ltd. to make a deal with gold giant Barrick Gold Corp.
At stake is the rich Busang gold deposit in Indonesia. New estimates released Tuesday suggest the discovery contains more than 57 million ounces of gold that can be mined at the low cost of $96 an ounce.
The Indonesian government has virtually mandated that Bre-X must carve up its find, with Barrick getting 75 percent of Bre-X's stake and Bre-X 25 percent.
And the government of President Suharto has also made it plain it would "appreciate" a stake of 10 percent in Busang.
But now, some major figures in the gold mining world are protesting that the deal ordered by Indonesia is unprecedented and unfair. They are pressuring Jakarta to allow rival bids.
"I think it's Bre-X's natural right to have a say who their partner will be," John Willson, chief executive officer of Vancouver-based Placer Dome Inc., said.
Placer Dome, Canada's second biggest gold company and one of the world's largest, wants to bid on Busang, and Willson said Newmont Mining Corp. and Teck Corp. have also been at the negotiating table for months.
The three heavyweight mining companies were abruptly shut out of the process last month when Indonesia forced Bre-X into Barrick's arms.
Analysts have speculated that Barrick used its business connections with Suharto's eldest daughter, as well as connections through former U.S. President George Bush and former Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, Barrick advisers, to sway the Indonesian government.
"We were clearly disappointed -- that's a nice way of putting it -- that all of a sudden the thing went away from us," Willson said. "Something has been going on that is not kosher in the West."
Willson said he thought the Indonesian government could be persuaded to consider other offers for Busang. Otherwise, the country would face international condemnation and risk losing foreign investment, he said.
"This is indeed unusual. The message to the whole market is we risk our money big time to find gold, and if we really find the jackpot, somebody's going to come along and tell us what to do with it.
"It would put a great big red flag on Indonesia."
Placer, Newmont and Teck must now await word from Jakarta on whether they will be allowed back into the bidding process.
Indonesia's consulate in Toronto declined to comment on the matter Tuesday. Newmont Mining also would not comment.
Teck's chief financial officer, John Taylor, said the company would consider bidding for Busang if Indonesia opened the door to an auction process, but would likely seek a partner in any bid.
"That's a pretty big bite," Taylor said.
Willson, however, noted Placer Dome could comfortably afford to take on Busang alone, despite a recent $600 million bid for a larger stake in Papua New Guinea's Porgera gold deposit.
He would not say what price Placer was willing to offer, but "it's clearly worth considerably more that what's being contemplated," he said after looking at the new resource calculations for Busang.
The resource calculations are in line with analysts' expectations, said mining analyst Bruno Kaiser with CIBC-Wood Gundy in Toronto, who noted that most analysts believe Busang holds a lot more gold than has already been outlined.
Kaiser said he was not concerned about the Dec. 4 deadline ticking past without news from Jakarta.
"My take on it is that the Indonesian government imposed this Dec. 4 deadline primarily as a means to facilitate bids and get the process moving," he said. "You get everyone who is interested and serious stepping up."
But analyst Catherine Gignac with Deacon Capital in Toronto expressed doubts about the Indonesian government soliciting more suitors for Bre-X. "Why should the Indonesian government provide the market with a bidding process just because we want them to?" she said.
North America's gold miners are not alone in seeking a piece of Busang. Bre-X's Indonesian partner Jusuf Merukh has claimed up to 40 percent of the deposit. And the former Australian owners of the property say they also have rights to part of the riches.
No final deal was in sight Wednesday for Bre-X Minerals Ltd. and Barrick Gold Corp., which are in the midst of forging a deal on one of the world's biggest gold deposits -- Indonesia's Busang.
As a Wednesday deadline slid by, Bre-X and Barrick said they were still trying to hammer out several issues, leaving the market to speculate about the status of negotiations.
"Several points remain outstanding," said Barrick spokesman Vince Borg. "An overall deal has not been reached."
The Indonesian government directed Bre-X to form a joint venture with Barrick by Dec. 4, with Barrick getting 75 percent of Bre-X's stake in the rich gold discovery and Bre-X keeping 25 percent. The companies were invited to consider giving the Indonesian government 10 percent of the rich find.
As the clocked ticked, Bre-X issued a statement saying no new deadline had been set by the Indonesian Mines Ministry. It said it expected the Ministry of Mines to clarify its stand on the outstanding issues "in due course."
Sources close to the talks said Indonesian mining officials had left Jakarta and would not be back until Dec. 9.
"I think both sides are probably worried about the so-called deadline, which has come and gone," said gold analyst John Ing with Maison Placements Canada Inc. "It's back in the lap of the Indonesians."
In Jakarta, a senior Indonesian mines official said the government of President Suharto would explore other possibilities to develop Busang if the two companies fail to clinch a deal.
"If they cannot reach an agreement, the government will take the necessary and appropriate action ... to expedite the development of Busang's resouces," Umar Said, secretary-general of the Mines Department, told a news conference in Jakarta.
"What the action will be ... I have to get back to the government. This is not my playground," he added.
Meanwhile, investors pushed up Bre-X's stock C$1.30 to close at C$20.10 ($14.84) in heavy trading in Toronto Wednesday, while Barrick rose C$1.45 to C$39.30 ($29.01).
"People think there's an agreement that will come out sooner rather than later," said gold analyst Catherine Gignac of Deacon Capital in Toronto.
But she noted that the uncertainty surrounding the negotiations was preventing Bre-X's stock from rising to meet the level of rumoured offers of about C$25 ($18.50) a share from Barrick.
"We're actually hearing that (the deal) is done and they're just dotting the i's and crossing the t's," Gignac said. "Everything has been set. We just don't know the details."
But a source close to the negotiations said he understood that the two companies did not have a deal and were trying to get a deadline extension from the Indonesian government.
The latest deadline is the second the two companies missed. They let a deadline at the end of November slip by too, sources said.
Possible stumbling blocks in the talks include price, how to pay for the deal and a series of threatened lawsuits over Bre-X's claims, analysts said.
Waiting to pounce on the deposit if the Indonesian government does open the door to outside bidding is another North American gold giant -- Placer Dome Inc., which seemed to be positioning itself in case the Barrick, Bre-X talks fail.
"I don't think today's deadline had any great significance," Placer spokesman Hugh Leggatt said in Vancouver, British Columbia. He added that the company still hoped to be allowed to form a partnership with Bre-X to develop Busang.
"We're not discouraged. It's going to be a long process," he said.
Newmont Mining Corp. and Teck Corp. also expressed an interest in Busang, which is located deep in the jungle in East Kalimantan on the island of Borneo.
Investors were on edge on Wednesday, anxiously awaiting the outcome of talks between Canada's Bre-X Minerals Ltd. and Barrick Gold Corp. aimed at forging a deal on Indonesia's huge Busang gold deposit.
As a Dec. 4 deadline slid by, Bre-X and Barrick said they were still trying to work out several issues, leaving the market to speculate about the status of negotiations.
"Several points remain outstanding," Barrick spokesman Vince Borg said. "An overall deal has not been reached."
The Indonesian government directed Bre-X to form a joint venture with Barrick by Dec. 4, with Barrick getting 75 percent of Bre-X's stake in the rich gold discovery and Bre-X keeping 25 percent. The companies were asked to consider giving the Indonesian government 10 percent in the rich find.
As the clocked ticked, Bre-X issued a statement saying no new deadline had been set by the Indonesian Mines Ministry.
In Jakarta, a senior Indonesian mines official said the government of President Suharto would explore other possibilities to develop Busang if the two companies fail to clinch a deal.
"If they cannot reach an agreement, the government will take the necessary and appropriate action ... to expedite the development of Busang's resouces," Umar Said, secretary-general of the Mines Department, told a news conference in Jakarta.
"What the action will be ... I have to get back to the government. This is not my playground," he added.
Meanwhile, investors pushed up Bre-X's stock by C$1.40 to C$20.10 ($14.90) in heavy trading in Toronto Wednesday, while Barrick rose C$1.10 to C$38.95 ($28.85).
"People think there's an agreement that will come out sooner rather than later," said gold analyst Catherine Gignac of Deacon Capital in Toronto.
But she noted that the uncertainty surrounding the negotiations was preventing Bre-X's stock from rising to meet the level of rumoured offers of C$25 ($18.50) a share from Barrick.
"We're actually hearing that (the deal) is done and they're just dotting the i's and crossing the t's," Gignac said. "Everything has been set. We just don't know the details."
But a source close to the negotiations said he understood that the two companies did not have a deal and were trying to get a deadline extension from the Indonesian government.
The latest deadline, if passed, would be the second the two companies missed. They let a deadline at the end of November slip by too, sources said.
Possible stumbling blocks in the talks include price, how to pay for the deal and a series of threatened lawsuits over Bre-X's claims, analysts said.
Waiting to pounce on the deposit if the Indonesian government does open the door to outside bidding is another North American gold giant -- Placer Dome Inc., which seemed to be positioning itself in case the Barrick, Bre-X talks fail.
"I don't think today's deadline had any great significance," Placer spokesman Hugh Leggatt said in Vancouver, British Columbia. He added that the company still hoped to be allowed to partner with Bre-X to develop Busang.
"We're not discouraged. It's going to be a long process," he said.
Newmont Mining Corp. and Teck Corp. also expressed an interest in Busang, which is located deep in the jungle in East Kalimantan on the island of Borneo.
No final deal was in sight Wednesday for Bre-X Minerals Ltd. and Barrick Gold Corp., which are in the midst of forging a deal on one of the world's biggest gold deposits -- Indonesia's Busang.
As a Wednesday deadline slid by, Bre-X and Barrick said they were still trying to hammer out several issues, leaving the market to speculate about the status of negotiations.
A few issues remain to be solved, and Bre-X will have more news on the negotiations "shortly," Chief Executive David Walsh said in an interview from New York.
He said the main issues that stand in the way of a full agreement with Barrick are "regulatory" but maintained he was prevented by a confidentiality agreement to give details.
"We need certain additional comfort in any agreement that would satisfy the regulatory authorities and our shareholders," he said.
The Indonesian government directed Bre-X to form a joint venture with Barrick by Dec. 4, with Barrick getting 75 percent of Bre-X's stake in the rich gold discovery and Bre-X keeping 25 percent. The companies were invited to consider giving the Indonesian government 10 percent of the rich find.
As the clocked ticked, Bre-X issued a statement saying no new deadline had been set by the Indonesian Mines Ministry. It said it expected the Ministry of Mines to clarify its stand on the outstanding issues "in due course."
The direction of negotiations is in the hands of the Indonesian government, Walsh said.
"We are waiting on the answers we get from the Minister of Mines," he said.
Sources close to the talks said Indonesian mining officials had left Jakarta and would not be back until Dec. 9.
"I think both sides are probably worried about the so-called deadline, which has come and gone," said gold analyst John Ing with Maison Placements Canada Inc. "It's back in the lap of the Indonesians."
In Jakarta, a senior Indonesian mines official said the government of President Suharto would explore other possibilities to develop Busang if the two companies fail to clinch a deal.
"If they cannot reach an agreement, the government will take the necessary and appropriate action ... to expedite the development of Busang's resouces," Umar Said, secretary-general of the Mines Department, told a news conference in Jakarta.
"What the action will be ... I have to get back to the government. This is not my playground," he added.
Meanwhile, investors pushed up Bre-X's stock C$1.30 to close at C$20.10 ($14.84) in heavy trading in Toronto Wednesday, while Barrick rose C$1.45 to C$39.30 ($29.01).
"People think there's an agreement that will come out sooner rather than later," said gold analyst Catherine Gignac of Deacon Capital in Toronto.
But she noted that the uncertainty surrounding the negotiations was preventing Bre-X's stock from rising to meet the level of rumoured offers of about C$25 ($18.50) a share from Barrick.
"We're actually hearing that (the deal) is done and they're just dotting the i's and crossing the t's," Gignac said. "Everything has been set. We just don't know the details."
But a source close to the negotiations said he understood that the two companies did not have a deal and were trying to get a deadline extension from the Indonesian government.
The latest deadline is the second the two companies missed. They let a deadline at the end of November slip by too, sources said.
Possible stumbling blocks in the talks include price, how to pay for the deal and a series of threatened lawsuits over Bre-X's claims, analysts said.
Waiting to pounce on the deposit if the Indonesian government does open the door to outside bidding is another North American gold giant -- Placer Dome Inc., which seemed to be positioning itself in case the Barrick, Bre-X talks fail.
"I don't think today's deadline had any great significance," Placer spokesman Hugh Leggatt said in Vancouver, British Columbia. He added that the company still hoped to be allowed to form a partnership with Bre-X to develop Busang.
"We're not discouraged. It's going to be a long process," he said.
Newmont Mining Corp. and Teck Corp. also expressed an interest in Busang, which is located deep in the jungle in East Kalimantan on the island of Borneo.
The rights to Bre-X Minerals Ltd.'s huge Busang gold discovery in Indonesia appeared to be up in the air Monday despite an Indonesian government statement declaring Canada's Barrick Gold Corp. the winner.
"We still don't have a deal. There are a number of points that are still being negotiated," Bre-X spokesman Steve McAnulty said in a phone interview. "Negotiations are still ongoing."
"I can explain to you that we don't have a signed agreement," Barrick spokesman Vince Borg said.
The Indonesian government told Reuters in Jakarta Monday that the two companies had agreed to split the deposit, with Barrick getting 75 percent and Bre-X keeping 25 percent.
"They have reported they can both accept the government suggestion," of a 75-25 split, said Umar Said, secretary-general of the Mines and Energy Ministry.
"They are also ready to provide a 10 percent stake to the government," he said. "It is good."
Last month, Indonesia asked Bre-X to form a joint venture with Barrick and announce a deal by Dec. 4. When the deadline passed, the two companies said they had reached agreement on some issues but that others were still outstanding.
"We are negotiating toward an end," McAnulty said Monday.
He said legal issues stood in the way of an agreement.
"The whole thing is totally confusing," said gold analyst Michael Fowler of brokerage Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion in Toronto.
"I think these guys are close, but there are probably a few things in the way."
The companies are wrangling over the Busang gold find, which holds at least 57 million ounces of low-cost gold on the island of Borneo.
Neither company would provide details about the terms of a deal, when the terms would be announced, whether shareholders would be able to vote on the agreement or who would be given essential contracts of work granting mining rights to the property.
Bre-X was still hoping the Indonesian government would drop its request for a deal with Barrick and let Bre-X find a partner through an open bidding process, McAnulty said.
"We're getting signals from the consulate, from the embassy, from Mr. Said," he said. "We certainly hope the government allows the process to proceed as originally planned. It would be to the best interest of Bre-X shareholders."
Vancouver, British Columbia-based gold firm Placer Dome Inc. has complained about being shut out of the process despite months of negotiations.
Placer Dome has said it wanted a chance to put forward a bid, but its status was in limbo as it awaited word from the Indonesian government.
Newmont Mining Corp., which had previously shown interest in Busang, said Monday it was preoccupied with a takeover bid for Santa Fe Pacific Gold Corp.
Bre-X closed down C10 cents (8 cents) to C$20.05 ($14.80), topping the list of most active stocks on the Toronto Stock Exchange. Barrick fell C15 cents (11.7 cents) to C$40.05 ($29.67) in Toronto and by 12.5 cents to $29.375 on the New York Stock Exchange.
North America's major gold companies are waging an expensive battle to win the coveted title of world's biggest gold producer.
"We want more of the action," said Hugh Leggatt, spokesman for Vancouver-based gold firm Placer Dome Inc..
"We want to be positioned in the industry as a bigger player."
Placer Dome has made a $600 million bid for Highlands Gold Ltd. of Papua New Guinea and the 25 percent of Placer Pacific Ltd. it does not already own.
The company also plans to raise $300 million through a preferred share issue and sell off some small Canadian mine properties.
Placer also has its eye on Bre-X Minerals Ltd., a Calgary, Alberta-based exploration company that discovered what could become one of the world's largest gold mines, the Busang deposit in Indonesia.
But Bre-X is also crucial to Barrick Gold Corp.'s plan to become the world's biggest gold company.
Toronto-based Barrick is already the the world's most profitable gold company and North America's biggest, but it wants to surpass Anglo American Corp. of South Africa Ltd. and Gold Fields of South Africa Ltd. to be the world's largest.
Barrick, through skillful navigation of Indonesian politics, appears to have Bre-X within its grasp.
Jakarta has asked the two companies to form a joint venture to develop the 57 million ounce Busang deposit, with Barrick controlling 75 percent.
Denver-based Newmont Mining Corp. was interested in Bre-X, but when Barrick appeared to gain the upper hand, Newmont turned its sights to Santa Fe Pacific Gold Corp., a mid-tier gold company.
Although Newmont seems to have lost out on its stock swap offer for Santa Fe to a $2.3 billion competing bid from Homestake Mining Co., analysts said Newmont was still hunting for other takeover targets.
"This is a very capital-intensive industry and it's becoming a global industry," Newmont spokesman Doug Hock said in an interview.
"In order to compete, you have to have large resources to do that. What you see is the larger players becoming bigger in order to compete."
Homestake is poised to become North America's second-biggest gold company after Barrick if its takeover of Santa Fe succeeds. Major gold companies are under pressure from their shareholders to keep gold reserves growing, analysts said.
"If one company gets big, they have a lot of clout in the marketplace to acquire properties or resources," said gold analyst Michael Fowler of brokerage Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion. With gold bullion prices in a steep decline, the share prices of many mid-tier companies have been hit, making takeovers cheaper, Fowler said.
But he said the current leaders of the gold world, the South Africans, were not caught up in the recent consolidation. "It looks as though they're losing out to the North Americans," said Fowler.
"They're behind the eight-ball really."
North American gold producers were geared to react aggressively and quickly, but the South African producers concentrated more on paying dividends, he said. "They don't move very fast."
Analysts said this round of deal-making was far from over as major gold companies fought it out to satisfy their shareholders' thirst for growth.
Analysts said possible future takeover targets included large mid-tier producers such as Dayton Mining Corp., Battle Mountain Gold Co., Cambior Inc. and Echo Bay Mines Ltd..
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
Confusion whirled around Canada's Bre-X Minerals Ltd on Wednesday after Indonesia's mines minister said the government canceled parliamentary approval for Bre-X's application for essential contracts of work for the huge Busang gold deposit.
Bre-X asked that its stock be halted on the Toronto Stock Exchange on Wednesday morning so company officials could explain the news to the public, said Neil Winchester, head of surveillance at the Toronto exchange.
Trading in Bre-X was also halted on Nasdaq.
Bre-X had not yet released a statement late in Wednesday's trading session, leaving investors and analysts trying to assess the impact of the minister's statements on Bre-X's future.
"Does Bre-X lose everything? We have no idea," said gold analyst Catherine Gignac. "It's very unclear. We have to sit tight and wait for news out of Jakarta. There are many options open to the government right now."
Earlier on Wednesday, Indonesian Mines and Energy Minister Ida Bagus Sudjana spoke to reporters about Bre-X's application for vital contracts of work for Busang.
"We cancel it. The Bre-X contract of work will be processed from the beginning," he said.
The secretary-general of the ministry, Umar Said, told a parliamentary commission hearing that the government was checking into representations Bre-X had made to North American regulatory authorities.
"I don't have an answer on what it means," said Vince Borg, a spokesman for Toronto-based Barrick Gold Corp .
Barrick has been negotiating with Bre-X to form a joint venture to operate Busang after the Indonesian government asked the two companies to work out a deal.
The move has irked Bre-X shareholders and other major gold companies wanting to bid on the 57 million-ounce deposit, but there were rumors on Wednesday that the Indonesian government may be considering an open bidding process.
"We need to clarify what this means," said Borg. "We are seeking to asctertain from both Bre-X and the Indonesian Mines Ministry what impact the parliamentary committee will have on our negotations."
Barrick, the world's third biggest gold producer, fell C$2.35 ($1.70) to C$38.90 ($28.55) on the Toronto Stock Exchange on Wednesday and by 1-7/8 to 28-3/8 on the New York Stock Exchange.
A deal to control Busang would take Barrick a long way to achieving its goal of becoming the world's biggest gold producer.
Bre-X has a contract of work for the Busang I area of the property on the island of Borneo. But Busang I contains only an estimated 2.6 million ounces of gold, with the bulk of the precious metal in two adjoining lots, Busang II and Busang III, for which it needs contracts of work to explore and develop.
The permits were held up this autumn because of an ownership dispute between Bre-X and one of its Indonesian partners over the Busang property.
North America's major gold companies are waging an expensive battle to win the coveted title of world's biggest gold producer.
"We want more of the action," said Hugh Leggatt, spokesman for Vancouver-based gold firm Placer Dome Inc.. "We want to be positioned in the industry as a bigger player."
Placer Dome has made a $600 million bid for Highlands Gold Ltd. of Papua New Guinea and the 25 percent of Placer Pacific Ltd.  it does not already own.
The company also plans to raise $300 million through a preferred share issue and sell off some small Canadian mine properties.
Placer also has its eye on Bre-X Minerals Ltd., a Calgary, Alberta-based exploration company that discovered what could become one of the world's largest gold mines, the Busang deposit in Indonesia.
But Bre-X is also crucial to Barrick Gold Corp.'s plan to become the world's biggest gold company.
Toronto-based Barrick is already the the world's most profitable gold company and North America's biggest, but it wants to surpass Anglo American Corp. of South Africa Ltd. and Gold Fields of South Africa Ltd. to be the world's largest.
Barrick, through skilful navigation of Indonesian politics, appears to have Bre-X within its grasp. Jakarta has asked the two companies to form a joint venture to develop the 57 million ounce Busang deposit, with Barrick controlling 75 percent.
Denver-based Newmont Mining Corp. was interested in Bre-X, but when Barrick appeared to gain the upper hand, Newmont turned its sights to Santa Fe Pacific Gold Corp., a mid-tier gold company.
Although Newmont seems to have lost out on its stock swap offer for Santa Fe to a $2.3 billion competing bid from Homestake Mining Co., analysts said Newmont was still hunting for other takeover targets.
"This is a very capital-intensive industry and it's becoming a global industry," Newmont spokesman Doug Hock said in an interview.
"In order to compete, you have to have large resources to do that. What you see is the larger players becoming bigger in order to compete."
Homestake is poised to become North America's second-biggest gold company after Barrick if its takeover of Santa Fe succeeds.
Major gold companies are under pressure from their shareholders to keep gold reserves growing, analysts said.
"If one company gets big, they have a lot of clout in the marketplace to acquire properties or resources," said gold analyst Michael Fowler of brokerage Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion.
With gold bullion prices in a steep decline, the share prices of many mid-tier companies have been hit, making takeovers cheaper, Fowler said.
But he said the current leaders of the gold world, the South Africans, were not caught up in the recent consolidation.
"It looks as though they're losing out to the North Americans," said Fowler. "They're behind the eight-ball really."
North American gold producers were geared to react aggressively and quickly, but the South African producers concentrated more on paying dividends, he said. "They don't move very fast."
Analysts said this round of deal-making was far from over as major gold companies fought it out to satisfy their shareholders' thirst for growth.
Analysts said possible future takeover targets included large mid-tier producers such as Dayton Mining Corp., Battle Mountain Gold Co., Cambior Inc. and Echo Bay Mines Ltd..
Canada's Bre-X Minerals Ltd and Barrick Gold Corp are still trying to forge a joint venture to mine the spectacular Busang gold discovery in Indonesia, despite a cloud of uncertainty over the rights to the deposit Bre-X's chief executive David Walsh said.
Progress in the negotiations with Barrick is slow, Walsh told Reuters in a telephone interview on Thursday.
"We're moving ahead, albeit at a snail's pace," he said, adding that legal issues stood in the way of a full agreement. "We're trying to get them to appreciate our views and the legal stance that we've taken," he said.
Last month, the Indonesian government advised Bre-X to form a joint venture with Toronto-based gold giant Barrick to operate Busang. The government requested a deal by December 4, but the two companies announced after the deadline that several issues were still outstanding.
Since then, the Indonesian government has raised doubts about Bre-X's grip on Busang, which is estimated to contain at least 57 million ounces of gold, worth around $21 billion at today's prices.
"The government has stopped processing the previous application for contracts of work by Bre-X because of various problems," Umar Said, Indonesia's secretary-general of mines, told Reuters in Jakarta on Thursday. "Therefore the previous application by Bre-X that has been delayed must be stopped and must be said to have been canceled."
He said Bre-X and Barrick must jointly submit new applications for contracts of work on the deposit.
Without contracts of work granted by the Indonesian government, Bre-X cannot proceed to exploit the find
But Walsh defended his company, saying its permits and applications for the gold property were "in good standing."
He said two Bre-X officials met with Umar in Jakarta on Thursday and were assured everything was in line.
"The telephone call that I got from Rolie (Francisco), he was quited pleased with the meeting. He said we're making very good progress in our relationship (with the mines ministry)," Walsh said.
Bre-X spokesman Steve McAnulty tried to explain the apparent contradiction in Umar's statements. "What the government wants to do in essence is that if an agreement with Barrick is made, the existing applications will be replaced with new applications," he told Reuters
Bre-X earlier said Umar had apologized for the misunderstanding, saying his comments were "erroneously reported in a December 11 Reuters newswire article."
Peter Thomas, the Reuters company spokesman in London, said Reuters was confident the quotations in its December 11 story from Jakarta were accurate.
Despite the barrage of news releases from Bre-X on Thursday, Barrick was still seeking clarity on the situation from the Indonesian government.
"We're still seeking clarification and we want to hear directly from the government of Indonesia," Barrick spokesman Vince Borg said in Toronto. "We're not saying anything until we talk directly to the government of Indonesia."
Bre-X, too, is waiting for the Indonesian government to make a move.
Walsh said he still had high hopes that Indonesian President Suharto would open up an auction for Bre-X, allowing other major mining companies to bid on the Busang project.
He said Bre-X had not made a formal request for an auction, but "we understand that the president is reviewing the situation."
An auction would be advantageous for Bre-X shareholders and for Indonesia, he said.
"We're not soliciting offers. We are getting other phone calls," Walsh said. "I am talking to to principals of other companies."
He said he had spoken to executives at Placer Dome Inc, Newmont Mining Corp and Teck Corp.
In Vancouver, Placer Dome spokesman Hugh Leggatt said any suggestion of an open auction on Busang was encouraging. His company has made a formal request for an open bidding process.
But gold mining analyst Bill Belovay with CIBC Wood Gundy said Barrick's competitors may be trying to make a deal with Bre-X more expensive for Barrick.
"They're playing games," he said. "One has got to read between the lines."
He said Busang was so fraught with uncertainty that he has a hard time understanding why the major gold producers would be interested. "One doesn't even know what percentage (Barrick) will end up with. One doesn't even know how to keep Suharto happy," he said. "To me it's a whole big nightmare."
Investors were thoroughly confused by Thursday's developments, analysts said.
"We're getting so much information, headline after headline," said one analyst. "It's causing anxiety for everyone."
Bre-X, which has halted all day Wednesday, closed down C$0.85 at 19.80 in rapid trading on Thursday of more than 8.6 million shares. Barrick, which lost C$2.75 on Wednesday, regained C$1 on Thursday to C$39.50 in trading of more than two million shares.
Bre-X Minerals Ltd's hold on the huge Busang gold deposit in Indonesia remained unclear Thursday after a string of statements from the company defending its rights to the find.
Calgary, Alberta-based Bre-X issued three news releases in as many hours early on Thursday about its grasp on Busang, worth at least $21 billion at today's gold prices and one of the world's biggest gold deposits.
Bre-X said its exploration permits and applications for contracts of work on Busang remained in good standing.
"Obviously significant progress is being made on all fronts toward the development of the Busang deposit," Bre-X Chief Executive David Walsh said in a statement issued from Jakarta.
Bre-X said its officials had met with Umar Said, Indonesia's secretary general of the Ministry of Mines, to clarify its status with Busang.
The company said Umar apologised for comments relating to the cancellation of permits and contract of work applications for Busang.
"The exploration permits and CoW applications for Busang II and Busang III remain in good standing," Bre-X said. Busang II contains most of the gold found so far on the property.
But earlier on Thursday, Umar repeated his comments to Reuters in Jakarta casting Bre-X's status in doubt.
Indonesian mining officials told Reuters in Jakarta that they had stopped processing Bre-X's applications for vital contracts of work on the gold find. Instead, Bre-X and Toronto-based Barrick Gold Corp. must jointly submit new applications for the permits.
"The government has stopped processing the previous application for contracts of work by Bre-X because of various problems," Umar said. "Therefore, the previous application by Bre-X that has been delayed must be stopped and must be said to have been cancelled."
While mining officials were explaining their position in Jakarta, Bre-X was issuing optimistic statements.
Bre-X said it appeared that the development of Busang was "possibly open to negotiation" and that draft documents showed it had exclusive operating rights to Busang.
The Indonesian government encouraged Bre-X in November to form a joint venture with Barrick, with Barrick getting 75 percent of the joint venture, Bre-X keeping 25 percent and the two companies granting the Indonesian government a 10 percent stake.
But Bre-X said on Thursday that "the government of Indonesia appears to be seriously reconsidering its earlier decision that would have compelled Bre-X into a partnership with Barrick."
Bre-X cited a published report that suggested Indonesian President Suharto was ready to intervene in the process.
Bre-X and Barrick said last week they reached agreement on some points to form a joint venture for Busang, but outstanding issues remained and no overall agreement had been settled.
But Bre-X was still hopeful on Thursday that the negotiations for Busang could be opened up to an auction process.
"We have believed from the outset that the best interests of the Indonesian people and their economy would best be served by a truly open negotiation process for the development of this extraordinary natural resource," Walsh said in a letter to Indonesia's Minister of Mines.
Bre-X shares were still halted on the Toronto Stock Exchange. The company requested a halt on Wednesday so it could clarify statements from Jakarta. The stock closed Tuesday at C$20.50.
Bre-X Minerals Ltd. and Barrick Gold Corp. are trying to forge an alliance to mine the huge Busang gold deposit in Indonesia despite a cloud of uncertainty over the rights to the find, Bre-X's chief executive said Thursday.
But the negotiations with Barrick are progressing slowly, Bre-X Chief Executive Officer David Walsh told Reuters.
"We're moving ahead, albeit at a snail's pace," he said, adding that legal issues stood in the way of a full agreement. "We're trying to get them to appreciate our views and the legal stance that we've taken."
Last month the Indonesian government advised Bre-X to form a joint venture with Toronto-based Barrick to operate Busang. The government, which also requested a 10 percent stake, set a Dec. 4 deadline, but the two companies announced after that date that several issues remained outstanding.
Since then, the Indonesian government has raised doubts about Bre-X's grip on Busang, estimated to contain at least 57 million ounces of gold, worth about $21 billion at today's prices.
"The government has stopped processing the previous application for contracts of work by Bre-X because of various problems," Umar Said, Indonesia's secretary-general of mines, told Reuters in Jakarta on Thursday. "Therefore the previous application by Bre-X that has been delayed must be stopped and must be said to have been cancelled."
He said Bre-X and Barrick must jointly submit new applications for work on the deposit. Without contracts of work granted by the Indonesian government, Bre-X cannot proceed to exploit the find.
Walsh defended his company, saying its permits and applications for the gold property were "in good standing."
He said two Bre-X officials met with Umar in Jakarta Thursday and were assured everything was in line. "The telephone call that I got from Rolie (Francisco), he was quite pleased with the meeting. He said we're making very good progress in our relationship (with the mines ministry)," Walsh said.
Bre-X spokesman Steve McAnulty, explaining the apparent contradiction, said: "What the government wants to do in essence is that if an agreement with Barrick is made, the existing applications will be replaced with new applications."
Bre-X earlier said that Umar had apologised for the misunderstanding, saying his comments were "erroneously reported in a Dec. 11 Reuters newswire article." But Peter Thomas, a Reuter spokesman in London, said the international news and information company was confident the quotations in its Dec. 11 story from Jakarta were accurate.
Umar's comments to Reuters Thursday were essentially repeating what he said on Wednesday.
Despite a barrage of statements from Bre-X on Thursday, Barrick was still seeking clarification on the situation from the Indonesian government.
"We're still seeking clarification and we want to hear directly from the government of Indonesia," Barrick spokesman Vince Borg said in Toronto. "We're not saying anything until we talk directly to the government of Indonesia."
Bre-X, too, is waiting for the Indonesian government to make a move.
Walsh said he still had high hopes that Indonesian President Suharto would open up an auction for Busang, allowing other mining companies to bid on the project. He said Bre-X had not made a formal request for an auction, but added: "We understand that the president is reviewing the situation."
An auction would be advantageous for Bre-X shareholders and for Indonesia, he said. "We're not soliciting offers. We are getting other phone calls," Walsh said. "I am talking to principals of other companies."
He said he had spoken to executives at Placer Dome Inc., Newmont Mining Corp. and Teck Corp.
In Vancouver, Placer Dome spokesman Hugh Leggatt said any suggestion of an open auction on Busang was encouraging. His company has made a formal request for an open bidding process.
But gold mining analyst Bill Belovay of CIBC Wood Gundy said Barrick's competitors may be trying to make a deal with Bre-X more expensive for Barrick. "They're playing games," he said. "One has got to read between the lines."
Belovay said Busang was so fraught with uncertainty that he has a hard time understanding why the major gold producers would be interested. "One doesn't even know what percentage (Barrick) will end up with. One doesn't even know how to keep Suharto happy," he said. "To me it's a whole big nightmare."
Investors were confused by Thursday's developments, analysts said.
Bre-X, whose stock was halted all day on Wednesday, fell 85 cents to C$19.80 in heavy trading of more than 8.6 million shares. Barrick, which lost C$2.75 on Wednesday, regained C$1 to C$39.50 in trading of more than 2 million shares.
The fate of one of the world's most glittering gold finds landed back in the hands of the Indonesian government on Monday after two Canadian mining concerns said they finally agreed on a plan of joint development.
Canadian gold giant Barrick Gold Corp. and Bre-X Minerals Ltd. ended weeks of speculation on whether they could work together when they submitted a proposal to develop the huge Busang deposit, which contains at least 57 million ounces of gold.
"We've made a submission...which says we can work together if the government can satisfy requests by both parties on a couple of items," Bre-X chief executive officer David Walsh said in a phone interview from New York.
"Within the document, there were certain concerns that we've asked the government to give us guidance on," said Walsh. "They are concerns from both parties."
He would not say what the concerns were, but he said price was not an issue.
The Indonesian government told the two companies in November to form a joint venture, with Barrick gaining 75 percent and Bre-X keeping 25 percent. The two companies were also asked to give the government a 10 percent cut.
The joint submission "is in accord with the government parameters," said Barrick spokesman Vince Borg. Neither company would say what the terms or structure of the proposed deal were or whether Bre-X shareholders would have a chance to vote on it.
They said a government response was expected in due course.
The government has twice extended a deadline for the two companies, with the latest extension being the end of December.
"This to me looks like they're doing what (Indonesian president) Suharto asked," said gold analyst Rick Cohen with Goepel Shields in Vancouver.
"There wasn't much else Bre-X could have done at this point."
The government's statements have angered Bre-X shareholders and hurt the company's once high-flying stock on Canadian stock exchanges.
One group of shareholders has hired high profile Texas lawyers to make sure shareholders get a fair deal.
"Talk of lawsuits is premature. We've got to see an offer first," said Greg Chorny, a retired lawyer who lives near Toronto and is spearheading the initiative. "We'll see what they have on the table, judge it and react appropriately."
Until Monday, Bre-X had been optimistic that the Indonesian government would endorse an open bidding process for Busang. Mining giants Placer Dome Inc., Newmont Mining Corp. and Teck Corp. have expressed interest.
But the statements from Barrick and Bre-X on Monday suggested there was little hope of an auction process, analysts said.
"We still remain hopeful," Placer Dome spokesman Hugh Leggatt said. "It's not over till it's over."
Investors appeared to be dumping Bre-X shares on Monday and picking up Barrick shares to participate in Busang, analysts said.
Barrick stock was up C$1.35 to C$40.15 while Bre-X fell C$1 to C$20 by late afternoon trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
Three Canadian mining companies are caught up in a quarrel over what do with the Petaquilla copper-gold project in Panama.
Adrian Resources Ltd, a Vancouver-based exploration company, Teck Corp, a big Vancouver-based miner, and troubled Toronto-based Inmet Mining Corp are partners in the deposit.
Adrian, which controls 52 percent of the find, says that a feasibility study on the property done by Teck was "incomplete and not in compliance with existing arrangements."  
Teck had an option to acquire up to 26 percent of the development by funding a feasibility study and eventually operating and arranging to fund the mine.
But Adrian said Teck has not filled the first requirement to move forward with its option.
"They had a job to do and they didn't complete it," Doug Turnbull, a consulting geologist for Adrian, said in an interview on Tuesday.
"Our stand right now is, they do not have their option until they complete their obligations," Turnbull said.  
But Teck says there was nothing wrong with its feasibility study.
"The study was a comprehensive assessment of the project, but...the economics would make a production commitment difficult under present metal price conditions," Teck's senior vice president of mining operations, Michael Lipkewich, said in a statement.  
Teck hopes to resolve its difficulties with Adrian and work with the junior company and Inmet to continue exploration on the property in search of higher grade ore, Teck's vice-president of corporate affairs, George Stevens, said in an interview.
The ore at Petaquilla so far is low grade, he said.
"The capital costs are higher than we had both anticipated a couple of years ago," he added.
He said Teck's agreement with Adrian allows Teck to defer a production decision twice before Adrian "can make us walk."  
"Their problem is they came out with a very optimistic scoping study," Stevens said. He said Adrian had not revised its projections.
According to Adrian, the study said the property had a geological resource of 3.74 billion tonnes of ore, including 31.8 billion pounds of copper and 9.8 million ounces of gold. The study said the proven reserves came to 1.46 billion tonnes of ore containing 13.74 billion pounds of copper and 3.17 million ounces of gold.
Teck's numbers were considerably lower but the company had not done sufficient infill drilling, Adrian's Turnbull said.  
The spat has knocked Adrian's stock down from C$3.85 on Friday to C$2.07 by Tuesday on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
Caught in the middle of the dispute is Inmet, which has just written off a series of mining interests and is struggling to regain investor confidence. Inmet controls 48 percent of Petaquilla.
"Under the current metal price conditions, we agree with Teck," Inmet's chief financial officer Richard Ross said in an interview.
But he said the company did not have anything to add to the dispute.
((Reuters Toronto Bureau (416) 941-8100))
The Indonesian gold bug is nibbling away at Inco Ltd, the world's biggest nickel company.
The company whose name has become synonymous with nickel is turning its sights to gold, copper and zinc exploration in Indonesia, Africa, Canada's Far North, Turkey and Brazil.
"Our target exploration area is Indonesia," Bob Horn, Inco's vice-president of exploration, said in a recent interview.
"We've reassessed what we're doing, we've refocused on our work," he said.  
"When we got rid of TVX, it was sold at a substantial profit...It was not a strategic move to get out of gold. It was a strategic move to get out of that particular company," Horn said.
"There's nothing wrong with gold. If it makes money, we'll be there."
Inco does not have any plans to go head-to-head with the world's huge gold producers, however.
"They always pay too much, but if we come across a situation where we find gold, we'll go for it, like we have in Indonesia," Horn said.  
The company has budgeted US$24.8 million for field exploration in 1997, slightly less than the US$25 million in 1996. But three recent alliances mean up to an extra US$15 million will be devoted to exploration through the junior partners, Horn said.
In addition to its alliance with Colony Pacific, Inco also has an arrangement with Carlin Resources Corp to explore in Africa, and a third deal in the works.
The company has just about all the nickel it needs with continued exploration in Canada at the huge and expanding Voisey's Bay deposit in remote Labrador as well as growing mines in Thomson, Manitoba and Sudbury, Ontario.
Instead, Inco hopes to grow through an exploration focus on copper, zinc and gold, Horn said.
In 1995, Inco did not produce any zinc, but it produced 240 million pounds of copper, 3.775 million pounds of cobalt, 60,000 troy ounces of gold and 403 million pounds of nickel.  
"We already market copper, so it's no big deal to us," said Horn. "And the technology for zinc is pretty well the same. We don't have to develop any new expertise to get into zinc."
But gold?
Inco got rid of most of its gold in 1993, when it sold its controlling interest in TVX Gold Inc. Gold production since then has been minimal.
Inco kept many of its gold experts on staff, however, and Horn said the company has all the expertise it needs to mine gold.  
Analysts said Inco is wise to use its solid status and its 28-year history in Indonesia to explore the vast mineral potential there.
Inco, which has a huge nickel operation in Indonesia, has several exploration projects there and recently struck deals with Highlands Gold Ltd and Canadian explorer Colony Pacific Explorations Ltd to step up its search for gold and copper.
Alliances with smaller companies will be key to Inco's exploration in the future, Horn said.
Canadian nickel giant Falconbridge Ltd has a growing appetite for expansion and is poised for growth through acquisition and exploration, the company's new chief executive officer said in an interview.
"The appetite of this company is much higher than what it used to be," Oyvind Hushovd told Reuters on Wednesday. "Falconbridge is in very good shape financially today, which means that we have the ability to grow."
Hushovd, 46, replaced Frank Pickard as chief executive this month after Pickard died suddenly at the age of 63 during a business trip in Chile this September.
Hushovd, originally from Norway, has worked for Falconbridge for more than 22 years.
He spent the past year and a half working closely with Pickard in the position of executive vice-president and was chairman of the steering committee that put together a strategic plan to carry Falconbridge into the next century.
"I don't see a need to revolutionize Falconbridge," he said. "The backbone of Falconbridge is nickel, and copper is another leg of Falconbridge. It will probably be like that in the future."
However, Hushovd is not content simply to sit back and let the long-term strategic plan unfold.
The plan calls for Falconbridge to double its annual nickel production to 200,000 tonnes and triple its copper production to about 500,000 tonnes a year, within 15 years.
To do that, Falconbridge needs to find growth opportunities, especially since the company lost a bid to take over the huge Voisey's Bay nickel, copper and cobalt deposit in remote Labrador, said Hushovd.
Ongoing work in New Caledonia, Ivory Coast and Zambia should complement plans to start producing nickel by the end of next year at the Raglan project in Quebec and plans to produce copper by 1998 at the Collahuasi joint venture project in Chile, Hushovd said.
In Zambia, Falconbridge joined a consortium in November to develop the Konkola Deep copper mine, in which Falconbridge is partners with South Africa's Gencor Ltd and Anglo American Corp of South Africa Ltd.
In New Caledonia in the South Pacific, Falconbridge is poised to gain access to nickel reserves to supply a nickel plant planned in the north of the country. The board of France's Eramet on Thursday said it had agreed to reallocate its mining reserves in New Caledonia, which would give Falconbridge access to Eramet's Koniambo field.
Hushovd does not intend not stop there.
"Falconbridge has always been very strong in exploration," he said. "We felt we lacked the business development infrastructure."
So last summer, the company set up a business development group, to search out growth opportunities either through exploration or acquisition.
While Hushovd would not hint at specific acquisition targets, he stressed, "I want properties that are not only profitable today but are also profitable in the future."
In any future acquisitions, Falconbridge can probably count on support from its powerful majority shareholder, Noranda Inc, which owns 46 percent.
"We have a big owner, which means that hopefully we can pursue things that might be tough to pursue on our own," Hushovd said. "We can have a bigger appetite than the company on its own would have."
Hushovd said he had no immediate plans to boost the company's share price, which peaked at C$32.75 in May but is currently trading around C$29.15.
He noted that the stock normally reflects the nickel price, which has failed to meet expectations in 1996.
"I think we all had very high hopes for nickel this year, and the market did not turn out the way that we had forecasted," he said.
As for next year, "I feel it's difficult to give a prediction at the present time. Fundamentally I do believe we're going to see better prices in 97 than we did in 96," Hushovd said. ((Reuters Toronto Bureau 416 941-8100))
Canadian nickel giant Falconbridge Ltd has a growing appetite for expansion and is poised for growth through acquisition and exploration, the company's new chief executive officer said in an interview.
"The appetite of this company is much higher than what it used to be," Oyvind Hushovd told Reuters on Wednesday. "Falconbridge is in very good shape financially today, which means that we have the ability to grow."
Hushovd, 46, replaced Frank Pickard as chief executive this month after Pickard died suddenly at the age of 63 during a business trip in Chile this September.
Hushovd, originally from Norway, has worked for Falconbridge for more than 22 years.
He spent the past year and a half working closely with Pickard in the position of executive vice-president and was chairman of the steering committee that put together a strategic plan to carry Falconbridge into the next century.
"I don't see a need to revolutionize Falconbridge," he said. "The backbone of Falconbridge is nickel, and copper is another leg of Falconbridge. It will probably be like that in the future."
However, Hushovd is not content simply to sit back and let the long-term strategic plan unfold.
The plan calls for Falconbridge to double its annual nickel production to 200,000 tonnes and triple its copper production to about 500,000 tonnes a year, within 15 years.
To do that, Falconbridge needs to find growth opportunities, especially since the company lost a bid to take over the huge Voisey's Bay nickel, copper and cobalt deposit in remote Labrador, said Hushovd.
Ongoing work in New Caledonia, Ivory Coast and Zambia should complement plans to start producing nickel by the end of next year at the Raglan project in Quebec and plans to produce copper by 1998 at the Collahuasi joint venture project in Chile, Hushovd said.
In Zambia, Falconbridge joined a consortium in November to develop the Konkola Deep copper mine, in which Falconbridge is partners with South Africa's Gencor Ltd and Anglo American Corp of South Africa Ltd.
In New Caledonia in the South Pacific, Falconbridge is poised to gain access to nickel reserves to supply a nickel plant planned in the north of the country. The board of France's Eramet on Thursday said it had agreed to reallocate its mining reserves in New Caledonia, which would give Falconbridge access to Eramet's Koniambo field.
Hushovd does not intend not stop there.
"Falconbridge has always been very strong in exploration," he said. "We felt we lacked the business development infrastructure."
So last summer, the company set up a business development group, to search out growth opportunities either through exploration or acquisition.
While Hushovd would not hint at specific acquisition targets, he stressed, "I want properties that are not only profitable today but are also profitable in the future."
In any future acquisitions, Falconbridge can probably count on support from its powerful majority shareholder, Noranda Inc, which owns 46 percent.
"We have a big owner, which means that hopefully we can pursue things that might be tough to pursue on our own," Hushovd said. "We can have a bigger appetite than the company on its own would have."
Hushovd said he had no immediate plans to boost the company's share price, which peaked at C$32.75 in May but is currently trading around C$29.15.
He noted that the stock normally reflects the nickel price, which has failed to meet expectations in 1996.
"I think we all had very high hopes for nickel this year, and the market did not turn out the way that we had forecasted," he said.
As for next year, "I feel it's difficult to give a prediction at the present time. Fundamentally I do believe we're going to see better prices in 97 than we did in 96," Hushovd said.
((Reuters Toronto Bureau 416 941-8100))
Investors with "exploration fever" have latched onto Black Swan Gold Mines Ltd, hoping drill results expected this week will line their pockets with paper profits.
"There certainly are rumors that the results they've got from their Brazilian exploration are going to be positive," said Fred Ketchen, senior vice-president at ScotiaMcLeod.
"It's all part of the current phenomenon -- exploration fever."
Black Swan was the most active stock on the Toronto Stock Exchange on Tuesday after heavy trading on Monday and last Friday. The stock was down C$0.05 to C$1.45 on volume of 2.6 million shares Tuesday.
But the flurry of speculative interest in the stock is not linked to anything concrete, company spokesman Richard Simpson said from the company's headquarters in Vancouver.
Drilling results from Black Swan's 50 percent-owned gold project in Brazil likely will released until later this week, he said, adding that the results are very preliminary.
"I know there'll be gold in the hole," said Simpson. "As to what grade it will be, whether it will be above or below the expectations of the market, I simply don't know. They're always looking for pretty jazzy stuff."
The rumor in the market is that the results will be good, and investors, especially institutional investors under pressure to show robust returns, are placing their bets, analysts said.
Mutual funds that burnished their performances on high returns from investments in such high-flying explorations stocks as Bre-X Resources Ltd and Diamond Fields Resources are quick to pile into junior mining shares with any hint of potential.
Although many previously Hot junior mining stocks cooled off quickly in June and July, investors seem to have forgotten their earlier rough ride, said Barry Cooper, a mining analyst at Wood Gundy.
"The 'once burned twice shy' saying doesn't work in junior gold stocks," he noted.
The attraction with Black Swan is a limited downside, since the stock has been trading around the C$1.50 mark, added ScotiaMcLeod's Ketchen.
"Whereas the upside potential, if they come up with something, can be rather impressive."
Black Swan shares its Cata Preta gold project in the Brazilian State of Minas Gerais with Sul America Mineracao Ltda, a Brazilian company.
Black Swan is in the midst of negotiating a takeover of its partner to gain a 100 percent interest in the Cata Preta and acquire Sul America's other Brazilian properties.
The drill results expected this week are from hole 23, the first of a 30-hole series expected to be completed by the end of the year.
Black Swan plans to drill a total of 150 holes to determine how much gold lies beneath a surface deposit already explored.
-- Reuters Toronto Bureau 416 941-8100
Falling gold prices have recently drained much of the life from the Toronto Stock Exchange's key gold index and analysts say the bloodletting may not be over.
"Gold stocks are still reflecting a $380 gold price, but look at the price now," said gold analyst Mike Jalonen at brokerage Midland Walwyn in Toronto. "It's awful."
"I think people are writing the obituary for the Toronto gold index," said Vahid Fathi, a mining analyst at Everen Securities in Chicago. "They've been slaughtered."
The Comex February gold price has slid steadily since Dec. 30 to $355.70 an ounce on Wednesday from $370.90. Gold was up slightly in London on Thursday at $356.60.
Gold prices have slumped to three-year lows on a strong U.S. dollar, booming financial markets, low inflation, rising mine production and rumors of central bank selling.
Most analysts said the yellow metal was headed further south, but there was no consensus on the extent of the decline or when prices might recover.
The heavily weighted gold index in Toronto, Canada's biggest stock market, has dropped with the price of the metal, losing more than nine percent since Dec. 30.
Canada's biggest gold companies, Barrick Gold Corp. and Placer Dome Inc. have followed suit.
Barrick, the world's third largest gold producer, closed at C$35.55 on Wednesday, down from C$39.50 on Dec. 30. The stock rose slightly on Thursday to C$35.75. In New York, Barrick has fallen to 26-3/8 from 28-7/8 on Dec. 30.
Vancouver-based Placer Dome fell to a 52-week low of C$27.05 on Wednesday from C$30.90 on Dec. 30. It was up C$0.30 to C$27.35 on Thursday. In New York, Placer fell to 20-1/4 on Thursday from 22-5/8 on Dec. 30.
U.S. gold producers have also been hit. Newmont Mining Corp. was trading at 40 on Thursday on the New York Stock Exchange, versus 45-1/4 on Dec. 30. Homestake Mining Co. was at 13 5/8 on Thursday in New York, down from 14-1/4 on Dec. 30.
Traditionally, Toronto gold stocks move up in tandem with the gold price, but do not react as strongly to a price decline.
Discoveries, takeover rumors and news from exploration companies that share the Toronto gold index with major producers generally temper the index's reaction to price slumps.
That is not the case now.
"At this point in time, the market is not even paying attention to special situations," said Fathi.
On Wednesday, almost every stock in the Toronto gold index fell except for diamond companies.
Midland Walwyn's Jalonen predicted Toronto golds would lose a further five percent before they stabilized.
Diversified producers such as Vancouver-based Teck Corp. were not as vulnerable as pure gold producers to steep drops in the gold price, Jalonen noted.
The world's gold producers will likely pay dearly for the steep fall in the bullion price and the deep uncertainty overhanging the gold market.
If the bullion price weakness continues or worsens, gold miners face lower profits, money-losing operations, closed mines, slashed exploration budgets and plunging share prices.
Analysts predict smaller companies will be increasingly vulnerable to takeovers as industry conditions get rougher.
"Earnings are going to be terrible," said gold analyst Michael Fowler at Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion in Toronto. "There have already been some mines that have shut and there could be a few more. And consolidation is likely to continue."
Gold, which was fixed at $358.55 an ounce in London on Friday, has lost more than $13 since the start of the new year, and few analysts believe the decline is finished.
The low price has already taken its toll on Canadian gold stocks, knocking the Toronto Stock Exchange's heavily weighted gold index down more than nine percent since Dec. 30.
At least two companies have announced shutdowns of marginal mines recently. Toronto-based TVX Gold Inc. said earlier this week it would close its Casa Berardi gold mine in Quebec. In December, Vancouver-based Placer Dome Inc. said it would sell two small mines in Quebec and stop work at its high-cost Paymaster mine in Northern Ontario.
"That can certainly happen again," said Jim Taylor, mining analyst with Yorkton Securities in London. "The high-cost producers are certainly vulnerable."
The effect will begin to show in fourth-quarter earnings, and earnings in the first quarter of 1997 will certainly reflect the low bullion price, according to analysts.
If Merrill Lynch's predictions of an average 1997 gold price of between $370 and $375 an ounce hold true, it could spell earnings trouble for many producers.
Merrill Lynch analyst David Christensen predicted that U.S. gold firm Homestake Mining Co.'s earnings for the year would drop to about 13 cents a share if gold averaged $370. Homestake would earn 22 cents a share at a gold price of $385.
Companies that do not hedge their gold sales -- such as Homestake, Echo Bay Mines Ltd., Battle Mountain Gold Co. and Agnico Eagle Mines Ltd. -- were especially vulnerable, Christensen said. Other analysts mentioned Royal Oak Mines Inc. and Pegasus Gold Inc. as prime victims of a lower price.
"A surprisingly large number of these companies are marginal -- companies that you wouldn't traditionally think of being marginal producers," he said.
Companies that rely on the spot price of gold "are fully exposed to a decline in the gold price," Christensen noted. "They're all either spot sellers or don't have significant forward selling. They'll all be negatively affected in terms of earnings and cash flow."
One exception was U.S.-based Newmont Mining Corp., which would likely see earnings rise in 1997 because of projects ready to start this year, he added. His projection did not take into account the potential acquisition of Santa Fe Pacific Gold Corp..
Even companies with solid hedging programs, such as Canada-based Barrick Gold Corp., will likely find their share prices hit along with the gold price.
"This is a sentiment swing," said gold analyst Manford Mallory with Research Capital in Toronto. Investors do not usually differentiate between hedgers and non-hedgers when the gold price starts to drop, he added.
Although some analysts believe a few more marginal projects could bite the dust if the gold price stays low, most say the production effects of lower gold prices will become apparent in decisions to delay development.
"Most of these companies will continue to produce as long as they are cash flow positive as opposed to earnings positive," said Christensen.
But as earnings start to drop, one of the first casualties will likely be exploration budgets. While some 1997 exploration commitments have been made, high-cost companies could find themselves slashing any flexible plans in order to cut their losses.
Exploration companies will become more vulnerable to takeover moves from larger companies with strong cash flow, analysts said. As the low price of gold discourages investors, junior companies will find it more difficult to raise money for exploration programs.
"The capital is drying up," said analyst Daniel McConvey of Lehman Brothers in New York.
The smaller companies may well see their share prices drop, making it cheaper for companies laden with cash to swallow them.
Toronto-based Kinross Gold Corp. a mid-tier producer, said it plans to take advantage of the sector weakness to expand.
"I would classify us as a predator," Kinross spokesman Gord McReary said in an interview. "We think we're in a very privileged position. We're in the kind of strange situation where maybe some of the bad news for the sector can be good news for us," he said.
Gold equities in Australia may also be knocked down by lower gold prices, said analyst Taylor. But since many Australian companies hedge their sales, earnings will not be hurt as much as among some companies in North America.
In South Africa, however, analysts expect first-quarter earnings to be trampled by low gold prices.
In Mexico, mining giants Industrias Penoles and Grupo Mexico will probably not alter their expansion plans for polymetallic mines with high gold contents but will see slightly differing bottom-line impacts.
The world's gold producers will likely pay dearly for the steep fall in the bullion price and the deep uncertainty overhanging the gold market.
If the bullion price weakness continues or worsens, gold miners face lower profits, money-losing operations, closed mines, slashed exploration budgets and plunging share prices.
Analysts predict smaller companies will be increasingly vulnerable to takeovers as industry conditions get rougher.  
"Earnings are going to be terrible," said gold analyst Michael Fowler at Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion in Toronto. "There have already been some mines that have shut and there could be a few more. And consolidation is likely to continue."
Gold, which was fixed at $358.55 an ounce in London on Friday, has lost more than $13 since the start of the new year, and few analysts believe the decline is finished.
The low price has already taken its toll on Canadian gold stocks, knocking the Toronto Stock Exchange's heavily weighted gold index down more than nine percent since Dec. 30.  
At least two companies have announced shutdowns of marginal mines recently. Toronto-based TVX Gold Inc. said earlier this week it would close its Casa Berardi gold mine in Quebec. In December, Vancouver-based Placer Dome Inc. said it would sell two small mines in Quebec and stop work at its high-cost Paymaster mine in Northern Ontario.
"That can certainly happen again," said Jim Taylor, mining analyst with Yorkton Securities in London. "The high-cost producers are certainly vulnerable."  
The effect will begin to show in fourth-quarter earnings, and earnings in the first quarter of 1997 will certainly reflect the low bullion price, according to analysts.
If Merrill Lynch's predictions of an average 1997 gold price of between $370 and $375 an ounce hold true, it could spell earnings trouble for many producers.
Merrill Lynch analyst David Christensen predicted that U.S. gold firm Homestake Mining Co.'s earnings for the year would drop to about 13 cents a share if gold averaged $370. Homestake would earn 22 cents a share at a gold price of $385.  
Companies that do not hedge their gold sales -- such as Homestake, Echo Bay Mines Ltd., Battle Mountain Gold Co. and Agnico Eagle Mines Ltd. -- were especially vulnerable, Christensen said. Other analysts mentioned Royal Oak Mines Inc. and Pegasus Gold Inc. as prime victims of a lower price.
"A surprisingly large number of these companies are marginal -- companies that you wouldn't traditionally think of being marginal producers," he said.  
Companies that rely on the spot price of gold "are fully exposed to a decline in the gold price," Christensen noted. "They're all either spot sellers or don't have significant forward selling. They'll all be negatively affected in terms of earnings and cash flow."
One exception was U.S.-based Newmont Mining Corp., which would likely see earnings rise in 1997 because of projects ready to start this year, he added. His projection did not take into account the potential acquisition of Santa Fe Pacific Gold Corp..  
Even companies with solid hedging programs, such as Canada-based Barrick Gold Corp., will likely find their share prices hit along with the gold price.
"This is a sentiment swing," said gold analyst Manford Mallory with Research Capital in Toronto. Investors do not usually differentiate between hedgers and non-hedgers when the gold price starts to drop, he added.
Although some analysts believe a few more marginal projects could bite the dust if the gold price stays low, most say the production effects of lower gold prices will become apparent in decisions to delay development.  
"Most of these companies will continue to produce as long as they are cash flow positive as opposed to earnings positive," said Christensen.
But as earnings start to drop, one of the first casualties will likely be exploration budgets. While some 1997 exploration commitments have been made, high-cost companies could find themselves slashing any flexible plans in order to cut their losses.  
Exploration companies will become more vulnerable to takeover moves from larger companies with strong cash flow, analysts said. As the low price of gold discourages investors, junior companies will find it more difficult to raise money for exploration programs.
"The capital is drying up," said analyst Daniel McConvey of Lehman Brothers in New York.
The smaller companies may well see their share prices drop, making it cheaper for companies laden with cash to swallow them.  
Toronto-based Kinross Gold Corp. a mid-tier producer, said it plans to take advantage of the sector weakness to expand.
"I would classify us as a predator," Kinross spokesman Gord McReary said in an interview. "We think we're in a very privileged position. We're in the kind of strange situation where maybe some of the bad news for the sector can be good news for us," he said.  
Gold equities in Australia may also be knocked down by lower gold prices, said analyst Taylor. But since many Australian companies hedge their sales, earnings will not be hurt as much as among some companies in North America.
In South Africa, however, analysts expect first-quarter earnings to be trampled by low gold prices.
In Mexico, mining giants Industrias Penoles and Grupo Mexico will probably not alter their expansion plans for polymetallic mines with high gold contents but will see slightly differing bottom-line impacts.
