Tibet's toilets offer some of the most spectacular views in the world -- if you can hold your nose long enough to enjoy the scenery.
Many tourists on the roof of the world are so overwhelmed by the breathtaking beauty of the Himalayan plateau that such niceties as stinking lavatories are the least of their concerns.
Given the altitude -- 3,680 metres (12,000 feet) in the Tibetan capital Lhasa -- many visitors stifled by the rarefied air scarcely have time to breathe the noxious odours from public toilets with unglazed windows that open on to views of mountains and temples. And most really don't care.
"It's pretty much indescribable. It's vast, overwhelming, awesome, beautiful, interesting," said U.S. tourist Mary Beth Cooper, visiting from Cleveland, Ohio, as she toured the Jokhang temple in Lhasa, holy of holies in a land dotted with Buddhist shrines and sacred sites.
Tourists say they are stunned by the beauty of Tibet's soaring Himalayas, the warmth of its nomadic and deeply devout people and the mysteries of its ancient Buddhist monasteries.
Officials are clearly almost as excited as the tourists as they reel off a list of their achievements in developing Tibet's major industry and the various recreational activities on offer to lure more dollars to one of China's poorest, most backward and inaccessible regions.
Tourism on the roof of the world is a growth sector, officials say. It is the most lucrative source of foreign exchange for this vast, sparsely populated land -- apart from trade -- and is an industry that officials eagerly nurture.
Tibet earned $22 million in tourist dollars last year and is hoping for $30 million this year. It hopes to increase earnings by 8-10 percent a year and to play host to 60,000 visitors a year by the turn of the century.
"We got off to a late start compared with the rest of China," Zhou Lizong, vice director of the Tibet Tourism Bureau, said in an interview.
Tibet inched open its doors to foreign tourism in 1980.
However, the route to 1996 when hundreds of awestruck tourists can be seen panting around Tibet's monasteries and mountains has been fraught with difficulties.
Riots by monks protesting against Chinese rule in 1987 -- a record year for tourism with 47,000 foreign visitors -- was followed by two years of unrest, several months of martial law and a tourism nadir.
"However, since 1990 tourism has gradually recovered," Zhou said. "And since 1992 things have really improved with between 30,000 and 40,000 foreign visitors a year."
Officials acknowledge that Tibet's infrastructure lags, there is a shortage of hotel rooms, especially higher-end accommodation, as well as of transport facilities. The cost of a holiday in Tibet far exceeds a vacation anywhere else in China.
The type of visitor has changed in recent years.
In 1987, only 10,000 foreign tourists came in high-spending organised groups. The rest were low-budget backpackers.
Now, backpackers are few and far between because of a policy imposed from Beijing that requires all visitors to the restive region to obtain a special permit -- and this can only be done through a travel agent and as part of a tour group.
Zhou insists the system has not hampered visitors.
"This does not make it more difficult to come to Tibet, you can, even in a group of just one person."
Backpackers spent little and damaged the natural resources, he said. Some individual foreign travellers were unfortunate enough to freeze to death on Tibet's wild and rugged plateau, said bureau vice Communist Party secretary Xiao Zhigang.
"We are not saying backpackers can't come," he said. "Everyone is welcome."
Beijing and Tibetan security officials may be less welcoming. They blame the huge 1987 influx of backpackers, many of them ex-hippies looking for a cause, for helping to stir up pro-independence unrest over the next two years.
Most tourists said they had few problems entering Tibet -- either because officials did not bother to require a permit or because of the efficiency of travel agencies.
"We have had absolutely no difficulties," said Cooper.
"The temples are magnificent... unlike anything I have seen anywhere," she said. "People are very friendly. Big, big smiles from people... from all sorts of ethnic backgrounds."
One American couple said they took three years to find an agent who could realise their dream of a holiday in the land fabled to be Shangri-La. They were not disappointed.
"Everything is as beautiful as we thought it would be. We are very glad we came," said the husband, who declined to be identified.
Officials say tourists are drawn by three main attractions -- Tibet's natural beauty and towering mountains, its monasteries and temples and its unique and mysterious culture.
That's not all. Tibet offers adventure tours to Everest, the world's highest mountain at 8,848 metres (29,028 ft), to the nature reserve at its foot, trekking with yaks and camping in yak-hair tents and mountain biking.
Not all tourists are bewitched, and several said the highly publicised campaign of Tibet's exiled god-king, the Dalai Lama, for autonomy for his homeland had sparked their curiosity.
"There are positive points such as better sanitation and roads, but the Tibetans have paid a high price," said one French woman tourist. "The Chinese could give them more autonomy.
"When we see the ugly Chinese buildings, the little Tibetan houses seem more beautiful."
Others said they were curious about the politics.
"Our impression is overwhelming," said Norwegian Bodil Borchgrevink Grindal.
"I do not want to say too much about the political situation for several reasons, but as Norwegians we gave the Nobel Peace Prize to (the) Dalai Lama and if we say we supported very much that decision I think we have said what we need to say."
Others just couldn't breathe.
"The altitude makes it very difficult for me," said one Austrian man. "But I am just so glad that I have been able to see something."
Chinese police detained leading dissident Liu Xiaobo on Tuesday after searching his home and confiscating documents in the latest sign of a hardening attitude to the few dissidents still at liberty.
About seven or eight plainclothes and uniformed police, equipped with a search warrant, entered Liu's Beijing home at about 8.00 a.m. (0000 GMT), a relative said.
"They turned the whole place upside-down," she said.
After searching the house and taking books, photographs and documents and articles that Liu had written, police took him away, the relative said. "They took everything."
They gave no reason for the detention of Liu, a renowned literary critic who gained fame as a dissident during the 1989 student-led pro-democracy movement that was crushed by the military with heavy loss of life.
Police did not say when Liu might be released. "They gave no reason," the relative said. "They said to wait for notification."
Liu has been active in recent months, sending open letters to the government to demand press freedom and talks with the Dalai Lama on Tibet.
On September 30, Liu and veteran pro-democracy activist Wang Xizhe issued a statement urging China's communist authorities to honour a promise in 1945 to give people religious freedom, freedom of the press and speech and to form political parties and stage demonstrations.
In a bold move, the two demanded Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin be indicted, impeached and step down for violating the constitution for saying the People's Liberation Army was under the "absolute leadership" of the party instead of the state.
Wang Xizhe was still at liberty in southern Guangzhou on Tuesday.
Liu was last detained by police in 1995 after orchestrating several daring petitions to parliament by groups of dissidents and intellectuals in the early months of the year. He was held for more than seven months without formal charges until being released last January.
His detention comes a day after Chinese sources said another dissident, former student leader Wang Dan, faced a second jail term after prosecutors charged him recently with subversion.
Wang, 26, faces up to seven years in jail on charges of counter-revolutionary incitement -- or subversion. A court in Beijing was expected to deliver a verdict on Wang's case as early as this week, said one source.
Wang, who is believed to have worked with Liu on several daring petitions, was detained in May 1995 in the run-up to the sixth anniversary of the June 1989 military crackdown.
A former student of Beijing University, Wang served four years in jail for counter-revolutionary activities for his role as a leader of the 1989 demonstrations.
He had been expected to face charges since the court that sentenced veteran democracy activist Wei Jingsheng last December to 14 years for plotting to overthrow the government also implicated Wang in its verdict.
Liu and Wang are among a very few dissidents who are not serving jail terms or re-education through labour penalties.
A court in central Henan province last month sentenced student leader-turned-dissident Guo Haifeng to seven years in prison for hooliganism. Police had initially accused Guo of fraud but the prosecutor did not file charges against him, a human rights group said.
An inaccessible, romantic and mystic Shangri-la where Chinese police torture Buddhist monks is a common Western view of Tibet.
A mysterious, terrifying land where lanterns are made from human skin, skulls are used for goblets and slavery is a recent memory is a widespread Chinese view of this far-flung outpost of Beijing's rule.
Somewhere in between may lie the truth.
"Tibet is constantly used as a Cold War icon by anti-Chinese opportunists," said Robbie Barnett, who runs the London-based Tibet Information Network that specialises in providing data on the human rights situation in Tibet.
For Tibetans prostrating themselves before their beloved Buddhist shrines, buying chunks of yak meat in the Lhasa market or cycling to a disco in the evening, such issues seem far removed from their daily lives.
Tibet's capital Lhasa, one of the world's highest cities at 3,684 metres (12,087 ft), has the air almost of a Wild West town that is rushing to catch up with the rest of the world.
The tap of hammers and roar of drills signal a construction boom that is transforming meadows and wasteland on the edges of the ancient city into a Chinese town like any other.
Many Western human rights groups and pro-Tibet activists cry foul. They speak of the sinicisation, the Han Chinese invasion of a land that belongs to Tibetans. They say that wealth is being concentrated in the hands of a few Han Chinese at the expense of the indigenous people and Tibetan culture is being annihilated.
Beijing says Tibetans in the region number 2.3 million while Han Chinese total fewer than 100,000. No figure is given for the military presence in the strategic region that borders India, with which Chinese troops have fought numerous skirmishes in the past 40-odd years and last went to war in 1962.
Official figures show an economy growing by about 10 percent a year, with rural per capita incomes around 600 yuan ($72) while urban incomes are about 2,000 yuan ($240). Both are still about half the national average but are increasing rapidly.
China chooses to compare the present standard of living with the traditional feudal system of serfs, many now officials, that persisted until well after People's Liberation Army troops marched into Tibet in 1950.
One Tibetan bus driver boasted of earning 100 yuan ($12) a day, a princely sum even for a Beijing cab driver.
Western activists prefer to heed the cause of the exiled Dalai Lama, spiritual leader of Tibet and winner of the 1989 Nobel Peace Prize for his peaceful struggle for autonomy for his homeland since he fled after an abortive uprising in 1959.
"There are a lot of former hippies getting into something they think is an easy ride," Barnett said.
"I do think things are enormously oversimplified," he said. "But fundamental disdain in Tibet for Chinese rule is so prevalent and of such long standing that in many cases it constitutes the basic context or tone within which other events have to be placed."
Tibetan exiles report a revival of traditional Tibetan ways in rural areas, pilgrims come freely to worship in Lhasa and commerce involving Tibetans apparently thrives on almost every Lhasa street corner.
In the main square in front of Lhasa's Jokhang temple, the Tibetan holy of holies, ragged pilgrims with matted hair prostrate themselves in medieval religious fervour and warrior merchants from the eastern Chamdo region mingle easily and chat in the marketplace with plainclothes Tibetan police.
To the visitor, there is little immediate sense of the anti-Chinese tension that prompted angry monks to riot against Chinese rule in the late 1980s.
There is little doubt Beijing would move swiftly to crush political opposition, as it does elsewhere in China. Officials say they are determined not to permit any infringement of Chinese sovereignty and warn repeatedly of the threat from what they call the "Dalai Lama splittist clique".
"Tibetans are resigned to it and accept the way things are," said one foreign resident who declined to be identified.
"They put up with the situation," he said. "There's enough control here that it would cut off anything before it got started."
But any military presence is not overt. Few soldiers are visible in the streets, apparently keeping to their barracks on the city outskirts, as in other Chinese towns, where they can be seen planting trees and whitewashing walls.
While photographs of the exiled Dalai Lama are nowhere to be seen following a ban earlier this year, pictures of Tibet's second holiest monk, the late 10th Panchen Lama, and his seven-year-old official reincarnation are everywhere.
Rural Tibetan homes that in the late 1980s were required to fly the red Chinese national flag now appear free to fly just their own colourful prayer pennants.
Human rights groups say dissidents and monks languish in jail for demanding independence. Many Tibetans appear to have more immediate concerns, such as making enough money from new business opportunities to buy a colour television, build their own home or send their children to school.
Pro-Tibet activists in the West paint a much harsher picture of life in Shangri-la under Chinese rule, and a MiG fighter on display at the foot of the legendary Potala Palace, towering over the capital, could be seen as a symbol of what they would call Chinese occupation.
But shades of grey exist.
"One of the great misfortunes of the Tibetans has been that they have attracted a number of westerners or exiles who have simplified the issues and given the impression that Tibetans are averse to development," Barnett said.
"Most people in Tibet want modernisation but feel they are under foreign rule."
Leading Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo has been ordered to serve three years in a labour camp in a term imposed just hours after police detained him and a second pro-democracy activist was missing, relatives said on Wednesday.
Veteran pro-democracy activist Wang Xizhe, who recently issued a joint statement with Liu, appeared to be missing from his home in southern Guangzhou, his wife said by telephone.
Police had notified Liu Xiaobo's wife early on Wednesday of the administrative three-year sentence, which does not need a court trial, but gave her no reason for the punishment.
"They have still had no formal contact with me or given me a reason," Liu Xia said in a telephone interview late in the day.
"I am very angry. How can they do this?," she said. "He did not do anything illegal. All he did was exercise his freedom of speech... Citizens have freedom of speech..."
She said she had not yet decided whether to appeal on his behalf.
The administrative punishment was passed against Liu just hours after he was taken from his Beijing home early on Tuesday by a group of uniformed and plainclothes police, with a search warrant, who also confiscated books, papers and photographs.
"Re-education through labour is the personal power of the public security bureau, it doesn't have to go through judicial departments," Liu Xia said. "The public security can just do as they wish."
Police officials declined to comment.
The administrative punishment of re-education through labour has been increasingly used against dissidents in recent months as a means of removing activists from circulation while avoiding the more complicated trial process, diplomats say.
Police gave no reason for the detention of Liu, a renowned literary critic who gained fame as a dissident in the 1989 student-led pro-democracy movement that was crushed by the military with heavy loss of life.
Liu has been active in recent months, sending several daring, open letters to the government.
On September 30, Liu and Wang issued a statement urging China's communist authorities to honour a promise in 1945 to give people freedom of the press and speech and to form political parties and stage demonstrations.
In a bold move, the two demanded Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin be indicted, impeached and step down for violating the constitution for saying the People's Liberation Army was under the "absolute leadership" of the party instead of the state.
Wang did not return home on Tuesday and his wife said she was very worried because he had not responded to his pager.
Wang was paroled in 1993 after serving 12 years of a 14-year term for sedition and remains deprived of his political rights. He is one of China's most outspoken proponents of democracy.
Liu was last detained by police in 1995 after orchestrating several daring petitions to parliament by dissidents and intellectuals in the early months of the year. He was held for seven months without charges until being released in January.
His sentence comes shortly after Chinese sources said dissident and former student leader Wang Dan faced a second jail term after prosecutors charged him recently with subversion.
Wang, 26, faces up to seven years in jail on charges of counter-revolutionary incitement -- or subversion.
Wang, who is believed to have worked with Liu on several daring petitions, was detained in May, 1995 in the run-up to the sixth anniversary of the June 1989 military crackdown.
Are you a businessman looking for generous tax breaks, lengthy tax holidays, easy loans, clean air and spectacular scenery?
Then Tibet may be your answer -- that is, if you don't mind high transport costs, frequent power outages and temperamental telephone lines.
Beijing has given unparalleled privileges to try to attract foreign investors to this remote, rugged, restive and poverty-stricken region. Those policies are starting to pay off, albeit slowly, officials said.
"This year circumstances are rather improved as a result of our new policies to foreign investors," Wang Yaju, vice director of the Department of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation of the Tibet Autonomous Region, said in an interview.
He said the new, preferential policies unveiled last year had already paid off with 14 new foreign investment projects approved this year. That compared with the establishment of just 61 joint ventures between 1988 and 1995.
Wang said he was optimistic that a planned $48 million 50-50 venture between Taiwan's Kwang Yang Motors and Tibet's Summit Motor to produce motorcycle engines in neighbouring Sichuan province would be successful.
The plant would be registered in Tibet, pay taxes to that region and enjoy its tax breaks.
Most members of Tibet's tiny community of foreign investors seem attracted both by the tax holidays and the scenic beauty.
For example, John McKay of Santa Cruz, Calif., set up the Tibet Plateau Cashmere Co. with a U.S. company and a private Tibetan partner. The three-way partnership will process cashmere with the goal of producing finished knitwear.
The joint venture is exempt from income tax for the first five years after it makes a profit, and then pays only half the national rate of tax for the following five years.
Wading through the Chinese bureaucracy for the necessary permits was a frustrating and time-consuming process, McKay said, echoing the experiences of other investors in the region as well as throughout much of China.
Red tape appeared to be less entangling than in other regions, however.
Also, investors said they had considered the risks from possible anti-Chinese violence, but believed the profits outweighed potential losses.
"I don't think this (unrest) is very likely," said McKay.
"There's enough control here that it would cut off anything before it got started," said another businessman who declined to be identified. "Tibetans are resigned to it and accept the way things are."
Kesang Rigdol, a Nepali Tibetan who set up his Tibet Snowland Restaurant in the centre of Lhasa last year, did not dodge the difficulties of setting up a business in a land supposed to be the fabled Shangri-La.
Rigdol owns 63 percent and invested $40,000 in the restaurant, which many say is the best eatery in Lhasa, while his Tibetan partner, who provided the site, holds 37 percent.
"Everything we were able to do was because of the policy on joint ventures," he said.
Despite the long, bitter winter that keeps away most of the tourists who are his main customers, Rigdol is already considering setting up a second joint venture, a dairy farm.
"We can't get good quality milk and cream here," he said, adding that skilled labour was also a serious problem.
Rigdol employs Nepali cooks and had hoped to teach Tibetans culinary skills. "But Tibetans don't seem to want to learn," he said. "They are not interested at all."
Foreign trade officials said they welcomed such small ventures, but were also eager to lure bigger investments, while recognising that the lack of a railroad, power shortages and limited flights hampered their bargaining power.
As part of a move to publicise opportunities in the vast, resource-rich but inaccessible region and escape their communications difficulties, Tibet authorities are preparing to launch a site on the Internet, the worldwide computer network.
Wang said investors in power plants, mineral resources and infrastructure were more than welcome.
Officials of the Tibet Department of Geology and Minerals said they were hoping the regional government would soon issue special regulations covering foreign investment in the region's underground resources.
Tibet wanted foreign firms to join forces in exploration for mineral resources, particularly copper, chromite, antimony and borax, said Wang Baosheng of the Department of Foreign Trade.
"This could lead to good opportunities for them to take part in exploitation of these resources," he said. "This place has great potential, if you invest here you will have very good returns."
Leading Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo has been ordered to serve three years in a labour camp just hours after police detained him in an early morning raid on his Beijing home, his wife said on Wednesday.
Police had notified her early on Wednesday of the administrative sentence, which does not need a court trial, but gave her no reason for the punishment.
"I am very angry. How can they do this?," Liu Xia said in a telephone interview.
"I feel he hasn't done anything (illegal). Citizens have freedom of speech, to write articles and say things."
She said she had not decided whether to appeal.
The administrative punishment was passed against Liu after he was taken from his Beijing home early on Tuesday by a group of uniformed and plainclothes police who also confiscated books, papers and photographs.
"Re-education through labour is the personal power of the public security bureau, it doesn't have to go through judicial departments," Liu Xia said. "The public security can just do as they wish."
Liu Xiaobo might be sent to a labour camp near his hometown of Dalian in the northeast, she said.
Police officials declined to comment.
The administrative punishment of re-education through labour has been increasingly used against dissidents in recent months as a means of removing activists from circulation while avoiding the more complicated trial process, diplomats say.
Police gave no reason for the detention of Liu, a renowned literary critic who gained fame as a dissident in the 1989 student-led pro-democracy movement that was crushed by the military with heavy loss of life.
Liu has been active in recent months, sending several daring, open letters to the government.
On September 30, Liu and veteran pro-democracy activist Wang Xizhe issued a statement urging China's communist authorities to honour a promise in 1945 to give people freedom of the press and speech and to form political parties and stage demonstrations.
In a bold move, the two demanded Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin be indicted, impeached and step down for violating the constitution for saying the People's Liberation Army was under the "absolute leadership" of the party instead of the state.
Wang could not be reached in southern Guangzhou and a human rights group said he did not return home on Tuesday.
Liu was last detained by police in 1995 after orchestrating several petitions to parliament by groups of dissidents and intellectuals in the early months of the year.
He was held for more than seven months without formal charges until being released last January.
His sentence comes shortly after Chinese sources said dissident and former student leader Wang Dan faced a second jail term after prosecutors charged him recently with subversion.
Wang, 26, faces up to seven years in jail on charges of counter-revolutionary incitement -- or subversion.
Wang, who is believed to have worked with Liu on several petitions, was detained in May 1995 in the run-up to the sixth anniversary of the June 1989 military crackdown.
A former student of Beijing University, Wang served four years in jail for counter-revolutionary activities for his role as a leader of the 1989 demonstrations that centred on Beijing's Tiananmen Square.
He had been expected to face charges since the court that sentenced veteran democracy activist Wei Jingsheng last December to 14 years for plotting to overthrow the government also implicated Wang in its verdict.
For 36 years Tibet's biggest leather factory gushed pollution into one of the world's cleanest rivers and haemorrhaged losses.
But help was at hand when Tibet's scenic beauty and devout Buddhist people enchanted visiting German Chancellor Helmut Kohl in 1988.
German aid has since poured in, along with German technicians, transforming the plant into a rare model of environmental awareness on the roof of the world. It has also made its first net profit.
Manager Li Jishan glowed with pride as he described the modernisation wrought at his plant over the last few years.
"When I first came here in 1961 things were really backward. We lived in tents. Can you imagine?" he said in an interview with Reuters.
The leather factory was moved to Lhasa in 1959 from Golmud in neighbouring Qinghai province to provide footleather for thousands of soldiers sent to garrison Tibet after an abortive uprising by Tibetans seeking independence in 1958.
As a state-owned firm that processes yak skins into shoes and handbags it had little incentive to turn a profit. That is slowly changing.
Last year, the China-Germany Joint Venture Lhasa Leather Factory of Tibet reported a profit of 200,000 yuan ($24,000) -- a modest sum but the first in its history.
"We have a good future, our efficiency is good...and with German assistance we are placing great emphasis on environmental protection," said Li, adding that he expected another profit this year.
"The German side is very strict, especially on environmental protection," he noted. "But we get along with them very well."
One problem identified by the German side is one common to most of China's state-owned firms -- the huge surplus labour that is the legacy of jobs-for-life socialism.
"We have had arguments with the German experts who want to fire someone, for example," said Li. "But they have come to understand our point of view and our system."
However, German officials still warn that keeping on a couple of hundred extra staff is bound to affect profits.
German officials said the plant had been an environmental disaster when they arrived, with its tannery spouting stinking waste into the nearby rushing Tolungchu river.
"It was in really bad shape with terrible environmental problems," said Niels von Keyserlingk, director of the office of the German Development Corporation in Beijing that oversees aid to the plant.
"Before, the water was untreated and flowed into the river causing many problems," he said. "But things have been very nicely done. There is no pollution."
All chemicals are recycled now and a German-manufactured system cleans the water, separating waste that is dried for use by local farmers as fertiliser.
"The water that flows into the river is absolutely clean," said von Keyserlingk, who visited the plant last May.
A cement factory on the opposite bank belching dust into the clear mountain area could pose a new environmental hazard.
Germany has given 15 million deutschemarks ($9.8 million) in aid to the plant, which has been allowed to register as a joint venture and thus qualifies for the generous tax breaks and holidays that Tibet offers to foreign investors.
German money has helped to buy the latest in leather processing machinery as well as sewing machines, waste elimination plants and even new solar energy panels that are heating water for the factory.
Sales have soared. The factory held an eight percent share of the Tibet shoe market for years, but in 1994 that jumped to 20 percent and nearly doubled again in 1995 to a 36 percent market share.
"Our products are really popular because they are all leather, and people want that kind of quality," Li said.
The factory is trying to boost sales to the rest of China as well as overseas exports, particularly to neighbouring Nepal.
But it faces awesome transport handicaps in shipping goods from a city that has no rail links and must send merchandise more than 1,000 km (600 miles) over some of China's most difficult roads to the nearest railway station.
"We still need to raise quality and produce more different styles of shoes to compete in the market," said Li, who has clearly picked up some tips from his German market-savvy experts.
"Either you learn to swim in the market or you drown."
Jailed, sentenced to labour camps, cowed or exiled, China's pro-democracy activists have virtually vanished.
The latest dissident to be swallowed by China's gulag was prominent literary critic Liu Xiaobo, sentenced on Tuesday to three years in a labour camp. Veteran democracy activist Wang Xizhe has simply disappeared.
Any hopes among Chinese dissidents of a revival of their beleaguered movement may lie with the Nobel Committee in Oslo and whether it decides on Friday to select Nobel Peace Prize nominee and veteran democracy activist Wei Jingsheng.
However, few in China expect Wei, regarded as the father of China's struggling democracy movement and serving the first year of a 14-year jail term, to win the Nobel Peace Prize and thus halt the slow demise of Chinese dissent.
Members of Wei's family said they did not consider him a serious contender because of the strength of competition from front runners such as Richard Holbrooke, the U.S. architect of Bosnia's peace treaty, and former U.S. president Jimmy Carter.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang voiced outrage at the suggestion on Thursday.
"I have already stressed many times that Wei Jingsheng is a criminal who has broken Chinese law. This kind of criminal basically has no qualifications to win any prize," he said.
Wei was jailed for 15 years for his role in the 1979 Democracy Wall movement when he wrote an article that called for democracy as China's "Fifth Modernisation" and attacked paramount leader Deng Xiaoping as a dictator.
He was released on parole in September 1993 after serving 14-1/2 years and re-arrested the following April. He was sentenced to 14 years last December for plotting to subvert the government.
"Would it make a great deal of difference?" said one Western diplomat when asked about the impact if Wei were to win the Nobel Peace Prize. "It wouldn't get him out any quicker. It would turn the international spotlight on China for a little while but that of itself would not be enough to get the (democracy) movement going again."
Diplomats have expressed surprise at the rash of arrests and convictions of dissidents -- many of them sentenced to the administrative punishment of "re-education through labour" that avoids a complicated trial process.
"My feeling had been that the whole business was under control," the diplomat said. "There are a few who pop up and engage in experiments to annoy the authorities but they are nothing serious or threatening to the regime."
He attributed the new crackdown to a secret plenum of the Communist Party, expected to finish later on Thursday with a statement on the importance of "spiritual civilisation" -- or conformity to orthodox Marxist values.
"Everyone will be expected to think properly and so they may need to tidy up a remaining few loose ends," the diplomat said.
Liu Xiaobo, who gained fame during the 1989 student-led pro-democracy movement, was ordered to serve three years in a labour camp, a term imposed just hours after police detained him during a raid on his Beijing home.
Veteran pro-democracy activist Wang Xizhe, who recently joined Liu in a statement calling for the impeachment of President and party chief Jiang Zemin, had disappeared from his home in southern Guangzhou, his wife said.
On Thursday court officials told the family of Wang Dan, a detained dissident and leader of the 1989 student protests, to hire a lawyer on his behalf, his mother said. The Beijing People's Intermediate Court informed her that she had until Friday to find a lawyer, in a sign that his trial was imminent.
"They have had so many crackdowns in the past that most figures are under lock and key or safely out of the way abroad, and in either case pretty harmless," the diplomat said.
China's private sector has become an important source of jobs for workers laid off by loss-making state enterprises and officials said on Thursday the jobless were able to find work despite fears of rising unemployment.
In 1995, the private sector hired 1.5 million workers made redundant from state- and collectively owned enterprises, an official of the State Administration for Industry and Commerce said in a telephone interview.
The official also noted a shift in the type of staff being employed by private enterprise as China's fastest growing sector expands and modernises.
"Before, employees were mainly peasants and young jobless," the administration official said.
"But in the last two years, the number of those employed after leaving state enterprises has increased," he said. "And there will be a bigger increase in employment of this type of worker in the next couple of years."
The main reason that workers were attracted to the sink-or-swim world of private enterprise from the jobs-for-life system in state firms was high wages, he said.
China's private companies and self-employed accounted for a total of 56 million jobs, or six percent of China's employed workers, at the end of 1995, he said.
China had 654,500 private companies and 25.28 million self-employed workers at the end of 1995 compared with none in 1979, when paramount leader Deng Xiaoping launched his market-oriented economic reforms.
Many had found jobs in Shenyang, at the heart of China's rust-belt and a city groaning with money-losing state firms, the official said. The city had found jobs for 800,000 laid-off workers in the last two years.
In Shanghai, more than 85,000 redundant state workers had created their own businesses or found jobs in private firms.
The administration official said private enterprise had averaged growth of 50 percent to 60 percent a year over the past three years, although that was expected to slow to about 30 percent over the next few years.
An official of the Ministry of Personnel said state enterprises had shed more than 2.0 million workers in recent years, many of them helped to find work by their former employers or through fledgling labour markets.
China's urban unemployment rate was 2.9 percent at the end of June, up by 0.01 percent from the same time last year, official figures show.
However, official media have warned that the actual rate could soar to 7.4 percent by 2000.
Nine out of 10 people entering the job market have found jobs through the new labour markets since 1995, the Xinhua news agency quoted an official of the Ministry of Personnel as saying.
The few who still enjoy the state's "iron rice bowl" in terms of assigning jobs include demobilised soldiers and college graduates.
At the start of 1995, China had more than 29,000 employment service organisations, which offered jobs to more than 12 million people last year, the official said.
Time in Tibet is a moveable feast.
In this far-flung outpost of Chinese rule, the clocks are synchronised with Beijing more than 2,560 km (1,590 miles) to the northeast, but dawn is two hours behind and everyone goes to work about two hours later than in Beijing.
It is not only Tibetan time that lags the rest of China. The economy in this Himalayan region, still based largely on yaks, goats and Buddhism, also trails.
Beijing says it is doing its utmost to narrow the gap and to make up for destruction wrought on Tibet's monasteries and temples in China's ultra-leftist 1966-76 Cultural Revolution.
It has pumped more than 35 billion yuan (US$4.2 billion) into the inaccessible, remote and backward region long peopled by nomadic herders and barter traders, officials say.
The funds are also useful to buttress control of the restive and strategically important region that borders India.
The investment is slowly paying off.
Economic growth in 1995 reached 10.6 percent, up from 8.6 percent the year before. Rural per capita incomes were about 600 yuan ($72) a year while urban incomes neared 2,000 yuan ($240) -- both still about half the national average but increasing rapidly.
In the capital Lhasa, the swift growth of commerce has taken even local leaders by surprise.
"I thought it would take several years before we could attract any real interest," said Chen Ciduan, president of the Tibet Investment and Trust Corporation that in 1994 set up a stocks trading centre in Lhasa.
"But we had to double our space last year and we are already overcrowded and making plans for another expansion," he said.
That's the high flying end of economic development in Tibet.
For those at the other end of the scale, Beijing is trying to make things easier with preferential policies to help a people struggling into the late 20th century from a lifestyle that more closely resembles the middle ages.
Income tax holidays, tax breaks and easy loans are just some of the incentives available to businessman in Tibet. The concessions are also attracting numerous entrepreneurs from elsewhere in China where such favourable policies are not available.
In Lhasa, one street specialises in selling the highly-decorated, colourfully-painted furniture favoured by Tibetans. Another sells fake leather sofas that appeal to Han Chinese residents.
Chinese restaurants abound, cheek by jowl with Tibetan-managed shops selling yak butter, computer parts and bolts of brocade and wool.
Tibet offers some of China's oddest employment opportunities.
In a tiny one-room workshop leased from a struggling state-owned factory processing yak horns, seven artisans from neighbouring Yunnan province hammer traditional silver bowls embossed with Buddhist symbols.
"We were already making these Buddhist artifacts in Yunnan anyway," said workshop owner Li Wenhan, 26. "It's only because there is so much demand here that we came. We could easily sell these in Yunnan, but here they need them."
Li said 40 percent of the goods they make are for export, 20-30 percent are sold to Tibetans and the rest distributed elsewhere in China.
The success of Li's business underscores a problem in Tibet that must be as frustrating for its Chinese masters seeking to lead the region into prosperity as for many educated Tibetans.
"The Tibetans lack education and a mentality of work," said one Tibetan-Nepali businessman who was born in Lhasa.
"They don't appreciate the need to work, they just want to make a profit straight away," he said. "It's very sad. They are too impatient to understand that you have to earn a living through steady work."
While some might dispute that view, no one questions that Tibet is among China's poorest and most inaccessible regions. Out of Tibet's 2.3 million people, about 400,000 live below the official poverty line.
Officials oversee one of China's most innovative anti-poverty policies in the deeply devout Buddhist area where many still donate much of what they earn to monasteries and temples and where education is costly.
"We are determined to bring all Tibetans out of poverty by the end of the century," said an official who declined to be identified.
Almost all Tibetan government officials are involved in anti-poverty programmes. Each government department in the Tibet Autonomous Region sends officials into rural areas each year -- both to see where government money and aid are most needed and to teach poverty-stricken nomads how to boost their incomes.
Many of Tibet's worst off are nomads living in remote mountain areas, many with large flocks of yaks, goats and sheep, but with little idea of how to exploit their resources.
The nomads either use their animals to feed themselves or, when their numbers climb, set them free as an offering to Buddha to try to win merit for their next reincarnation, believing that their station in each life is dependent on their behaviour in the previous one.
"Many of these people have assets but they are still poor because they don't know how to use them," the official said.
Tibet does not rely on handouts alone. Since last year it has worked at setting up sister relationships with 14 of China's booming eastern cities and provinces.
These wealthy cousins each send between 10 to 20 officials to work for three years in the region over a 10-year period and also provide financial resources.
The provinces are helping Tibet with 43 projects, mostly in infrastructure. Initial investment was 2.3 billion yuan ($277.1 million) but now totals more than 3.0 billion yuan ($361 million).
"Tibet's capacity to develop itself is very low," the official said. "It's hampered by its geological conditions such as lack of infrastructure and its remoteness. And it takes a long time to move away from the previous feudal serf system.
"This is a very beautiful place but we have a very arduous task ahead."
($1.0=8.3 yuan)
The watchdogs of China's ruling Communist Party have ordered members to obey a call from party chief Jiang Zemin for ideological orthodoxy -- or face disciplinary punishment, state media said on Saturday.
"The work style of the ruling party is a matter of life and death," the People's Daily quoted a decision by the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection of the Communist Party of China as saying after a meeting this week.
The commission also issued a call for clean government, warning of the threat of corruption to continued party rule.
"Party organisations and members should conscientiously carry on the party's fine traditions and work style," it said.
The statement was issued two days after the party wound up its annual policy-making plenum with a pledge to boost orthodox socialist values that have been eroded by nearly two decades of economic reforms.
"Anyone who violates the sixth plenum's decisions, or who disobeys orders, or engages in harmful activities against socialist ethical and cultural progress, should be strictly disciplined," the discipline commission said.
The party plenum had said spiritual civilisation -- Chinese communist jargon for ideological orthodoxy and toeing the party line -- could not be sacrificed in the name of the economic reforms spearheaded by paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
The commission echoed the plenum's call for a return to the communist puritanism espoused by the late Chairman Mao Zedong.
"The work style of close links to the masses, criticism and self-criticism, hard work, and building a clean and honest government should also be continued," the commission said.
The ruling party has seen its credibility undermined in recent years after the chaos of the ultra-leftist 1966-76 Cultural Revolution and as loopholes for corruption opened up by economic reform have tempted many senior party officials.
"The crackdown on corruption is one of the important tasks of improving the party's work style and clean government and for promoting ethical and cultural progress," the commission said.
It called on party committees throughout China to intensify their battle against corruption and to severely punish those found guilty of corruption.
Jiang, who is also state president, has warned repeatedly that corruption is a virus that threatens to topple the party.
Jiang had been expected to seize on the plenum as the last chance before a crucial congress in 1997 to underline his role as anointed heir to Deng Xiaoping, who has been fading gradually from the scene, diplomats and Chinese sources said.
He has made clear that he wants to place his stamp on ideology in China.
The party mouthpiece, the People's Daily, has filled its front page for several days with examples of model workers whose socialist values the populace at large should strive to emulate.
Among these is Beijing bus conductress Li Suli, who is said to rise at 4.00 a.m. to make sure she is familiar with major sites along the route so that she can help disoriented passengers. She then washes the bus windows.
Diplomats said Jiang was using the campaign -- coupled with a tough line on the media and ideology -- to boost his position.
Detained Chinese dissident Wang Dan faces the capital charge of plotting to subvert the government based on evidence such as writings critical of the state and accepting funds from abroad, a human rights group said on Saturday.
Wang Dan's case was expected to come to trial next week, the New York-based Human Rights in China said in a statement.
Relatives said on Friday they had succeeded in finding a lawyer willing to defend Wang, the former leader of the 1989 student demonstrations for more democracy centred in Beijing's Tiananmen Square.
The Beijing People's Intermediate Court on Thursday informed Wang's mother, Wang Lingyun, that she had one day to find her son a lawyer, a signal that the dissident had been indicted and a trial was imminent.
The family on Friday obtained a copy of the court chargesheet, which formally accused the 26-year-old of plotting to subvert the government, a crime that carries a maximum penalty of death.
The indictment cited four major areas of evidence against Wang, Human Rights in China said.
The first was the writing of articles published in overseas magazines and newspapers, including some that criticised the government, in the three years since his release from jail.
Wang served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in the 1989 demonstrations, which were crushed by the army on June 3-4 with heavy loss of life.
Other evidence against the former student at prestigious Beijing University included taking part in studies at home organised by the University of California, Berkeley, in the United States, Human Rights in China said.
The charges accused Wang and other dissidents of joining forces to collect funds and donations to help other dissidents facing difficulties and the lack of work after their release from prison, the group said.
Wang was also accused of accepting donations and economic aid from overseas organisations, it said.
Wang's lawyer had already visited the court dealing with Wang's case to begin legal formalities, but there was still no news of when the trial of the former student leader, who has been in detention since May 1995, would begin, a close relative said.
"We feel pretty anxious. We are just waiting for new developments," the relative told Reuters.
The outspoken activist attracted the ire of China's communist authorities in 1989 when he shot to prominence as a leader of student protests for more democracy centred on Tiananmen Square in the heart of the Chinese capital.
Wang had been expected to face new charges since last December, when the court that convicted veteran democracy activist Wei Jingsheng -- a nominee for this year's Nobel Peace Prize -- of plotting to overthrow the government also implicated the former student leader.
The court's verdict said Wei, who was jailed for 14 years, had links with people "convicted of counter-revolutionary crimes, including Wang Dan". It also referred to a tape-recorded conversation between Wang and Wei, but gave no details.
Wang had been active since his release from jail, defying persistent police surveillance and harassment to join in a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of those still in prison for their part in the 1989 protests.
China's Communist Party, in what it called one of its greatest ever documents, warned on Sunday against hostile Western ideas such as parliamentary democracy and capitalism and vowed to fight back with puritan Marxist values.
The 15,000-character document -- adopted at last week's annual secret plenum of the ruling party elite -- marked the latest volley by party chief Jiang Zemin to boost his position by battling corruption, pornography and worship of money while promoting nationalism and hardline communist ideology.
Diplomats said a strong tone of opposition to the West and particularly the United States, which Beijing fears is pursuing a policy of containment toward China, also suffused the document, unveiled by the official Xinhua news agency.
They said Jiang was striving to placate leftwing party hardliners angered by what they see as an erosion of puritan communist values by nearly two decades of profit-based economic reform.
"The standard of moral conduct has been lowered in some spheres, and the practice of worshipping money, seeking pleasure and individualism has grown," the document said.
It railed against corruption, warning senior party officials not to be tempted by the lures of power, profit and sex.
Jiang has warned repeatedly that corruption is a virus that could topple the party which has ruled China since 1949, and public opinion surveys show graft as the top popular gripe.
In a sign that Jiang needs to consolidate his power base even after amassing China's three most important posts -- general secretary of the party, state president and chairman of the party's powerful Central Military Commission -- the document paid extravagant homage to paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, 92.
The text was littered with 14 mentions of Deng's name, against just three for Jiang and four for the late Chairman Mao Zedong.
Analysts say Jiang remains overshadowed by Deng, architect of the market-oriented reforms and influential even without an official post and despite increasingly fragile health.
However, a recurring theme of the document was a warning to the nation to be on guard against the West, taking up one of the main platforms of Jiang's rule -- the importance of patriotism.
It urged self-sufficiency, saying people should "fear no pressure, safeguard national sovereignty and surmount sanctions imposed by Western countries" -- a clear reference to the United States.
"Because socialism has suffered serious setbacks on a worldwide scale, pressure from the superiority of developed capitalist countries in economy...as well as the infiltrations of Western ideology will remain for a long time," it warned.
It advocated "how to...prevent and eliminate the spread of cultural garbage, resist the conspiracy by hostile forces to westernise and split our country," -- and suggested more flag-raising ceremonies and singing of the national anthem.
However, despite the lip-service to Deng Xiaoping, the document cast doubt over one of his most far-reaching reforms -- the lifting of a ban on private enterprise -- while repeating his opposition to western-style democracy.
"It is necessary to distinguish right from wrong on such major issues as...common development of various economic sectors with socialist public ownership as the mainstay versus privatisation...socialist democracy versus parliamentary democracy practised in Western countries," it said.
"Liberalism will precisely lead China to the capitalist road and undermine the political situation," the document thundered.
The family of detained Chinese dissident Wang Dan said on Sunday the former student leader could stand trial this week for the capital offence of plotting to overthrow the government. They said the charge was unfounded.
"Not one point in the bill of indictment broke the law, even less to speak of plotting to overthrow the government," his mother Wang Lingyun said in a telephone interview.
The 26-year-old former leader of the 1989 pro-democracy demonstrations has been charged with the capital offence of plotting to subvert the government, based on evidence such as writings critical of the state and accepting funds from abroad.
"All he did was to say a few things," Wang Lingyun said. "He is unjustly accused."
"He has always advocated peace and non-violence," she said. "There must be action or plans to constitute "overthrowing the government'."
She said the family had yet to be notified of when her son's trial would take place, but she said it could come this week.
Relatives said on Friday they had found a lawyer willing to defend Wang. The lawyer had already visited the court dealing with Wang's case to begin legal formalities, they said.
The Beijing People's Intermediate Court had informed Wang Lingyun on Thursday that she had one day in which to find her son a lawyer, a signal that a trial was imminent.
Wang was detained by police in a raid on his home in May 1995 but was not formally arrested or charged until last week.
On Friday the family obtained a copy of the court indictment, which accused Wang Dan of plotting to subvert the government, a crime that carries a maximum penalty of death. The minimum sentence is 10 years, although the court can show leniency if it finds extenuating circumstances.
Wang has already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in the 1989 demonstrations centred in Beijing's Tiananmen Square, which were crushed by the army with heavy loss of life..
The indictment cited four major areas of evidence against Wang, the New York-based Human Rights in China said.
The first was the writing of articles published in overseas magazines and newspapers, including some that criticised the government, in the three years since his release from jail.
Other evidence against the former Beijing University student included taking part in studies at home organised by the University of California, Berkeley, in the United States, Human Rights in China said.
The charges accused Wang and other dissidents of joining forces to collect funds and donations to help other dissidents facing difficulties and failure to find work after their release from prison, the group said.
Wang was also accused of accepting donations and economic aid from overseas organisations, it said.
Wang had been expected to face new charges since last December, when the court that convicted veteran democracy activist Wei Jingsheng -- a nominee for this year's Nobel Peace Prize -- of plotting to overthrow the government also implicated the former student leader.
The court's verdict said Wei, who was jailed for 14 years, had links with people "convicted of counter-revolutionary crimes, including Wang Dan". It also referred to a tape-recorded conversation between Wang and Wei, but gave no details.
Wang had been active since his release from jail, defying persistent police surveillance and harassment to join in a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of all those still in prison for their part in the 1989 protests.
China's new hardline dictum to its people to battle hostile Western influences with puritan Marxist values underlines a poverty of ideas among an ageing leadership with declining credibility in a fast-changing society, analysts said on Monday.
"They don't seem to grasp that people have changed since the days when they had nothing else to do but to listen to lengthy party documents being broadcast on the radio," said one China analyst.
"Nowadays people have so many other activities they may just skim over the headlines and not bother to read something like this," he said, referring to a 15,000-character Communist Party document issued in official newspapers on Monday.
"Do the leaders not realise people can channelsurf because it's not just one television station any more?" he said.
China's ruling Communist Party, in what it hailed as one of its greatest documents ever, warned against hostile Western ideas such as capitalism and parliamentary democracy, urged vigilance against pornography and profit and vowed to fight back with puritan Marxist values.
"If they are seeking to change the average Chinese in the street then this is not the answer," said one Western diplomat, describing the newest demand for ideological conformity as a rehash of communist methods practiced for years.
Chinese political analysts have warned that the inability of the communist leadership to move with the times and experiment with new ideas and methods to stir up popular support in a society rapidly being transformed by market-oriented economic reforms could have dangerous repercussions.
"A lot of people just aren't listening any more," one analyst said, adding that a consequence of this breakdown of communication would create even more distance between the populace and a leadership that is already remote and secretive.
To recapture popular attention, China's leaders might try to use more extreme propaganda tools, such as whipping up a potentially destabilising nationalist and anti-Western campaign, analysts said.
"We are looking at an ageing leadership -- many of the Politburo are in their 70s -- who are set in their ways and don't seem able to accept younger advisers trying to package acceptable ideology in new wrapping paper," one diplomat said.
Paramount leader Deng Xiaoping had missed an opportunity to appoint a younger leadership when he purged the upper echelons after the 1989 student demonstrations for more democracy, analysts and diplomats said.
Analysts said that while the latest communist creed tried to present itself as a balanced dictum, it was clearly intended to achieve the goal of conformity of thought.
"It's pretty much a blueprint for censors to do what they want," said one diplomat.
Even conservative newspaper editors appointed in recent years as replacements to more liberal writers have been purged in recent weeks, a succession of books have been ordered off the shelves and popular author Wang Shuo has been effectively banned.
"Things are only going to get worse," said one analyst.
However, some doubted how effective a new purge would be.
"It's part and parcel of an attempt to take control of the way people think and the kind of cultural afairs that are conducted," the western diplomat said.
"But people don't always take as much notice as they once did," he said. "It may not last much longer than the time it takes to read the thing."
The U.S. government's top Asia official, Winston Lord, was to hold talks with Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister Liu Huaqiu in Beijing on a range of issues including human rights, diplomats said on Wednesday.
Lord, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, arrived on Tuesday for the unannounced visit and was keeping a low profile while in Beijing, a U.S. embassy official said.
However he was due to hold talks with Deputy Foreign Minister Liu and a possible meeting with Foreign Minister Qian Qichen was on the agenda before Lord left on Thursday for Japan, diplomats said.
In Washington, State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns said on Tuesday that Lord was preparing for a visit next month by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, but officials said a wide range of other issues would almost certainly be raised.
"Human rights will come up," one diplomat said.
Washington last week sharply criticised the sentencing of dissident Liu Xiaobo to three years in a labour camp, as well as apparent plans to try another pro-democracy activist, Wang Dan, on the capital charge of plotting to subvert the government.
U.S. officials say relations with China have generally improved in recent months, but there have been frictions in the past two weeks over its treatment of dissidents and over fresh reports of Chinese nuclear sales to Pakistan.
"I think all issues are on the table in (Lord's) discussions with the Chinese. It wouldn't surprise me at all if that issue of the alleged sale of items between China and Pakistan came up," Burns said.
Nevertheless, he said Washington continued to maintain that China had not violated past pledges with the sale, which the Washington Times said last week consisted of a special industrial furnace and high-tech diagnostic equipment.
Burns also said human rights issues were likely to be raised.
Diplomats said Beijing would almost certainly be angered by reports that Chinese dissident Wang Xizhe had arrived in San Francisco for asylum in the United States.
A row over human rights scarred Christopher's last visit to China in 1993.
Christopher is due to visit China on November 21-22 on a trip originally announced in July.
The visit would mark the highest point in relations since ties plunged after Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui paid a private visit to the United States in June, 1995 -- a trip that enraged Beijing.
Both sides have said they are moving towards a possible exchange of presidential visits during 1997.
Among outstanding issues that could spark U.S. anger are the alleged nuclear sales and China's human rights record, while Beijing blames Washington for holding up its application for membership of the World Trade Organisation.
U.S. officials said Lord had considered the possibility of extending his trip beyond South Korea when he left Washington last week, but did not finally decide to do so until he was already in Asia.
Lord came to China after a visit to South Korea to discuss tensions over the beaching of a North Korean submarine on the South Korean coast last month.  
"With more and more (listed) firms involving in such takeovers, regulation and supervision has become a tough task," said one analyst with China Guotai Securities.
"The central government should not wait until there are too many headaches before taking measures to sort things out," he said.
But the analyst said that despite the problems, takeovers would be a focus of the stock market over the next few years because of restrictions in other areas, including a ban on mergers between listed firms and unlisted firms.
In the six-year history of modern China's stock markets, there has been no case of a takeover of one listed firm by another.
The U.S. government's top Asian official, Winston Lord, left China on Thursday, wrapping up a low-profile visit after talks that focused on human rights in China and problems on the Korean peninsula.
Diplomats described the meetings as frank and cordial overall, even though Lord raised the thorny issue of China's treatment of its dissidents amid signs of a renewed crackdown by Beijing's communist rulers on their critics.
Lord, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, arrived on Tuesday for the previously unannounced visit and kept a low-profile while in Beijing, a U.S. embassy official said. He left for Japan on Thursday.
Lord held substantive discussions with Deputy Foreign Minister Liu Huaqiu on Wednesday and also had a brief meeting with Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, diplomats said.
"They discussed a wide range of issues," one Western diplomat said.
The issue of Korea was one focus of the talks and although diplomats said there was little sign of concrete progress, the tone of discussion was positive.
"Both sides want to maintain stability on the peninsula," one diplomat said.
South Korea and the United States in April called for four-nation peace talks with North Korea and China to replace a truce that ended the Korean conflict but left Seoul and Pyongyang technically still at war.
Pyongyang has insisted on bilateral talks with Washington to seek an accord, saying Seoul was not a party to the 1953 truce. China has yet to take a clear stance on the four-way talks.
Frosty relations between Seoul and Pyongyang have been in crisis since last month, when 26 North Koreans landed in the South from a stranded submarine.
Diplomats said Lord's talks did not focus on any single issue, and a major aim of his trip was to prepare for a visit next month by Secretary of State Warren Christopher.
"Generally speaking relations are on the upturn," said one diplomat. Christopher is due to visit Beijing on November 21-22 on a trip originally announced in July.
A row over human rights scarred Christopher's last visit to China in 1993.
The visit would mark the highest point in relations since ties plunged after Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui paid a private visit to the United States in June 1995, a trip that enraged Beijing.
In Washington, State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns said Lord had raised Chinese treatment of dissidents.
"Human rights have been on our agenda quite importantly over the last couple of days, because of recent arrests of some of the political dissidents, and the recent travel to the United States of a noted champion of human rights. So, that issue for us is front and centre on our agenda with them."
Washington last week sharply criticised the sentencing of dissident Liu Xiaobo to three years in a labour camp, as well as apparent plans to try another pro-democracy activist, Wang Dan, on the capital charge of plotting to subvert the government.
Diplomats in Beijing said China would almost certainly be angered by the arrival of a third dissident, Wang Xizhe, in San Francisco this week after escaping from China.
Both sides have said they were moving toward a possible exchange of presidential visits during 1997.
Among outstanding issues that could spark U.S. anger are China's alleged nuclear sales and human rights record while Beijing blames Washington for holding up its application for membership in the World Trade Organisation.
China is dipping its toe into the freedoms of Hong Kong but is finding the water chilly -- and Beijing's latest pronouncement on freedom of expression under Chinese rule may be giving it cold feet, analysts said on Friday.
China's communist rulers are so accustomed to exercising power that is scarcely checked by law, they may be having difficulty curbing their tongues when it comes to the delicate handover of Hong Kong, diplomats said on Friday.
One example came on Thursday when China tried to backtrack from a warning by Foreign Minister Qian Qichen to Hong Kong people on limits to their freedom of expression after the territory reverts to Beijing rule on July 1, 1997.
"Chinese officials seem to be speaking from the heart when it comes to Hong Kong and then realise that they have put their foot in their mouth where the law is concerned," said one Western analyst.
Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang raced on Thursday to repair damage from his boss's remarks, saying: "Hong Kong people will have full freedom of expression, but all freedoms must be within the limits allowed by law."
His statement followed an interview with Foreign Minister Qian by the Asian Wall Street Journal,in which Qian hinted that Hong Kong would no longer be able to mark the anniversary of Beijing's June 4, 1989, crackdown on student-led protests.
Qian's interview stirred an outcry in Hong Kong, where China has pledged a high degree of political freedoms for 50 years after the handover on July 1, 1997, and not to change its capitalist system.
But Shen's damage control may have been too late.
Western diplomats said Qian's remarks gave great cause for concern and were almost certain to stir anxiety in Hong Kong.
"Ordinary Hong Kong people have fairly mixed feelings," said one Western diplomat. "There is an element of patriotism about their return to the mainland but they don't want their basic freedoms to be put in question."
Chinese officials said Foreign Minister Qian was believed to have shown great interest in the response in Hong Kong to his remarks on the limits on what Hong Kong's people could do after the 1997 handover.
Qian was reported to have showed little surprise at the reaction in Hong Kong, and had paid close attention to the stir in the territory, one official said.
"It looks as if he may have gone a little beyond what he should have said," said another Western diplomat. "But he clearly thought he was safe in saying that and now they are trying to smooth over the rough edges."
Hong Kong newspaper reports that interpreted Qian's remarks as a ban on activities in the territory to commemorate the 1989 crackdown were wrong, Shen said, adding that Beijing had not altered its pledge to maintain Hong Kong's current political and economic system under Chinese sovereignty.
A transcript of Qian's interview showed he was specifically asked what activities would not be allowed and whether the 1989 commemoration was among them. Qian replied that he was referring to just such activities.
"This isn't the first time this kind of faux pas has happened," one diplomat said, referring to similar remarks this year on post-1997 freedom limitations by Lu Ping, director of the Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office under China's State Council, or cabinet.
"I don't expect that it will be the last."
One of China's most prominent dissidents, Wang Dan, is expected to receive a harsh sentence on the charge of plotting to overthrow the government, his mother said on Tuesday.
Wang, 27, would plead not guilty to the capital charge when his trial at the Beijing Intermediate People's Court begins on Wednesday, said the dissident's mother, Wang Lingyun.
"The court...giving my son a harsh sentence even though he is innocent is very likely to happen," Wang Lingyun told Reuters. "I dare not rule it out."
She said court officials told her the verdict could be delivered as early as Wednesday or in two days. Family members had been under surveillance for several weeks, she added.
The former student leader, who vanished into detention in May 1995, faces a minimum 10-year sentence and a maximum penalty of death.
The court has refused to give details of Wang's trial except to say he has been charged with plotting to overthrow the government.
The New York-based Human Rights Watch said last week the chances of acquittal were slim because Wang has not had adequate time to prepare a defence.
His family found a lawyer willing to defend the dissident after being given just one day in which to do so.
Wang's mother, a 61-year old museum researcher who has no background in law, would attend the trial as one of two defence lawyers. His father and a sister would be allowed to sit in.
The mother has said the dissident was calm and mentally prepared for a harsh sentence, although she has said his health had deteriorated during his detention.
Human Rights Watch attacked the trial on Tuesday as a sign of the Chinese leadership's increasing intolerance of dissent.
"The fact is that China's urban dissident movement... has in effect been comprehensively smashed," it said in a statement.
"At least where political dissidents are concerned, all the judicial signs thus far point... to intensified repression by the country's state security forces," it said, calling for a freeze on trade missions from the United States, Europe, Japan and Australia.
The human rights group said Chinese criminal trials seldom respect the presumption of innocence, and defence lawyers were generally restricted to arguing mitigating circumstances for a reduced sentence.
Wang's court appearance would likely be held out of the public eye, as was last year's trial of Wei Jingsheng, regarded as the father of China's tiny, struggling democracy movement.
Officials have been silent on a request by the U.S. embassy in Beijing to send observers to Wang's trial, diplomats said.
French senator Robert Badinter, former U.S. attorneys general Nicholas Katzenback and Richard Thornburgh, and former Canadian solicitor-general Warren Allmand have also said they want to observe Wang's trial.
Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang on Tuesday shrugged off questions from reporters about the status of the requests, saying Wang's trial was China's internal affair.
Beijing has repeatedly come under fire from the West for human rights abuses. It says foreign intervention in China's internal affairs is not welcome.
Wang has already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square that were crushed by the army in June 1989 with heavy loss of life.
He was politically active again after his parole in 1993, defying police surveillance to join a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of those still jailed for their part in the 1989 protests.
China has recently cracked down on the few remaining dissidents who have not fled into exile or been jailed.
If foreign governments thought Beijing listened to pleas on human rights, they may have to think of new means of persuasion after a Beijing court jailed one of China's few dissidents still at liberty for 11 years on Wednesday.
In a trial lasting less than four hours, the Beijing Number One Intermediate People's Court ensured that Wang Dan, the pale, thin student leader who topped China's most wanted list after the 1989 demonstrations for more democracy, would spend most of his young adult life behind bars.
The conviction of the 27-year-old democracy activist on the capital charge of plotting to overthrow the government marked the disappearance of one China's few remaining dissidents into the Chinese gulag.
"It's really a slap in the face to those Western governments that have repeatedly asked China to improve its human rights record," said one Western diplomat.
He noted that the sentencing came just a week after a visit by German Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel and amid preparations for a trip by U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher in late November.
Another Western diplomat said China was not impervious to concerns about its human rights record raised by foreign governments, adding that it was possible that without foreign pressure such jail terms could be even longer.
Western diplomats said the swiftness of the trial and the severity of the sentence were part of a nationwide tightening of controls by the Communist Party.
"They may see deterrent value in a stiff sentence," said one Asian diplomat. "It dissuades other would-be Wang Dans from taking a similar course of action."
Diplomats said the sentence was remarkably light given the severity of the charges, which carried a maximum punishment of death and a minimum of 10 years in jail -- although the penalty was tough if the evidence was taken into consideration.
"This is not seriously heavy by the standards of the charges and the potential that existed," the second Western diplomat said. "But in the light of what we understand him to have done, yes, it's heavy... A sledgehammer to crack a walnut."
The verdict against the former most-wanted leader of the 1989 demonstrations for more democracy charged he received funds from overseas hostile forces, gave financial aid to families of jailed dissidents and tried to set up an "opposition force" by uniting illegal organisations.
"It's sort of difficult to see why they should be so frightened of this," the second Western diplomat said in a reference to China's communist rulers.
However, he said that in recent months Beijing had moved to virtually eradicate any remnants of China's struggling democracy movement.
"In the last few weeks the few remaining (dissidents) have either run away or been dealt with," he said referring to the sentencing of dissident Liu Xiaobo to three years in a labour camp and the escape to the United States of Wang Xizhe, his co-author of a call to impeach President Jiang Zemin.
"There is not very much left. The Chinese do have pretty tight control and they are making sure that they maintain it that way," he said.
"You can see a general sort of tightening up -- dissidents, religion, the Dalai Lama, crime, ideology -- you can just tick them off."
China hopes for a breakthrough to launch manned space flights early next century and planns to land a spacecraft on the moon in the 21st century, the Xinhua news agency said on Thursday.
Senior Chinese space officials had unveiled an ambitious, multi-million dollar and wide-ranging programme that was aimed at giving the country a competitive edge in international space development, Xinhua said, quoting senior officials.
China is known to be eager to push ahead with its space programme to expand its role in the commercial satellite business while winning international prestige through trumpeting its technological advances, industry analysts have said.
Manned space flights were being given top priority in China's space programme, which includes building a heavy solar satellite in partnership with Germany as well as developing a new generation of lightweight spacecraft to 'bus' satellites into orbit, Xinhua said.
"The country is expected to make a breakthrough in manned space technology at the beginning of the next century," Xinhua said, quoting Wang Liheng, vice-administrator of the China National Space Administration.
Wang gave no more details of the manned space flight programme, which has been rumoured for some time.
However, Li Jianzhong, president of the China Academy of Launch Vehicle Technology, told Xinhua that China was pushing ahead with its goal to boost launch vehicle technology in the 21st century. He said the goal was to build rockets that could carry 20-tonne payloads -- more than twice the current capacity of the nation's most powerful launch vehicles.
China, which put its first satellite into orbit in 1970, has been trying to expand its role in the commercial space market, despite a series of recent setbacks.
In August a Long March 3 rocket, considered one of China's most reliable launch vehicles, failed to put a U.S.-built satellite into orbit. In February, technical flaws had even more disastrous results when a new generation Long March 3B rocket exploded shortly after take-off, killing six people.
Li said China also planned to develop a reuseable space transport system and vehicle re-entry and landing systems.
Cheng Fangyun of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) said a small spacecraft with low operating costs would be designed.
"China has reliable technology for space tracking, telemetry and control to do this," Xinhua quoted Cheng as saying.
In terms of moon exploration, China planned to provide cheap transport systems for lunar-landing spacecraft to explore the moon and developing lunar resources, Xinhua said.
Xu Fuxiang, president of the Chinese Academy of Space Technology, said items under development included a scientific satellite, the Shijian-5, which was light and cheap and would become a 'bus' for small satellites.
In solar observation, China and Germany were cooperating to produce a two-tonne lunar satellite equipped with a solar telescope. The $100 million satellite was expected to be sent into orbit around 2002, said CAS member Ai Guoxiang.
China has also decided to invest 170 million yuan to build the world's most advanced sky survey telescope that could observe at least 100 million galaxies, he said.
China was working on its own space station, Xinhua said.
It is cooperating with the United States and Russia to build a magnetic spectrograph aboard the Alfa station -- scheduled to be launched early next century -- that was expected to detect anti-matter and dark matter in the universe, Xinhua said.
Wang Dan's name cards describe him as "Free Man" and "World Citizen", but for the next 11 years the democracy activist's world will be a prison.
The disappearance of the 27-year-old into the Chinese gulag on Wednesday signalled a tightening of the Communist Party's grip on all aspects of life -- from religion to crime, from where people may speak to where they may spit.
The sentencing of the former leader of the 1989 Tiananmen Square pro-democracy demonstrations left only a handful of the country's dissidents free.
The Beijing Number One Intermediate People's Court took less than four hours to convict Wang Dan of plotting to subvert the government.
"What do they really think they have to be afraid of from people like me?" said one prominent dissident after learning that Wang Dan had been jailed.
"Of course, they don't really believe that a kid in his 20s poses a threat," said the dissident, who like others interviewed recently, declined to be identified.
"But by putting him in jail they create a hostage who they can release whenever they feel they need to make a gesture on human rights to the West," said the dissident, who spent the day of Wang's trial with a policeman posted in his living room.
The dissident is one of a rapidly dwindling band still at liberty in China.
Most are either sentenced to lengthy jail terms, serving in labour camps, living in voluntary exile or enforced banishment overseas or just keeping their heads down while the security apparatus seeks pretexts to lock them up and remove what it sees as a potential threat to party rule.
"Don't think for a moment that the aim of sending Wang Dan to jail is just to frighten people like me," said the dissident.
"This is a warning to the United States that says 'We can be tough to our own people and we can be tough to you, too'," he said.
This week, a U.S. State Department official underlined the tensions in the Sino-U.S. relationship by describing China's current leadership as the most difficult that Washington has had to deal with in 25 years.
When U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher comes to China in late November he will find few dissidents to add to his cocktail party guest list.
Historian Bao Zunxin, a veteran of the ill-fated 1989 pro-democracy demonstrations who wrote a letter to the government this year calling for a crackdown on corruption, lives quietly in Beijing.
Outspoken environmental champion and author Dai Qing -- who spent months in prison after the June 4, 1989, military crackdown in Tiananmen Square -- writes, campaigns against the huge Three Gorges dam on the Yangtze river and often gives interviews in Beijing to foreign reporters.
Veteran democracy activist Xu Wenli this year completed a 15-year prison term for subversion but has kept silent since a police ban on meeting foreigners and publishing his writings.
Ren Wanding, like Xu a veteran of the 1979 Democracy Wall movement, was released this year from a seven-year term for his role in the 1989 student movement and has kept a low profile, unable to meet foreigners or to vent his opinions.
China's economic growth is likely to accelerate in 1997 as Beijing pumps up its economy before a crucial Communist Party congress that may tackle nagging reform problems, state media said on Sunday.
Political factors were likely to be a significant factor in a possible renewed boom next year in one of the world's fastest growing economies, the China Daily Business Weekly quoted Xu Hongyuan of the State Information Centre as saying.
However, Xu also warned that the higher growth could see the spin-off of a renewed burst of inflation and warned of rising joblessness, giving one of the most pessimistic unemployment forecasts to be published openly in China.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 1997 could reach 8,178 billion yuan ($985.3 billion), growing by 10.5 percent compared with an anticipated 9.6-9.7 percent increase this year, the newspaper quoted Xu as saying.
GDP grew by 10.2 percent in 1995 and Beijing's communist rulers have been trying to cool the rate slightly amid signs the economy was threatening to overheat. China has set a goal of eight percent average growth for the 1996-2000 Ninth Five-Year Plan.
Xu linked his higher growth forecast to the five-yearly Communist Party congress, set for late in 1997, which he said was expected to take some difficult decisions to eradicate the low economic efficiency and operational losses plaguing thousands of lumbering state enterprises.
"These political factors, if the government makes use of them smoothly, will provide strong backing to national economic performance in 1997," the newspaper said, quoting Xu.
Diplomats and western economists have said Beijing may try to revive an economic boom in 1997 in the run-up to the party congress as part of a push to bolster the standing of the current leadership before a meeting when personnel reshuffles are a key issue.
Xu forecast retail price inflation to speed up slightly in 1997 to about eight percent from an expected seven percent this year. Inflation was 14.8 percent last year, down from a communist-era high of 21.7 percent in 1994.
Official media have been rife with speculation that China may again trim interest rates after two cuts already this year but central bank officials insist Beijing has no plans to do anything more than "appropriately" adjust a three-year-old tight monetary policy.
Xu said foreign trade was expected to make a strong recovery after exports slumped in the first few months of this year, especially as the government completes repayment of billions of dollars of export rebates to exporters.
He forecast exports to reach $171.5 billion in 1997, up 14.1 percent from 1996.
Xu urged a further cut in import tariffs next year, a move that Beijing has promised and which could lubricate China's bid to gain entry to the World Trade Organisation.
However, Xu forecast a sharp increase in unemployment.
In 1997, the number of people out of work in the urban area could be as many as eight million, including workers left idle because of suspension of factory production, he said.
The urban jobless rate could reach eight percent next year if both surplus workers at factories and registered unemployed were included, Xu said.
China's official registered urban jobless rate was 2.98 percent at the end of September.
China's economic growth is likely to accelerate in 1997 as Beijing pumps up its economy before a crucial Communist Party congress that may tackle nagging reform problems, state media said.
Political factors were likely to be a significant factor in a possible renewed boom next year in one of the world's fastest growing economies, the China Daily Business Weekly quoted Xu Hongyuan of the State Information Centre as saying on Sunday.
However, Xu also warned that the higher growth could see the spin-off of a renewed burst of inflation and warned of rising joblessness, giving one of the most pessimistic unemployment forecasts to be published openly in China.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 1997 could reach 8,178 billion yuan ($985 billion), growing by 10.5 percent compared with an anticipated 9.6-9.7 percent increase this year, the newspaper quoted Xu as saying.
GDP grew by 10.2 percent in 1995 and Beijing's communist rulers have been trying to cool the rate slightly amid signs the economy was threatening to overheat. China has set a goal of eight percent average growth for the 1996-2000 Ninth Five-Year Plan.
Xu linked his higher growth forecast to the five-yearly Communist Party congress, set for late in 1997, which he said was expected to take some difficult decisions to eradicate the low economic efficiency and operational losses plaguing thousands of lumbering state enterprises.
"These political factors, if the government makes use of them smoothly, will provide strong backing to national economic performance in 1997," the newspaper said, quoting Xu.
Diplomats and western economists have said Beijing may try to revive an economic boom in 1997 in the run-up to the party congress as part of a push to bolster the standing of the current leadership before a meeting when personnel reshuffles are a key issue.
Xu forecast retail price inflation to speed up slightly in 1997 to about eight percent from an expected seven percent this year. Inflation was 14.8 percent last year, down from a communist-era high of 21.7 percent in 1994.
Official media have been rife with speculation that China may again trim interest rates after two cuts already this year but central bank officials insist Beijing has no plans to do anything more than "appropriately" adjust a three-year-old tight monetary policy.
Xu said foreign trade was expected to make a strong recovery after exports slumped in the first few months of this year, especially as the government completes repayment of billions of dollars of export rebates to exporters.
He forecast exports to reach $171.5 billion in 1997, up 14.1 percent from 1996.
Xu urged a further cut in import tariffs next year, a move that Beijing has promised and which could lubricate China's bid to gain entry to the World Trade Organisation.
However, Xu forecast a sharp increase in unemployment.
In 1997, the number of people out of work in the urban area could be as many as eight million, including workers left idle because of suspension of factory production, he said.
The urban jobless rate could reach eight percent next year if both surplus workers at factories and registered unemployed were included, Xu said.
China's official registered urban jobless rate was 2.98 percent at the end of September.
China is unlikely to concede on its demand to enter the World Trade Organisation as a developing country and has the patience to hunker down for a long wait to win accession on its terms, a senior Chinese analyst said.
"Both sides need to make concessions, but there is one issue of principle on which China will not change," Pei Changhong, head of the department of Foreign Economy and Trade under the leading think-tank, the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, told Reuters in an interview at the weekend.
"China will only enter as a developing country," Pei said, referring to one stumbling block -- that of Beijing's entry status. The United States insists that the size of China's economy ranks it as a developed country.
"This is a matter of principle," Pei said.
China was deeply disappointed when its application to join the world trade body as a founding member two years ago failed, and talks since in Geneva have proceeded at a snail's pace.
He said he expected little progress when ministers of the WTO's 125 member states meet in Singapore this week, with China attending under observer status, but said China would seize the opportunity to explain its stand in meetings on the sidelines.
"After we gain recognition of our status then the talks could more easily proceed," Pei said. "There may be the possibility of concessions (by China) on some concrete issues."
Pei declined to say where China might be prepared to offer concessions in line with a "road map" presented to Beijing by Washington outlining liberalisations it wants before it will support Chinese membership.
He said China's economy was already remarkably open compared with some of its neighbours such as Japan and South Korea.
"When you go shopping in Beijing you see goods from all over the world on every shelf," he said. "You don't see nearly so many Chinese products on foreign shelves."
Chinese President Jiang Zemin announced at the Asian-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum last month in the Philippines that China would slash average import tariffs to 15 percent by 2000 from the current 23 percent.
Pei said non-tariff barriers still existed in China, citing the service sector as one area to which foreign firms were eager to gain admittance, but insisted Beijing was gradualling pulling down these barriers.
"Opening up requires a process," he said. "It is a fact that China is a backward country and must protect some parts of its economy. The demands on us must not be too harsh."
Pei offered a less optimistic view than China's Foreign Minister Qian Qichen who has said talks with the United States on entry could be wrapped up by mid-1997 as well as WTO chief Renato Ruggiero who has said next year could see a solution to the exclusion of the world's most populous nation from the world trade body.
Pei said 1997 seemed a rather ambitious target given the distance between the United States and China on many issues, but said he hoped to see entry by 1999.
"There are both advantages and disadvantages to China from entry to the WTO," Pei said, setting off the access to worldwide markets for Chinese goods against the cost and competition its domestic industry would face.
"China's stand now is that it is up to the other side," Pei said.
"China actively wants membership but it can wait. It will be good for China to enter but it won't be a catastrophe if we have to wait," he said.
"It is in no one's interests to keep China out."
China is unlikely to concede on its demand to enter the World Trade Organisation as a developing country and has the patience to hunker down for a long wait to win agreement to its terms, a senior Chinese analyst said.
"Both sides need to make concessions, but there is one issue  of principle on which China will not change," Pei Changhong, head of the department of Foreign Economy and Trade under the leading think tank, the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, told Reuters in an interview over the weekend.
"China will only enter as a developing country," Pei said, referring to one stumbling block -- that of Beijing's entry status. The United States insists that the size of China's economy ranks it as a developed country.
"This is a matter of principle," Pei said.
China was deeply disappointed when its application to join the world trade body as a founding member two years ago failed, and talks since in Geneva have proceeded at a snail's pace.
Pei said he expected little progress when ministers of the WTO's 125 member states meet in Singapore this week, with China attending under observer status, but said China would seize the opportunity to explain its stand in meetings on the sidelines.
"After we gain recognition of our status then the talks could more easily proceed," Pei said. "There may be the possibility of concessions (by China) on some concrete issues."
Pei declined to say where China might be prepared to offer concessions in line with a "road map" presented to Beijing by Washington outlining liberalisations it wants before it will support Chinese membership.
He said China's economy was already remarkably open compared with some of its neighbours, such as Japan and South Korea.
"When you go shopping in Beijing, you see goods from all over the world on every shelf," he said. "You don't see nearly so many Chinese products on foreign shelves."
Chinese President Jiang Zemin announced at the Asian-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum last month in the Philippines that China would slash average import tariffs to 15 percent by the year 2000 from the current 23 percent.
Pei said non-tariff barriers still existed in China, citing the service sector as one area to which foreign firms were eager to gain admittance, but insisted Beijing was gradually pulling down these barriers.
"Opening up requires a process," he said. "It is a fact that China is a backward country and must protect some parts of its economy. The demands on us must not be too harsh."
Pei offered a less optimistic view than China's Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, who has said talks with the United States on entry could be wrapped up by mid-1997 as well as WTO chief Renato Ruggiero, who has said next year could see a solution to the exclusion of the world's most populous nation from the world trade body.
Pei said 1997 seemed a rather ambitious target given the distance between the United States and China on many issues, but said he hoped to see entry by 1999.
"There are both advantages and disadvantages to China from entry to the WTO," Pei said, setting off the access to worldwide markets for Chinese goods against the cost and competition its domestic industry would face.
"China's stand now is that it is up to the other side," Pei said.
"China actively wants membership but it can wait. It will be good for China to enter but it won't be a catastrophe if we have to wait," he said.
"It is in no one's interests to keep China out."
China's long-delayed bid to enter the World Trade Organisation will fall under the spotlight when the world's richest nations meet to discuss its application this week, European and U.S. officials said on Monday.
Delegates of the Quad -- the United States, Japan, Canada and the European Union -- will meet for lunch on Tuesday on the sidelines of the first ministerial conference of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) in Singapore, the officials said.
The European Union (EU) was trying to bring the United States on board regarding its proposal that China enter the world trade body through a phased accession process, one EU official said.
The United States says Beijing must comply with a "road map" to open its markets and eliminate trade and non-trade barriers before it can win U.S. support for its entry.
China had hoped to culminate its decade-long bid to join the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade by becoming a founding member of the WTO at its inception two years ago.
Its application foundered on opposition over entry terms, with Beijing maintaining that the price of the road map was too high. Talks continue at a snail's pace in Geneva.
One aim of Tuesday's Quad meeting would be to try to narrow differences between the United States and Europe over terms for China's entry, terms used by Beijing to play one side off against the other, one EU source said.
Outlining his key objectives for the week-long ministerial conference in Singapore, EU Commissioner for Trade Sir Leon Brittan, stressed the need to relaunch in earnest negotiations toward Chinese membership.
"We have the remarkable changes going on in China, as well as a continuing process of economic renewal elsewhere in Asia and in Latin America...Hence the urgent need for WTO enlargement," Brittan told the conference opening session.
Brittan has visited China several times in recent months and has said he received a warm response from Beijing to the phased accession proposal.
In his opening address to the conference, Singapore Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong also backed China's entry in a reference to pending memberships, although he repeated the United States stand that new applicants must meet the necessary criteria.
"Some of these new entrants are significant economic players, like China and Russia, their entry into the WTO would have a positive impact on the rules-based multilateral trading system," Goh said.
Senior Chinese analyst Pei Changhong said last week China was unlikely to concede on its demand to enter the WTO as a developing country and has the patience to hunker down for a long wait to win accession on its terms.
The United States insists that the size of China's economy ranks it as a developed country.
A goal of 1997 entry seemed an ambitious target given the distance between the United States and China on so many issues, but Pei said he hoped to see entry by 1999.
China's Foreign Minister Qian Qichen said last month that talks with the United States on entry could be wrapped up by mid-1997.
Intense haggling among the world's trade ministers has brought within grasp a lucrative deal to free the global information technology market, officials said Tuesday, and some said they saw movement on the contentious issue of labour standards.
Big powers, notably the United States and the European Union, said a flurry of talks during the second day of the World Trade Organisation ministerial conference had inched toward a global pact to eliminate tariffs on the $600 billion market for information technology.
Differences appeared to narrow on standards to regulate cheap labour and child workers.
WTO officials want a final declaration at the close of the first ministerial meeting of the fledgling trade body on Friday that would point the WTO down the free trade path into the 21st century.
The EU, along with the United States, Canada and Japan, was making progress to reach consensus on an Information Technology Agreement that would be the crowning achievement of the meeting, EU Trade Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan told reporters.
"We are making a lot of progress," Brittan said after a lunchtime meeting of the four major trading partners to discuss types of products to be covered and timing of tariff reductions.
Acting U.S. Trade Representative Charlene Barshefksy said she concurred with Brittan's comments, but declined to say anything more on the proposed pact to remove tariffs on computer products by 2000.
"There is no question that what the industrialised countries now hope for most here is a deal on information technology products and agreement to work hard for a basic telecommunications pact by February," said one key negotiator.
Signals from negotiators left little doubt the major traders were aiming for agreement as quickly as possible -- perhaps by Wednesday -- to convince Asian trading partners to sign on to the agreement by the end of the meeting on Friday.
Japan's Foreign Minister Yukihiko Ikeda told the conference he hoped "ardently .... that we will have an agreement as the most significant achievement of this ministerial conference in the area of trade liberalisation."
However, several Asian nations voiced reservations, with Malaysia saying the goal of free commerce in infotechnology by the turn of the century was too ambitious.
"We did not come here to discuss the Information Technology Agreement," International Trade and Industry Minister Rafidah Aziz said. "All negotiations should be done in Geneva."
The 128 full delegations from WTO member countries and ministers and officials from nearly 30 others waiting to be admitted heard ringing appeals for progress toward a telecommunications liberalisation pact with a deadline set for mid-February.
Another late-night meeting was called on the issue of labour standards, which has emerged as the most divisive at the meeting.
A Japanese foreign ministry official told reporters that some developing countries that had opposed any mention of the labour issue in the final declaration were taking a more positive position. "A possibility of an agreement has emerged," he said, but addded that some hard-core emerging economies were holding out.
India, Malaysia and Indonesia, for example, have been insisting on no mention at all, arguing that even a neutral phrasing would suggest work conditions were a subject for the WTO.
Aiming to counter lobbying by sceptical Western-based aid groups, the WTO insisted that the poorest nations stood to reap major benefit from the freeing of global commerce.
But WTO officials admitted that Director-General Renato Ruggiero had failed to convince richer members, both industrialised and emerging economies, to remove all tariffs and other barriers affecting goods from the laggard states.
The European Union made little headway in efforts to persuade its main trading partners to jump-start stalled talks on China's bid for WTO admission. But Russia, another major member-in-waiting, expected to win entry by the end of 1997, Russian Deputy Prime Minister Oleg Davydov said.
Intense haggling among the world's trade ministers brought within grasp a lucrative deal to free the global information technology market and some officials saw movement on the contentious issue of labour standards.
Big powers, notably the United States and the European Union (EU), said on Tuesday a flurry of talks throughout the second day of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) ministerial conference had inched toward a global pact to eliminate tariffs on a $600 billion market for information technology.
Storm-clouds over whether to discuss monopolistic business practices began to disperse. Differences appeared to narrow between North and South as well as North and North on standards to regulate cheap labour and child workers.
WTO officials want a final declaration at the close of the first ministerial meeting of the fledgling trade body on Friday that would point the WTO down the free trade path into the 21st century.
The EU, along with the United States, Canada and Japan, were making progress to reach consensus on an Information Technology Agreement (ITA) that would be the crowning achievement of the meeting, EU Trade Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan told reporters.
"We are making a lot of progress," Brittan said after a lunchtime meeting of the four major trading partners to discuss types of products to be covered and timing of tariff reductions.
Acting U.S. Trade Representative Charlene Barshefksy said she concurred with Brittan's comments, but declined to say anything more on the proposed pact to remove tariffs on computer products by 2000.
Late night talks focused on details, officials said.
"There is no question that what the industrialised countries now hope for most here is a deal on information technology products and agreement to work hard for a basic telecommunications pact by February," said one key negotiator.
Signals from negotiators left little doubt the major traders were aiming for agreement as quickly as possible -- perhaps by Wednesday -- to convince Asian trading partners to sign on to the agreement by the end of the meeting on Friday.
Japan's Foreign Minister Yukihiko Ikeda told the conference he hoped "ardently....that we will have an agreement as the most significant achievement of this ministerial conference in the area of trade liberalisation."
However, several Asian nations voiced reservations, with Malaysia saying the goal of free commerce in infotech by the turn of the century was too ambitious.
"We did not come here to discuss the Information Technology Agreement," international trade and industry minister Rafidah Aziz said. "All negotiations should be done in Geneva."
The 128 full delegations from WTO member countries and ministers and officials from nearly 30 others waiting to be admitted heard ringing appeals for progress to a telecoms liberalisation pact with a deadline set for mid-February.
Another late night meeting was called on the "new issue" of labour standards that has emerged as the most divisive in Singapore.
A Japanese foreign ministry official told reporters that some developing countries who had opposed any mention of the labour issue in the final declaration were taking a more positive position.
"A possibility of an agreement has emerged," he said, but addded that some hard-core emerging economies were holding out.
India, Malaysia and Indonesia, for example, have been insisting on no mention at all, arguing that even a neutral phrasing would suggest work conditions were a subject for the WTO.
Accord was also closer on whether to study competition policy.
"No one was totally opposed to taking up the issue," a Japanese official sid. "We are moving towards a compromise."
Aiming to counter lobbying by sceptical Western-based aid groups, the WTO insisted that the poorest nations stood to reap major benefit from the freeing of global commerce.
But WTO officials admitted that Director-General Renato Ruggiero had failed to convince richer members, both industrialised and emerging economies, to remove all tariffs and other barriers affecting goods from the laggard states.
The European Union made little headway in efforts to persuade its main trading partners to jump-start stalled talks on China's bid for WTO admission.
But Russia, another major member-in-waiting, expected to win entry by the end of 1997, Russia's Deputy Prime Minister Oleg Davydov said.
Days and nights of intense talks on ways to liberalise global trade brought ministers to the brink of agreement on Wednesday although the stormy issue of labour rights cast a shadow on a final deal.
Despite sleepless nights and three days of intense negotiations, World Trade Organisation (WTO) Director-General Renato Ruggiero was buoyant at the inaugural Ministerial Conference of the two-year-old watchdog body.
"I am very encouraged. The sense of achievement is very clear," he told Reuters as he emerged at the half-way stage of the gathering from the latest of several sessions aimed at finalising a declaration for the ministers to sign.
"The road is open to something important, something big," declared Ruggiero, whose horizon has been set on the Singapore meeting since he took up the post 18 months ago just after the body was launched.
"We are deep in negotiation, and I do not want to prejudice anything," he said. "But there have been some very interesting proposals to get over some of the differences. People are ready for compromise to reach agreement."
Haggling in Singapore focuses on a multi-billion dollar Information Technology Agreement (ITA) and wording of the last few contentious clauses in a final declaration to try to include the concerns of all of the organisation's 128 members.
The document is intended as a blueprint consolidating agreements already reached in the 1986-93 Uruguay Round of world trade talks -- in areas ranging from goods tariffs and services to farm produce and textiles.
It will also set the course and the tone for discussions between now and the end of the century on topics not yet fully under the WTO purview such as basic telecommunications, financial and maritime services, and many others.
The big battle has been over whether to include a reference to core labour standards in the document and whether it should include provision for some discussion in the WTO on investment rules, competition policies and the way national authorities award contracts -- or government procurement.
Several countries, mostly Asian, are resisting what they see as a U.S.-driven push to get labour rights on to the WTO agenda and to use the organisation's disputes court to erode the developing world's low-cost labour edge.
When asked if Malaysia would permit a WTO study on labour rights, International Trade and Industry Minister Rafidah Aziz told reporters: "No, no, no way. There is no place for labour issues at the WTO."
The United States, backed by France, Norway and the International Confederation of Free Trades Unions (ICFTU), has been pressing hard for inclusion of the issue in the final text.
Delegates say Washington has insisted the issue be included if it is to back the declaration when the conference ends.
The United States, digging in its heels, says the labour issue involves human rights, eliminating developing world sweat shops, child and forced labour and other forms of worker abuse.
Faster progress was expected on ITA, with delegates scrambling for an accord to free trade in the $600 billion market for computers, software chips and other high-technology products by the year 2000.
Negotiators from the Big Four powers, the United States, Japan, the European Union and Canada haggled in meetings on the sidelines to try to settle differences as early as late on Wednesday on such touchy questions as what products would be covered and the extent of tariff reductions.
"There is not an agreement yet," European Union Trade Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan said after meeting Acting U.S. Trade Representative Charlene Barshefsky.
"There is agreement on many points. There are some outstanding ones. We are trying to resolve those."
A Japanese government source told Reuters earlier that gaps still remained among the Big Four powers, particularly over which products to include.
"We are continuing to work with our Quad (Big Four) partners and with many other delegates to find a formula that will succeed," a U.S. official told reporters.
Washington hopes that in addition to a broad infotech pact by as many countries as possible, the WTO will endorse the ITA deal in its Ministerial Declaration on Friday.
That would allow WTO members unable to sign on now to do so at a later date by presenting revised tariff schedules at the WTO in Geneva, the U.S. official said.
China charged on Thursday that politics was holding up its application for entry to the world trade body, the World Trade Organisation (WTO), and said it wanted to join as soon as possible,
"The accession of the applicants to the WTO has been slowed down due to political consideration and the excessive demand for immediate commercial benefits," China's Deputy Minister of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation Long Yongtu told the WTO ministerial meeting in Singapore.
In a thinly veiled attack on the United States, Long accused some members of taking advantage of the negotiation process to resolve bilateral trade disputes not relevant to WTO rules.
"As a result, some accession negotiations have encountered undue delay, which has slowed down the process of economic globalisation," he said.
China was bitterly disappointed when it failed in its decade-long bid to join the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade by becoming a founding member of the WTO at its inception two years ago.
Beijing has met particularly stiff resistance from the United States, which disputes Beijing's demand it join as a developing country and says the size of China's economy means it should enter as a developed nation.
The United States also says Beijing must comply with a "road map" to open its markets and eliminate trade and non-trade barriers before it can win U.S. support for its entry.
Beijing maintains the price of the road map is too high, and talks continue at a snail's pace at WTO headquarters in Geneva.
"The Chinese government has consistently held a positive attitude towards joining the WTO not because we believe the membership will bring out miracles to our economy and foreign trade," he said.
He welcomed an initiative by the European Union to support phased accession for China.
"We...hope the positive attitude will be translated into actions in resolving specific actions in the negotation," Long said.
"On our part, we shall take a flexible, pragmatic and forward-looking attitude and in the hope that other members will do likewise," Long said.
Long said China was keen to join the world trade body as soon as possible and repeated Beijing's official stand that exclusion of the world's fastest-growing economy from the WTO would benefit no one.
Asked when Beijing hoped to see accesion, Long said Beijing had never specified a timetable, but added: "We hope it can be rather quickly."
Senior Chinese analyst Pei Changhong said in an interview last week that China was unlikely to concede on its demand to enter the WTO as a developing country and had the patience to hunker down for a long wait to win accession on its terms.
A goal of 1997 entry seemed an ambitious target given the distance between the United States and China on so many issues, but Pei said he hoped to see entry by 1999.
China's Foreign Minister Qian Qichen said last month that talks with the United States on entry could be wrapped up by mid-1997.
China announced a major reform of its huge agricultural system on Wednesday, saying it would take the ambitious step of unifying the price the state pays for grain with the market rate to boost output next year.
In a speech outlining some of Beijing's plans for reform in 1997 to drag China's economy away from Stalinist-style central planning and toward stronger market forces, Politburo member Li Tieying cited reform of lumbering state enterprises and agriculture as two primary objectives.
China would unify the grain purchasing price with market prices next year, Li, the minister in charge of the State Commission for Restructuring the Economy, told a national conference on reform in the southern city of Shenzhen.
The system of cotton purchasing would also be reformed.
He gave no more details of how prices would be unified, but the move appeared to herald the effective liberalisation of grain prices.
Since paramount leader Deng Xiaoping launched economic reform in 1978, Beijing's communist leaders have tried -- and failed -- to free grain prices, falling foul of fears that spiralling prices would make food unaffordable for many of China's 1.2 billion people and spark social unrest.
China's central authorities still buy a certain amount of grain from farmers at set prices below the market rates to ensure ample stores in state granaries.
With a record harvest of 480 million tonnes forecast for this year and with market prices falling closer to the state level, analysts said the time was ripe to unify the system.
Officials said last week grain supply was expected to exceed demand in 1997, with planting and weather conditions indicating a good summer crop next year.
Officials have said difficulties in selling grain would sap farmers' incentive to plant, placing in jeopardy China's ability to feed itself without resorting to huge imports.
Li said the state would separate national grain reserves from regional ones and would divide the responsibilities of the central government from local governments, but gave no details.
Next year the government would also separate losses incurred by state grain enterprises in 1996 from those expected next year and thereafter, he said. He did not give further details.
This year China raised by 20 percent the purchase price it pays to farmers for their grain after holding down increases in 1995 because soaring prices the year before had helped to push inflation to a communist-era high.
Li did not say whether the government would also take the opportunity to force urban consumers to pay market prices for grain, thus extricating state coffers from the burden of huge subsidies when plentiful supplies could curb price rises.
On state enterprises, Li said China would reorganise assets of ailing factories and establish a new system of supervision, while pushing social security and housing reforms.
In 1997, the number of pilot cities chosen for experimental reform of capital structure of state firms would be increased to 100 from 58, Li said. Enterprise groups selected as pilots of reform would almost double to 100 from 57.
The number of key enterprises linked with a sponsoring bank, and thus given easier access to loans during a continuing credit squeeze, would rise to 500 from 300, he added.
More than 45 percent of China's 68,800 state industrial firms registered losses in January-September, a rise of 17.6 percent from the same period last year, latest figures show.
The combined deficit of loss-making state firms hit 65.12 billion yuan ($7.8 billion) in the first nine months of this year, a rise of 45.7 percent from a year ago.
Top Hollywood film stars, including screen idols Harrison Ford and Brad Pitt, have been placed on a blacklist of 50 people barred from visiting the restive region of Tibet, Chinese officials said on Friday.
News that some of Hollywood's biggest box office draws were on a blacklist comes just weeks after Beijing clashed with U.S. entertainment giant Walt Disney Co over its film on the life of Tibet's exiled god-king, the Dalai Lama.
Brad Pitt, Harrison Ford and his wife Melissa Mathison Ford as well as directors Martin Scorsese and Jean-Jaques Annaud were among a group of movie personalities on a blacklist held by the Tibet Tourism Bureau, a tourist official said by telephone from the regional capital, Lhasa.
"Last October, we were verbally informed by the Tibet state security office that those foreigners should not be given an entry permit if they applied to visit Tibet," he said.
"At the end of April or in early May, we received the formal documents," he said, when asked if the Hollywood stars were barred from the Himalayan region that has been rocked by sporadic anti-Chinese unrest in recent years.
"They are banned from coming here for any reason," the official said, adding that none of those named on the list had yet applied to visit.
Brad Pitt stars as an escaped Austrian prisoner of war, who fled India in World War Two and found refuge in Lhasa where he befriended the young Dalai Lama, in the film "Seven Years in Tibet" that is directed by Annaud. China has not formally objected to the film.
However, it has apparently tried to halt production by California-based Walt Disney of the film "Kundun" that tells of the Dalai Lama's early life and is directed by Scorsese. Mathison Ford is a scriptwriter for the movie.
Disney has said it will go ahead with the release of "Kundun" despite China's objections. Beijing has denied putting pressure on Disney to withdraw backing for the film.
Beijing has been reported to have warned Walt Disney last month that its ambitious business plans in China were at risk if it went ahead with the release of the movie.
A Foreign Ministry spokesman said Disney would be wrong to sing the praises of the exiled spiritual leader.
The Dalai Lama fled Tibet to India in 1959 after an abortive uprising against Chinese rule and has since waged a non-violent campaign for autonomy for his homeland.
However, the blacklist did not include actor Richard Gere, who has long backed the Tibetan spiritual movement and is an active supporter of the Dalai Lama, the tourism official said.
Gere was among a group of movie luminaries who this month wrote to China's ambassador in Washington protesting against what they called Beijing's "attempt to impose worldwide censorship".
Officials had begun to compile a blacklist of foreigners barred from visiting the restive area in 1993, and the list had now reached more than 50 names, he said.
All foreign visitors to Tibet are required first to obtain an entry permit issued by local authorities who are anxious to keep out Westerners who may support the underground pro-independence movement spearheaded by the region's monks.
China will accelerate listings of new firms on its two stock markets next year to meet demand and curb speculation, a senior securities official said.
His remarks, published on Sunday, came a week after an official statement warned investors away from excessive speculation, triggering a steep sell-off on the Shanghai and southern Shenzhen stock exchanges.
However, an official of the top securities watchdog, the China Securities Regulatory Commission, sounded another note of caution, saying that the markets needed even tighter regulation because of insider trading, excessive speculation and trading on margin.
"It will remain at the top of our work agenda for a fairly long period of time to further supervise the stock market, and curb over-speculation and irregularities ... to better protect the interests of the smaller investors," Xinhua quoted the unidentified official as saying.
Since the People's Daily editorial one week ago, Shanghai's domestic A share index has tumbled 20.07 percent, standing at 922.34 points last Friday compared with 1,163.05 at the close a week before.
The foreign currency B index fell 3.84 percent to 63.743 points from 66.291 points a week ago after a roller-coaster five days of trading.
China would move more swiftly to list additional firms on the markets, in line with the recent market upswings, Xinhua quoted Zhang Dongsheng, a deputy director of the Finance and Banking Department of the State Planning Commission, as saying.
"This is part of the nation's effort to balance supply and demand in the stock market and curb excessive speculation," Zhang said.
Last week China announced a share quota of 10 billion yuan ($1.2 billion) for 1996 and to be carried over into 1997, almost double the 5.5 billion yuan approved for the previous year.
Analysts said one aim of the decision to flood the fledgling stock markets with new issues was to soak up excess funds that have fuelled a flurry of speculation in recent months.
At its height just a few days ago, Shanghai's domestic A share index had surged more than 100 percent and its Shenzhen counterpart over 300 percent since April, when Beijing announced that it supported development of the stock markets.
In a sign of soaring interest in securities, official figures show 21 million Chinese have now opened trading accounts, up from just 12 million at the start of the year and rocketing from 14 million in September, Xinhua said.
The rapidly growing number of stock investors had caused the market to overheat on a shortage of supply, resulting in runaway price rises and excessive speculation, Xinhua said.
"The current market size allows some institutional investors to manipulate the stock prices and drive them up to ridiculous highs," it quoted Cao Fengqi, a financial expert at prestigious Beijing University, as saying.
"An accelerated expansion of the Chinese stock market will boost the capital market and help pool more funds for capital-strapped enterprises," he said.
Speculation could be curbed only if the market was big enough to handle demand, he added.
Beijing, which says its stock exchanges and futures markets are experiments, was committed to the markets, Xinhua said.
Current market capitalisation of more than 1.33 trillion yuan, almost triple the 1995 figure, accounts for 18 percent of China's gross domestic product, compared with six percent at the end of last year, Xinhua added. ($1 = 8.3 yuan)
China hailed on Tuesday its war on bourgeois decadence as the top news event of 1996 along with missile tests off Taiwan, but ignored improved ties with the United States and the jailing of a dozen dissidents.
The line-up of the top 10 news events in China in 1996 as selected by senior editors of the major Communist Party-linked newspapers closely reflected the party line on news -- or propaganda.
The list issued by the Xinhua news agency differed sharply from events in China that have focused international eyes on the world's most populous country in the last 12 months.
Heading the list selected by 12 Beijing editors was the annual plenum of China's ruling Communist Party in October that adopted a 15,000-word document exhorting China's 1.2 billion people to adhere to socialist ethics and abhor bourgeois Western liberalism.
On Christmas Eve, it was unclear how far socialist values extended, but Santa Claus appeared to be exempt as he smiled and waved from dozens of Beijing and Shanghai department stores.
Politics, not only news value, may have coloured the views of many of the editors, who would have remembered that the plenum was trumpeted as one of the major achievements of Communist Party chief, state President and army boss Jiang Zemin -- anointed heir to paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
Newspaper editors elsewhere in the world would probably have chosen Beijing's campaign to intimidate Taiwan in the run-up the island's first popular elections of a Chinese president on Chinese soil as the top story of 1996.
However, for Chinese editors the decision to conduct missile tests and live-fire war games in waters near the island last March, and which sent U.S. aircraft carriers steaming into neighbouring seas, ranked only fourth in their top 10.
The news item in second place related to China's resumption of sovereignty over the British colony of Hong Kong in mid-1997, or Premier Li Peng's decision to sign off on the appointment of shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa as Hong Kong's first post-colonial chief executive.
Other editors might have focused less on the role of a single Chinese leader in Tung's elevation and more on his selection by a Beijing-sponsored committee of his peers.
Four of the top 10 Chinese news stories were linked to economic achievements and one to sports -- the Atlanta Olympic Games in which China ranked fourth overall in the medals' tally. Just two involved international affairs.
President Jiang's visit to the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum in the Philippines last month edged into fifth place.
Jiang's APEC meeting with U.S. President Bill Clinton set the seal on a warming of frosty Sino-U.S. ties and resulted in a decision on an exchange of the first presidential state visits in nearly eight years. But for China's news commissars, that merited only a brief aside.
"Chinese President Jiang Zemin... met with leaders of other APEC members, including U.S. President Clinton," Xinhua said.
China's renewed crackdown on dissent, such as its decision to sentence Wang Dan, a former leader of the 1989 student demonstrations for more democracy, to 11 years in jail for conspiring to subvert the government, went unmentioned.
China has moved a step further from its recent radical past with a decision to scrap the crime of "counter-revolution" and replace it with the offence of jeopardising state security, officials said on Wednesday.
The maximum penalty of death for a charge that is most commonly used against political dissidents accused of subversion would remain unchanged.
The proposal to rename the crime of counter-revolution as jeopardising state security was tabled in a draft amendment to the Criminal Law submitted to the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, or parliament, on Tuesday.
Following approval by the standing committee, the amendment that reduces the scope of the crime to 10 offences from 15 would be sent to the annual session of parliament next March for final ratification, a parliament official said by telephone.
The proposal to change the name of the crime "was made in consideration of changed circumstances and the overall interests of the country", the Xinhua news agency quoted Wang Hanbin, vice-chairman of the Standing Committee, as telling parliament.
The crime of counter-revolution was placed on China's books after Chairman Mao Zedong swept the communists to power in 1949 and launched three decades of radical rule when to be revolutionary were marks of a correct political attitude.
The crime of counter-revolution has for decades been a catch-all to imprison anyone of whose opinions the state disapproved or whose opinions disapproved of the state.
Its victims have ranged from writers condemned as rightists in the late 1950s and those who criticised Mao during the ultra-leftist 1966-76 Cultural Revolution, to teenage students who took to the streets in 1989 to demand more democracy.
Among the most prominent dissidents serving lengthy jail terms for counter-revolutionary crimes is Wei Jingsheng, regarded as the father of China's struggling pro-democracy movement and sentenced late last year to 14 years for plotting to subvert the state.
Wei was previously sentenced to 15 years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes after he wrote an essay during the 1979 Democracy Wall movement calling for the Fourth Modernisation -- or democracy.
Parliament's Wang praised the use of counter-revolutionary crime to safeguard state security, but said times had changed.
"Political, economic and social development in recent years has given birth to a series of new problems," Wang said, referring to the shift away from revolution to define political correctness that has been generated by the pragmatic reform policies of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
Under the draft amendments, counter-revolutionary activities as now stipulated will remain a crime -- with the exception that offences such as murder, manufacturing firearms and stealing guns will be excluded and handled as ordinary criminal acts.
Activities that aim to overthrow the dictatorship of the proletariat -- or subversion -- remain covered by the new crime of jeopardising state security, the parliament official said.
Under other amendments to the criminal law, an act not specifically covered cannot lead to a criminal conviction. Currently, people can be convicted based on a similar crime.
New offences will be added including organised crime, computer crime and manipulating stock markets.
Police acting in the line of duty will no longer bear criminal responsibility for causing death or injury.
China has jailed a Tibetan music expert touring the Himalayan region on a U.S. scholarship for 18 years for spying in one of the harshest sentences ever meted out in the restive region, local radio reported on Friday.
Ngawang Choephel, 30, who was travelling in Tibet as a Fulbright scholar to produce an amateur documentary about traditional music and dance, was detained by the authorities in Tibet in August, 1995, said the broadcast monitored by the British Broadcasting Corp.
The young scholar confessed to having been sent to Tibet by "the Dalai (Lama) clique" on behalf of an unnamed foreign country to conduct espionage activities, the report said in a thinly veiled reference to the United States.
U.S. officials had no immediate comment on the case.
He was visiting "under the pretext of collecting information on Tibetan folk songs and dances", the radio broadcast said.
"In accordance with the Criminal Law of the People's Republic of China... The Intermediate People's Court of Xigaze Prefecture sentenced Ngawang Choephel to an 18-year prison term for committing espionage crime," the radio said.
He was deprived of his political rights for four years.
China has been swift to crack down on any sign of anti-Chinese unrest in the Himalayan region.
Beijing has been especially nervous about anyone with possible links to the exiled Dalai Lama, Tibet's god-king, since he announced in 1995 his own candidate as the reincarnation of the region's second holiest monk, the Panchen Lama. China later presided over the discovery of an alternative reincarnation.
"The striking thing is the length of the sentence," Robbie Barnett of the London-based group Tibet Information Network said in a telephone interview. "It is quite extraordinary."
Ngawang Choephol's sentence was the most severe handed down in a political case since Tibetan monk Ngawang Phulchung was jailed for 19 years in 1989 for subversion after publishing political leaflets, including a manifesto for a democratic Tibet.
Another monk, Jampel Changchup, was also sentenced in 1989 to 19 years in prison for subversion and espionage.
"It does seem to be a provocative decision in political terms because it names three times 'a certain foreign government'," Barnett said.
"It appears to mean the end of any sense that China is susceptible to the international community on human rights issues," he said. "They now feel confident to use counter-espionage laws against political offenders."
Ngawang Choephol left Tibet as a child shortly after the Chinese takeover in 1950 and grew up in India before going to Middlebury College in Vermont in 1993 as a Fulbright scholar in ethnomusicology.
The young man, who once worked as a dance teacher in India, travelled to Tibet in 1995 to make his amateur documentary.
To gain permission to travel to his birthplace, Ngawang Choephol renounced his Indian refugee status and entered Tibet as a Chinese citizen, Barnett said.
He was last reported to have been seen in Nyari prison in Xigaze, Tibet's second largest city in the west of the Himalayan region, in September 1995, shortly after his arrest in the local market.
"It is very unlikely that he was a spy," said Barnett. "He was genuinely making the film he said he was making. No one wold have entrusted him to do this because he was not competent to carry out any hidden activities.
"He is a rather distracted, emotional artist," he said.
Draft amendments to China's criminal law have sparked fierce debate among usually tame lawmakers, with controversy surrounding the scope of the death penalty and whether corrupt state managers should be executed.
The Workers Daily newspaper on Saturday published a rare insight into controversies troubling a string of amendments to the Criminal Law, currently under debate by the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, or parliament, that meets behind closed doors.
"Looking at the last few days of debate by the standing committee of the draft criminal law amendments, argument on specific clauses has been very fierce," the newspaper said in an unusual expose of controversy in the usually rubber-stamp body.
The criminal law amendments along with a new anti-corruption law were two main items on the agenda of a week-long meeting of the standing committee that began on Tuesday to debate bills to be passed by the full annual session of parliament next March.
"Are there too many death penalties?" was one of the top controversies this week, the Workers Daily said.
"Some people think that, with the international tide moving toward eliminating or reducing the use of the death penalty, even though the current amendments do not increase the number of death penalty clauses, however the current criminal law with more than 30 capital crimes should be reduced," it said.
China executes several thousand people each year and international human rights group Amnesty International recorded 3,612 death sentences and 2,535 executions in China in 1995 compared with 2,496 death sentences and 1,791 executions in 1994. Hundreds, if not thousands more, go unreported.
From January 1, when a new criminal procedures law takes effect, China will add lethal injection as well as execution by firing squad as a new means of capital punishment.
The Workers Daily said another body of legislative opinion held that the death penalty should neither be reduced or eliminated because it served as a deterrent and answered a popular demand for harsher punishments to prevent crime.
Debate also swirled around amendments to combat corruption, including more than 60 clauses that would specifically define graft and dereliction of duty, while increasing to 32 from seven the types of officials subject to the law, the newspaper said.
Heated argument surrounded the designation of managers of state firms as government employees, who are subject to a maximum penalty of death for corruption, it said.
One body of opinion held that government factory managers be defined as public servants since 75 percent of all official cases of corruption involved state enterprise managers.
Others argued this was unfair since managers of non-state firms faced a maximum of only 15 years in jail for graft.
"On this issue, the Supreme People's Procuratorate and the Supreme People's Court hold very different opinions," the newspaper said.
All should be equal before the law, the newspaper quoted the criminal law as saying regarding the need to tackle corruption, which is regarded as the chief threat to Communist rule.
It made no mention of a former Beijing city party boss who was sacked in early 1995 after a vice-mayor committed suicide in a $37 million corruption scandal, but has yet to face charges.
Another source of contention among legislators was a proposal that police acting in the line of duty should bear no criminal responsibility for killing or injuring a suspect.
This proposal had won strong support from the Ministry of Public Security, especially after the deaths of 100 police in the first half of this year, it said.
"Those opposed believe that this regulation could be used as an excuse in cases when casualties result from improper use of weapons," the Workers Daily said.
A bomb exploded outside a government office in the Tibetan capital, Lhasa, and Chinese authorities on Sunday described the blast that shattered windows for 100 metres as "an appalling act of terrorism".
The Christmas Day bomb, the largest so far set off by anti-Chinese activists in the restive Himalayan region of Tibet, resulted in no casualties but caused widespread damage, local officials said by telephone from Lhasa.
"It was a huge explosion that could be heard a long way off," said a government official, who refused to be identified.
"This was the biggest bomb blast by counterrevolutionary elements in Lhasa," a party official said. "None of the terrorists has been arrested, but one thing is certain -- this was done by plotters of the Dalai (Lama) clique."
The bomb exploded on the doorstep of the Lhasa City Chengguan District Government Office in the early hours of December 25, ripping apart the gateway to the buildings that house the main city government offices, the government official said.
"Windows for at least 100 metres (yards) around suffered some degree of damage," he said. "But because the explosion was in the middle of the night, no one was wounded."
He declined to give further details.
"The bombing... was an organised, planned, and targeted counterrevolutionary bombing incident staged by the Dalai (Lama) clique," local radio said on Friday quoting a circular issued by the regional Communist Party committee and government.
It was "a serious counterrevolutionary political incident and an appalling act of terrorism", the circular said according to the radio report monitored by the British Broadcasting Corp and made available on Sunday.
The London-based Tibet Information Network (TIN) said five people were wounded, some seriously. They included two nightwatchmen at the office and shopkeepers living nearby.
A nearby branch of the Bank of China was also reported to have been damaged along with two hotels, TIN said.
"The act of terrorism staged by the Dalai (Lama) clique is opposed by the people of Lhasa City, as well as by people all over the world," the party broadcast said.
"It fully demonstrates that the Dalai clique has cast off its previously so-called peaceful disguise to openly oppose the people of Tibet and has reached a point when it puts up a last-ditch struggle," it said.
China regularly blames followers of Tibet's exiled god-king, the Dalai Lama, for anti-Chinese unrest that erupts sporadically in the strategic mountainous region that straddles the Himalayas and runs along China's sensitive border with India.
The Dalai Lama, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989 for this non-violent campaign to win autonomy for his homeland, says he wants self-government and freedom of worship in the deeply religious Buddhist region. He fled China in 1959 after an abortive uprising against Beijing rule.
Speaking at a meeting of party officials in Lhasa on Friday, the vice chairman of the autonomous regional government, Gyamco, called for a campaign of retaliation.
"We should wage a tit-for-tat struggle against the Dalai clique's sabotage," he said.
"We should, once again, stage another campaign across Tibet to thoroughly expose and criticise the Dalai clique, heighten our alertness and strengthen preventive measures so as to keep the situation stable," the radio quoted him as saying.
Several much smaller bombs have been been set off in Lhasa over the last two years, including one in 1995 that caused slight damage to a plaque donated by Beijing and another last March outside the headquarters of the Tibet regional government.
China's restive Tibet region appeared certain on Sunday to fall under the shadow of a renewed campaign of intimidation after a music student was jailed for 18 years for spying and a bomb rocked the capital.
"The bomb attack, especially such a big explosion, is a real slap in the face," said one Tibet observer who declined to be identified. "The authorities really don't know any other way but the knee-jerk crackdown response."
A senior local government leader signalled that a new round of intimidation in the deeply Buddhist Himalayan region was essential to tackle such challenges to Beijing's sovereignty.
"We should wage a tit-for-tat struggle against the Dalai (Lama) clique's sabotage," Gyamco, vice chairman of the regional government, was quoted by local radio as telling a Friday meeting of party government officials in Lhasa after the December 25 blast.
"We should, once again, stage another campaign across Tibet to thoroughly expose and criticise the Dalai clique, heighten our alertness and strengthen preventive measures so as to keep the situation stable," the radio quoted him as saying.
The explosion was certain to trigger further official rhetoric against the Dalai Lama, Tibet's exiled god-king, whom Beijing accuses of fomenting anti-Chinese unrest in the strategic mountainous region that borders India, analysts said.
The Dalai Lama, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989 for his non-violent campaign to win autonomy for Tibet, says he wants self-government and freedom of worship in the region.
He fled China in 1959 after an abortive uprising against Beijing rule.
Police had set up new checkpoints on the road west from Lhasa, visited hotels to question Tibetan guests, particularly exiles from India, and begun house-to-house questioning of young Tibetan men, the London-based Tibet Information Network said.
Diplomats said the extraordinarily harsh prison sentence meted out to music scholar Ngawang Choephol underlined the determination of authorities in the region to stamp out even the smallest activity that lacked an official sanction.
Ngawang Choephel, 30, was jailed last Friday by a court in Tibet's second city, Xigaze, for 18 years for spying, in one of the harshest sentences ever meted out in the region.
The student, a former Fulbright scholar in the United States, disappeared into China's security limbo in August 1995 while travelling in Tibet to produce an amateur documentary film about traditional music and dance.
The young scholar confessed to having been sent to Tibet by "the Dalai (Lama) clique" on behalf of an unnamed foreign country to conduct espionage, local radio said in a thinly veiled reference to the United States.
Washington voiced concern at the sentence, and said it knew nothing of his activities other than making a documentary.
"It appears to mean the end of any sense that China is susceptible to the international community on human rights issues," Robbie Barnett of the Tibet Information Network said after hearing of the sentence.
"They now feel confident to use counterespionage laws against political offenders," he said late on Friday.
But with the largest bomb explosion yet reported in Tibet rocking Lhasa before dawn on December 25, a renewed crackdown on anti-Chinese unrest appeared inevitable.
One Tibetan government official reached by telephone in Lhasa on Sunday said he could not comment on the bomb blast because he was too busy conducting a rectification and discipline drive in Lhasa's temples and monasteries.
The bomb exploded outside the main city government office in Lhasa, shattering windows in a 100-metre (yard) radius and prompting officials to condemn the blast as "an appalling act of terrorism". They said no one was wounded in the explosion.
"The act of terrorism...fully demonstrates that the Dalai (Lama) clique has cast off its previously so-called peaceful disguise to openly oppose the people of Tibet and has reached a point when it puts up a last-ditch struggle," local radio said.
China on Sunday hailed a brief visit by Premier Li Peng to Russia as 43 hours packed with political and business achievements and trumpeted the growth of a power centre to offset the influence of the United States.
Diplomats said the rapid warming of ties between China and Russia was unlikely to signal a major strategic alliance or a return to the close political and military alliance that existed between Beijing and Moscow in the early 1950s.
China's effusive rhetoric to describe Li's Russia trip was meant as a gesture to the West that Beijing could turn to friends other than the United States, diplomats said.
It did not appear to signal a major new power axis between the former bitter rivals for leadership of the communist world, they said.
"The visit... was brief indeed. However, it scored fruitful achievements and had great significance," the People's Daily, mouthpiece of the Communist Party, said in a front-page editorial.
"It is bitingly cold in Moscow in late December, but Li and his entourage felt the warmth of the Russian leaders and people everywhere," the People's Daily purred.
The achievements of Li's 43-hour visit included an agreement for the prime ministers to meet twice a year to monitor progress on building trade and diplomatic relations and a decision that Chinese President Jiang Zemin visit Moscow in April for talks to set the seal on a new level of relations.
The two sides also signed several deals including the supply of Russian Sukhoi Su-27 warplanes and building a nuclear power plant in China's eastern Jiangsu province.
Officials gave no details of the fighter deal, but sources said it involved sale of a complete production line to be built in northeast China. The deal was held up by financing problems and complications from the break-up of the Soviet Union that left Su-27 engine manufacturing lines in Ukraine, they said.
However, the Chinese commentary focused on the political significance of the visit, and a joint communique on strategic cooperation into the 21st century, as important signs of the global importance of the Sino-Russian partnership.
"The world is moving towards multi-polarisation," the People's Daily said.
"Both Russia and China well deserve to be two important and independent poles in the multi-polar world. The establishment and development of strategic partnership between Russia and China is conducive to the multi-polarisation of the world," it said.
"Leaders of both countries made it clear that they do not favour a world dominated by one power," it said, in a scarcely veiled reference to the United States.
Russia's desire to develop close links with China has followed NATO's plans to expand eastwards by admitting Moscow's Cold War allies in Eastern Europe as members of the alliance.
Li, whose meeting with Boris Yeltsin was the Russian president's first with a foreign leader since returning to work after a heart bypass operation on November 5, stressed that China saw the partnership as long-term and not as expediency.
The strategic partnership was directed at no other parties, the People's Daily stressed.
"May Sino-Russian friendship be passed on from generation to generation," it said.
Moscow and Beijing, once bitter rivals for leadership of the communist world, have been building steadily warmer and closer ties since Soviet communism began to unravel a decade ago.
For Russia, democracy has been accompanied by poverty and Moscow sees China as a huge market for its struggling industry.
China has launched a manhunt across the restive region of Tibet, tightened airport security and offered a reward of $120,000 for the arrest of culprits who exploded a bomb in Lhasa last week, officials said on Monday.
The government had announced a reward of one million yuan ($120,000) for information leading to the arrest of those responsible for the bomb blast early on Christmas Day outside city government offices in the Tibetan capital, Lhasa, a senior official said.
"No one has yet been arrested and we are now mobilising and deploying our forces," Lhasa Vice Mayor Ou Yangxiang said in a telephone interview.
Notice of the reward had been published in the Lhasa Evening News on December 27 and it was being issued in other newspapers in the strategic Himalayan region, government officials said.
The Christmas Day bomb, the largest so far set off by anti-Chinese activists in restive Tibet, had resulted in no casualties but caused widespread damage, shattering windows within a radius of 100 metres (yards), officials said.
"Almost the whole of Lhasa heard it," said one Lhasa government official. "It was a muffled sound, like -- whoong."
Officials insisted there was little doubt that the blast was politically motivated and carried out by followers of the region's exiled god-king, the Dalai Lama.
The bomb exploded at night outside a government building and was therefore clearly political, said Zhou Kaifu, deputy director of the Tibet Public Security Bureau.
"This was done by the Dalai separatist camp," the government official said, adding that the attack bore the hallmarks of previous similar "terrorist acts". He declined to give details although several smaller bombings have been reported in Lhasa.
"This is a terrorist act, aimed at destroying peace in our area," he said. "This was a brazen act."
Police had set up a special task force to search for the culprits and customs and immigration officials had stepped up security searches at Tibet's airport, he said.
The senior police official said the bomb was a home-made device made mainly from ammonium nitrate, a fertiliser.
"We are targeting Tibetan exiles returning from abroad and who have political connections," he said when asked about the focus of the manhunt.
"The bomb was made at a farm," he said. "We are searching mainly in Lhasa, but are cooperating with other areas."
China regularly blames followers of Tibet's exiled god-king, the Dalai Lama, for anti-Chinese unrest that erupts sporadically in the strategic Himalayan region that borders India.
The Dalai Lama, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989 for his non-violent campaign to win autonomy for his homeland, says he wants self-government and freedom of worship in the deeply religious Buddhist region. He fled China in 1959 after an abortive uprising against Beijing rule.
Monks in the devout Buddhist region who have spearheaded anti-Chinese demonstrations and riots in the past were not regarded as suspects, the police official said.
Officials have vowed to retaliate, signalling a possible renewed crackdown on anti-Chinese unrest in the region.
"We should wage a tit-for-tat struggle against the Dalai clique's sabotage," local radio quoted Gyamco, vice chairman of the regional government as saying last week.
Several much smaller bombs have been been set off in Lhasa in the last two years, including one in 1995 that caused slight damage to a plaque donated by Beijing and another last March outside the headquarters of the Tibet regional government.
China's usually rubber stamp parliament failed on Monday to pass an anti-corruption bill after the proposed law fell victim to fierce debate over whether it should specifically target government officials.
State media had reported heated discussion at the week-long session of the standing committee of the National People's Congress, or parliament, that closed on Monday.
Disputes among China's usually tame lawmakers ranged from controversy surrounding the scope of the death penalty as contained in proposed amendments of the criminal law to whether corrupt state managers should be executed.
The draft law on administrative supervision, which would target corruption and had been due to be adopted this week, was eventually withdrawn from voting, the Xinhua news agency said.
The law was withdrawn "because legislators sharply disagreed with the name of the law", it said, quoting parliament chairman Qiao Shi.
Some lawmakers believed the bill should be named the Law On Administrative Supervision in line with its regulation of the government.
However, they ran into opposition on constitutional grounds from legislators who argued it should be called simply the Law on Supervision, without reference to the administration, Xinhua said, but did not elaborate.
Qiao suggested the issue be put forward for a vote at the next standing committee session in February, 1997.
Beijing has launched repeated crackdowns on graft, which senior leaders have called a cancer that threatens the Communist Party's grip on power, but many Chinese say enforcement of anti-corruption measures at senior levels is patchy at best.
Debate had swirled around amendments to combat corruption, including more than 60 clauses that would specifically define draft and dereliction of duty, while increasing to 32 from seven the types of officials subject to the law, state media said.
One source of contention was the designation of managers of state firms as government employees, who are subject to a maximum penalty of death for corruption, it said.
One body of opinion held that government factory managers be defined as public servants since 75 percent of all official cases of corruption involved state enterprise managers.
Others argued this was unfair since managers of non-state firms faced a maximum of only 15 years in jail for graft.
All should be equal before the law, the newspaper quoted the criminal law as saying regarding the need to tackle corruption
The failure of the anti-corruption law to pass came as senior leaders considered whether to punish scandal-hit former Beijing Party boss Chen Xitong -- the highest-ranking victim of China's anti-corruption campaign -- for dereliction of duty.
Under the law, prosecutors would have the powers to investigate a suspect's bank account and ask the courts to freeze bank accounts of those suspected of graft, bribery and embezzlement.
In the first 11 months of 1996, Chinese prosecutors had begun action in 77,611 cases of corruption, bribery and economic crime and had dealt with 33,879 cases, up year-on-year 9.4 percent, the media said.
Corruption was virtually wiped out in the years after the communists took over in 1949 but has staged a comeback after economic reforms were introduced 17 years ago.
The largest bomb blast reported in Tibet marks a new desperation in anti-Chinese sentiment in the restive region and offers a longed-for opportunity to officials to launch a new crackdown, analysts said on Monday.
"I think what we are seeing here is people who tend to say that the path of non-violence is not working and they will now use violence," Robbie Barnett of the London-based Tibet Information Network said in a telephone interview.
The Himalayan region that is peopled mainly by deeply devout Buddhists has been rocked in recent years by sporadic, sometimes violent, anti-Chinese unrest, with monks and nuns often at the forefront of demonstrations for independence.
The home-made ammonium nitrate blast early on Christmas Day outside a city government office in Lhasa shattered windows in a radius of 100 metres (yards) and was the largest such explosion reported in the region. No casualties were reported.
Barnett described the attack as an act of desperation.
"These people are Buddhists," Barnett said. "But they are Buddhists who do not see anything being achieved by what the Dalai Lama is doing and they are very worried about it."
Officials said there was little doubt that the Christmas Day blast in Lhasa was politically motivated and carried out by followers of the region's exiled god-king, the Dalai Lama.
"There have been increasing hints that some groups could turn to violence if China did not relax its repression in Tibet," Barnett said. "But this movement seems to have attracted only a very few."
The Dalai Lama, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989 for his non-violent campaign to win autonomy for his homeland, says he wants self-government and freedom of worship in Tibet.
He fled China in 1959 after an abortive uprising against Beijing rule and has since lived in India with many followers.
As part of his peaceful campaign, the Dalai has proposed talks with Beijing, suggesting China shoulder defence and foreign policy but allow Tibetans self-rule in internal matters such as religion. His spokesmen say China has not responded.
Beijing has said it cannot negotiate unless the Dalai Lama recognises Chinese sovereignty.
Analysts said the latest bombing had played into the hands of local authorities eager for evidence that would demonstrate to Beijing the need for a stricter crackdown in Tibet.
"This is just the kind of thing the authorities in Tibet have been hoping for," Barnett said.
"They have been exaggerating hugely the extent of unrest to justify the need for a crackdown," he said, referring to a string of Tibet newspaper articles warning against anti-Chinese forces. "This can only help them."
Officials interviewed recently in Tibet played down the extent of anti-Chinese feeling in the region, saying those opposed to Beijing were a tiny minority. Witnesses saw little sign of tight security in the capital, Lhasa.
However, a senior police official in Lhasa hinted on Monday that a stable security situation in Tibet and its temples was a result of careful planning. "The order in monasteries is good because we have recently regulated them," he said.
An ideological campaign in Tibet, as elsewhere in China, to promote socialist ethics and allegiance to the Communist Party could have ignited the new violence in a region where many ordinary Tibetans pledge their first loyalty to religion, Barnett said.
China has launched a manhunt across the restive region of Tibet, tightened airport security and offered a reward of $120,000 for the arrest of culprits who exploded a bomb in Lhasa last week, officials said on Monday.
The government had announced a reward of one million yuan ($120,000) for information leading to the arrest of those responsible for the bomb that exploded in the early hours of Christmas Day outside city government offices in the Tibetan capital, Lhasa, a senior official said.
"No one has yet been arrested and we are now mobilising and deploying our forces," Lhasa Vice Mayor Ou Yangxiang said in a telephone interview.
Notice of the reward had been published in the Lhasa Evening News on December 27 and it was being issued in other newspapers in the strategic Himalayan region, government officials said.
The Christmas Day bomb, the largest so far set off by anti-Chinese activists in restive Tibet, had resulted in no casualties but caused widespread damage, shattering windows for a radius of 100 metres (yards), officials said.
"Almost the whole of Lhasa heard it," said one Lhasa government official. "It was a muffled sound, like -- whoong."
Officials insisted there was little doubt that the blast was politically motivated and carried out by followers of the region's exiled god-king, the Dalai Lama.
"This was done by the Dalai separatist camp," the government official said, adding that the attack bore the hallmarks of previous similar "terrorist acts". He declined to give details although several smaller bombings have been reported in Lhasa.
"This is a terrorist act, aimed at destroying peace in our area," he said. "This was a brazen act."
Police had set up a special task force to search for the culprits and customs and immigration officials had stepped up security searches at Tibet's airport, he said.
A senior Tibet police official said the bomb was a home-made device made from ammonium nitrate, a fertiliser.
"We are targeting Tibetan exiles returning from abroad and who have political connections," he said when asked about the focus of the manhunt.
China regularly blames followers of Tibet's exiled god-king, the Dalai Lama, for anti-Chinese unrest that erupts sporadically in the strategic mountainous region that straddles the Himalayas and runs along China's sensitive border with India.
The Dalai Lama, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989 for his non-violent campaign to win autonomy for his homeland, says he wants self-government and freedom of worship in the deeply religious Buddhist region. He fled China in 1959 after an abortive uprising against Beijing rule.
Monks in the deeply devout Buddhist region who have spearheaded anti-Chinese demonstrations and riots in the past were not regarded as suspects, the police official said.
Officials have vowed to retaliate, signalling a possible renewed crackdown on anti-Chinese unrest in the region.
"We should wage a tit-for-tat struggle against the Dalai clique's sabotage," local radio quoted Gyamco, vice chairman of the regional government as saying last week.
"We should, once again, stage another campaign across Tibet to thoroughly expose and criticise the Dalai clique, heighten our alertness and strengthen preventive measures so as to keep the situation stable," the radio quoted him as saying.
Several much smaller bombs have been been set off in Lhasa over the last two years, including one in 1995 that caused slight damage to a plaque donated by Beijing and another last March outside the headquarters of the Tibet regional government.
China's senior leader Deng Xiaoping is spending his twilight years as an effective recluse, leaving an opportunity for power-hungry, would-be heirs fighting for his title to use his name to strengthen their hand, analysts said on Thursday.
The most blatant sign of the exploitation of the reputation of the 92-year-old elder statesman was the New Year's Day launch of a 12-hour documentary on Deng's life that showed him larger than life, glowing against a background of golden clouds radiating across the sky.
"This was done, written and arranged by those around him who would benefit from having his image... burnished up a bit," said one Western diplomat.
"All those who owe their fortunes to him want to make him appear in as good a light as possible," he said. "The fact that they are starting the year with this shows that the pro-Deng camp seems to have the upper hand."
The clearest immediate beneficiary was the narrator of the introduction to Wednesday's inaugural episode of the 12-part series -- Deng's own anointed heir-apparent President, Communist Party chief and army commander-in-chief Jiang Zemin.
"Jiang will be better off if Deng is able to linger for about another year and a half -- until about mid-1998," the diplomat said.
"It would be inconvenient for (Jiang) if Deng went now," he said, adding that Jiang needed the clout of the man who succeeded Chairman Mao Zedong as China's most powerful man to consolidate his position at a crucial party meeting this year.
Deng has not been seen in public for nearly three years -- a result of his own desire to retire to a behind-the-scenes role as well as his failing health, analysts say. In his last appearance he looked weak and faltering.
Speculation abounds of Deng's fragility, ranging from rumours of his sudden admission to hospital in recent days to reports that he remains at home with little change in his health but with fading lucidity.
"There is no doubt that the perception is... that he is to all intents and purposes no longer consistently lucid," the diplomat said, adding that the adulatory documentary was proof of Deng's waning control.
"This is the kind of thing he always avoided," he said, quoting from Deng himself who always openly abhorred the cult of personality that deified Mao.
Chinese analysts said the series was reminiscent of the power struggles that gripped the inner ranks of the party in Mao's last years.
"You can see that people are now using Deng just as (Mao's wife) Jiang Qing and the Gang of Four used Mao to boost their position in the years before he died," said one Chinese writer.
Jiang and his opponents were already lining up their pieces in the months before the high-profile handover of Hong Kong to Beijing on July 1 this year and the crucial 15th Party Congress late in the year, diplomats and analysts said.
"The transition is pretty much done now, but Jiang still needs Deng's clout behind him until everything is wrapped up with the congress and the change of government at the 1998 National People's Congress (parliament)," the diplomat said.
The primetime documentary, carefully timed to start the year, is expected to define Deng's legacy to the current party leadership and thus future policies, political analysts said.
The main theme of the first one-hour show was reform, underlining China's commitment to Deng's pragmatic market policies that turned a backward Stalinist state into an economic powerhouse.
China must tackle the thorny task of state enterprise reform this year, forcing through unpopular layoffs and bankruptcies to halt haemorrhaging losses, economic tsar Vice Premier Zhu Rongji said on Thursday.
Zhu hailed such achievements in 1996 as a high economic growth rate of 9.7 percent, a fall in inflation to 6.0 percent and the swelling of foreign exchange reserves to a record $105 billion at the year-end.
However, he cited two urgent tasks that must be tackled in 1997 -- increasing grain reserves and ensuring incentives to farmers and halting rapidly mounting losses among the state enterprises that form the backbone of China's economy.
About 75 percent of China's more than 100,000 state firms lost money last year and total losses in the government sector soared to 69 billion yuan ($8.3 billion) between January and October, a year-on-year rise of 45 percent.
Zhu blamed the losses on two increases in state prices for farm products, hikes in costs of transport and power, tighter accounting mechanisms, high interest rate payments despite two cuts last year and arbitrary fees by local governments.
However, these were secondary reasons, Zhu told a meeting in Beijing on re-employment in state enterprises.
The three main reasons were duplication of products, the impact of widespread smuggling and the burden of huge numbers of surplus workers employed in state firms, Zhu said.
Many state firms, accustomed to mass-production for a command economy, have struggled to adjust to China's new consumer-led markets and continue to churn out millions of yuan worth of unsaleable goods.
Tackling these problems must be a priority in 1997, he said, if China is to turn around inefficient state enterprises that recorded their first net loss in the first quarter of last year as they struggled in an economy racing to abandon the cushion of central planning in favour of a sink-or-swim marketplace.
Zhu called for reorganising management in state enterprises this year, citing bad management as a major factor in growing losses, and urged active promotion of re-employment projects to help surplus workers or those laid off through streamlining.
He also urged standardisation of the bankruptcy system, which has been used mainly on an experimental basis for the past few years, along with encouragement of mergers.
While proposing the use of mergers rather than bankruptcy to eliminate loss-making state firms, he advised against the sale of an entire company and favoured enterprises taking on a portion of the ailing firm's debt.
The government would write off up to 30 billion yuan ($3.6 billion) of bad debt this year, and this figure could rise gradually in the next few years, Zhu said.
On agriculture, Zhu revealed for the first time the size of China's state grain reserves, which totalled a record 148.5 million tonnes at the end of 1996. That marked an increase of 34.4 million tonnes compared with the end of 1995, he said.
China has estimated its 1996 grain harvest at a record 480 million tonnes, up from a record 466 million tonnes in 1995.
Market prices for grain would not fall and Zhu urged farmers not to sell their grain at low prices to private traders.
Beijing is anxious that farmers continue to grow grain and not turn to more lucrative cash crops and wants to insure that farm incomes do not drop with the record harvests.
China has placed one of its largest investment trusts, stung by real estate losses, under administrative custody, and officials said on Thursday that more such financial firms may suffer a similar fate.
The People's Bank of China, the central bank, ordered the China Agribusiness Development Trust and Investment Corp (CADTIC) placed under the administration of two state banks in early January, local bank officials said.
CADTIC's domestic business had been taken over by the China Construction Bank while its overseas business had become the responsibility of the Bank of China, a construction bank official said.
Bankers said the financial firm that was China's biggest investment trust company after the China International Trust and Investment Corp (CITIC) had overextended itself due to serious mismanagement.
"CADTIC grew too big, it set up too many local branches and its scope of business was too wide," one banker said.
It had extended its business beyond its officially sanctioned scope -- agriculture -- and suffered large losses from real estate investments and had also invested in securities, a banker in Hong Kong said. The huge investment entity was owned by the Ministry of Agriculture.
"This underlines what we suspect -- that irregularities involving firms supposed to be engaged in agriculture business are fairly widespread," said a Hong Kong banker who declined to be identified.
"They are all fairly overexposed to property," he said.
Bank officials said there were no plans yet to close the trust company, but did not rule out that it might be sold off in the future.
A Construction Bank official declined to say whether the bank had plans to buy any or all of the trust company's assets.
The trust firm was still engaged in business as usual, said one CADTIC official who declined to be identified.
The Construction Bank had taken over management of CADTIC's domestic debts while the Bank of China was handling its overseas commitments.
Officials of the central bank declined to comment.
The ministries of Agriculture and Finance began an investigation into the financial situation of the company a year ago, an official of the investment company said earlier.
"It is not possible to shut down CADTIC immediately because the knock-on effects would be very large, there would be a series of problems," said one local banker. "It should be taken over by the banks."
Unlike China's state-owned banks, which can easily attract deposits but face tight restrictions on loans, the financial institutions can operate without any loan limitations, he said.
China was stepping up supervision of financial institutions, and new, tighter rules and more frequent checks were expected to result in several more such actions against firms engaged in irregular business, he said.
Financial institutions could be taken over, ordered to stop business or to merge, he said. Many that had little business, large debts and large losses were expected to close, he said, but declined to give details of the irregularities.
CADTIC has reported assets of about 30 billion yuan ($3.6 billion) and outstanding loans from such international financial institutions as the World Bank.
The Asian Development Bank just last month arranged a $70 million loan through CADTIC to a $185 million fish protection project in the Bohai and Yellow Seas.
China defended on Saturday its decision to exercise its veto at the United Nations for the first time in nearly a quarter of a century, killing a U.N. plan to monitor disarmament and a ceasefire in Guatemala.
"We had no choice but to vote against the draft decision on peacekeeping," the Xinhua news agency quoted Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang as saying.
"Clearly, the government of Guatemala must be wholly responsible," he said and made clear that China had no objection to the dispatch of U.N. peacekeepers to oversee a peace that ended a brutal 36-year-old civil war.
Shen accused Guatemala of forcing China to exercise its veto because the Central American country had maintained ties with Taiwan, which Beijing regards as a renegade province not entitled to international diplomatic links.
At a late Friday night meeting, all Security Council members except China voted in favour of a resolution that would have sent 155 peacekeepers to Guatemala for three months under a U.N.-brokered peace accord signed on December 29 between the government and leftist rebels.
In Beijing, the Foreign Ministry spokesman said Guatemala was to blame not only for recognising Taiwan but for joining a number of other small countries since 1993 to sponsor a General Assembly resolution aimed at securing U.N. membership for the Asian economic powerhouse.
Shen also lashed out at Guatemala's decision to invite Taiwan Foreign Minister John Chang to last month's peace signing ceremony in Guatemala City.
China had offered solutions to the impasse but Guatemala had remained resolute, Shen charged.
"Guatemala cannot expect on the one hand to do something that harms the sovereignty and territorial integrity of China while on the other hand requesting China to cooperate on peacekeeping," Shen said.
The negative vote on Friday by China, which along with the United States, Britain, France and Russia, has veto power in the 15-member council, meant that Council President Hisashi Owada of Japan had to announce that the resolution had failed.
It was China's first U.N. Security Council veto in nearly 24 years.
Taiwan has given generous economic aid to several small, impoverished states around the world in its bid to break out of a diplomatic isolation imposed by China. Taiwan was expelled from the U.N. in 1971 and replaced by Beijing as the rightful representative of China.
Under the peace accord, Guatemala's army would redeploy units to specified locations, after which troops from the rebel Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unit (URNG) would move to eight assembly points and disarm. The U.N. observers were to verify the process.
The drafters of the resolution -- the United States, Mexico, Colombia, Venezuela, Spain and Norway --  decided to push ahead with the vote, despite China's threat of a veto, saying that further talks could not overcome the differences.
China had never spelled out publicly what Guatemala was expected to do. But diplomats said it sought a pledge to refrain from sponsoring further pro-Taiwan U.N. resolutions and to stop receiving high-ranking Taiwanese visitors.
Officials in a central Chinese region have issued an action plan to stamp out worship by the underground Catholic church loyal to Rome, a U.S.-based church group said on Saturday.
The Communist Party document issued by officials of Chongren county in central Jiangxi province warns against infiltration by overseas religious forces and threats to political stability, said the Cardinal Kung Foundation, which obtained a copy of the document.
The seven-point plan, titled Procedures to Legally Implement the Eradication of Illegal Activities of the Underground Catholic Church, spells out action to be taken from November 25, 1996 to March 31, 1997 to wipe out underground congregations.
Measures include laying good public relations, registering and setting up a file for each religious believer for local and transient Catholics, forcing each undergound Catholic to write a letter denying their faith and to join the official church.
The document blames the growing number of illegal religious believers on "the intensified infiltration of overseas religious enemy and opposition forces, and due to the influence of the illegal activities of the undergound religious force".
Underground believers "used religion to commit criminal activities, seriously disturbing the social order and affecting political stability", it said.
It urges local authorities to employ "resolute, decisive and organised" measures to stamp out the underground church.
A local official reached by telephone in Chongren county refused to comment, saying the issue could arouse widespread international controversy.
China allows Catholics to worship under the auspices of the officially sanctioned, state-sponsored Patriotic Association but forbids allegiance to Rome or the Pope and maintains no diplomatic relations with the Vatican.
Authorities view underground congregations as a threat to party rule.
Aims of what the document called its "glorious assignment" include to "destroy the organisation of the Catholic underground forces" and to "destroy the Church's illegal assembly place".
Teachers engaged in illegal religious studies will be sacked and students are forbidden to carry any religious items.
The document called specifically for large-scale assemblies on Christmas Day to be stopped and exits of villages to be blocked to ensure no one leaves on December 25, 1996.
The plan defined the struggle against underground Catholics as a long-term political goal beyond April 1, 1997.
The Cardinal Kung Foundation is a Roman Catholic group that monitors religious persecution in China and wants recognition of those faithful to Rome.
It listed a string of recent examples of persecution of underground Catholics in China, including the disappearance of Bishop Su Zhimin of Baoding in northern Hebei province, and the jailing of two other bishops.
Bishop Su vanished after some 5,000 troops sealed off the Hebei village of Donglu in May, destroyed a shrine to the Virgin Mary that had drawn tens of thousands of underground Catholics in 1995, and detained two bishops and several priests and lay people, the foundation said.
Bishop Zeng Jingmu, 75, was ordered in March, 1995 to serve three years of re-education through labour after celebrating an undergound mass and a third bishop was jailed after he refused a bribe to join the Patriotic Association, it said.
About 80 underground Catholics were arrested in Chongren county on November 20, it said but gave no more details.
China's Catholic and Protestant churches, both tightly controlled by the state, claim several million believers but many more are believed to worship at underground churches.
