Hong Kong Dragon Airlines (Dragonair) is about to buy two new Airbus Industrie consortium aircraft and lease another to cope with increasing demand on its routes into China, industry sources told Reuters.
The proposed deal is for two new Airbus A320 aircraft for delivery in 1998 and 1999 with options for five more and one larger Airbus A330 on lease from next year, the source said.
A Dragonair spokesman said it could not confirm the reported acquisition but he said talks on new aircraft had been taking place.
The airline which currently has a fleet of seven Airbus A320s and four A330s, recently said it will need additional aircraft.
"It is common knowledge that we have a requirement for extra capacity and we have been talking to Airbus but no announcement has been made yet," the spokesman said.
Industry analysts said expansion would be seen as a vote of confidence in future business prospects after a difficult period trying to develop its regional network especially into China.
Slot restrictions at Hong Kong's crowded Kai Tak airport were a major constraint, they added.
Expansion would also benefit Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd which holds an 18 percent stake in the regional carrier by feeding more passengers and cargo on its international network and vice versa, analysts said.
Dragonair recently began new services to the Chinese city of Qingdao and Khaohsiung in Taiwan. It also has full scheduled cargo rights on two of its Chinese routes to Xian and Chengdu and says it has plans for additional Chinese services to Chongqing, Urumqi and Shantou.
Other shareholders in Dragonair are the Chinese state-owned China National Aviation Corp with 36 percent, China-backed CITIC Pacific Ltd with 29 percent and Cathay's parent, Swire Pacific Ltd with eight percent. --Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax +44 171 542 5017
The Hong Kong government said it is focusing on negotiating new overflight arrangements with several countries in time for the 1997 handover to China.
Up to now, Hong Kong has come under Britain's traffic rights umbrella. Now it must negotiate its own agreements so airlines can continue to fly over countries on key air routes, the government said.
A spokesman said the countries involved are located on routes from Hong Kong to Europe and to Africa, which are not signatories to International Air Services Transit Agreements with.
He declined to name them or say which negotiations were the most important as overflight fees will also be discussed and more pressure could be brought to bear on Hong Kong's negotiators.
Industry observers said the government is up against the clock to sign the new agreements before next year's handover.
"Some countries will be no problem, others may be sticklers," said a source close to the negotiating procedure.
Any proposed deal must be approved by the Joint Liaison Group, the Sino-British body set up to oversee the transition to Chinese rule. The text of a model overflight agreement to be used as the basis for the negotiations was cleared by the JLG in September.
Michael Arnold, who will be Hong Kong's chief negotiator, told Reuters that the negotiations will start as soon as possible with airlines fully involved. He said the agreements which are a form of international treaty will give greater certainty of routes.
"On flights to Europe, for example, given weather and the sometimes unstable political situation in some countries, the airlines need to have access to alternative routes. We need overflight agreements with a number of countries in order to offer several route options," he said.
He said overflight rights are now a priority following the successful completion of Hong Kong's final Air Service Agreement (ASA) with the Philippines last week.
"The number one task was to negotiate full ASAs to separate Hong Kong's air services from those previously provided for under the UK ASAs. This we have completed with the initialling of the Philippines agreement. We can now turn to focus on negotiating overflights," Arnold said.
When asked about overflight costs and whether airlines faced an increase Arnold said: "We would hope to continue the present arrangements, obtained under the UK umbrella." -- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 8982 Fax +44 171 542 5017
Air Macau said it expects to carry beween 20 and 30 per cent more belly cargo when two more Airbus Industrie A321 aircraft are delivered to serve three new routes into China next year.
Speaking from the Portuguese enclave, Air Macau's cargo supervisor sales and marketing Simon Tang told Reuters the new airline is achieving 60 percent load factors on current available capacity.
Airline statistics show that Air Macau has carried 3091 tonnes of air cargo in the first nine months of cargo operations although during the first two months no cargo was carried.
The figures also show a steady increase from 161 tonnes in January to a high of 489 tonnes in August.
"For a newly established airline I am quite happy to have achieved 60 percent load factors so quickly," Tang said.
"Due to the new aircraft arriving next year and the new routes into China I expect cargo carrying capacity to increase by 20 to 30 percent which should be a dramatic improvement." he added.
The Airbus A321 aircraft on seven year leases will join the airline's four other A321 and smaller A320s which are due to begin flying to three new destinations in China -- Hainan Island, Qingdao and Wuhan, the airline said.
It began flying 11 months ago when Macau International Airport opened and currently serves six destinations with 63 frequencies per week to Bangkok, Beijing, Shanghai, Xiamen, Taipei and Kaohsiung in Taiwan.
The airline said it wants to fly to 22 destinations in the next three years including Australia, Singapore, Kuala Lumpur and Seoul.
Air Macau also said it expects to carry 30 percent more passengers than forecast for its first year of operation, a total of 650,000. Many use Macau as a staging post for semi-direct flights where they are not required to change planes between the Chinese mainland and Taiwan.
--Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax +44 171 542 5017
Virgin Atlantic Cargo said it will begin flying a new, shorter route on its Hong Kong to London service later this month which will cut an hour off the journey time and enable an extra six tonnes of freight to be carried westbound and two tonnes eastbound.
The division of Virgin Atlantic Airways says China gave permission for the short cut after recent negotiations with the British government which also benefits British Airways Plc.
Virgin's pilots are due to begin the new northerly route via Beijing and then over Russia and Germany on October 27. The southerly track currently used is over Thailand, Bangladesh, Tashkent and Turkey.
Brinkley Chan, assistant manager for Virgin Atlantic Cargo in Hong Kong told Reuters that the new routing offers significant benefits for both passengers and cargo capacity.
"It is a much welcomed boost and will mean quite a dramatic increase in the amount of cargo we are able to carry  For the passenger it will mean one hour's less flying time," Chan said.
He said Virgin's Airbus A340 aircraft will require 50,000 pounds less fuel enabling eight tonnes of cargo to be carried with a full passenger load from Hong Kong and an extra two tonnes from London.
Until now during the winter months between November and February, Virgin has been able to carry only two tonnes of belly cargo and during the summer months four tonnes from Hong Kong. Weight penalties are less east bound, it added.
Virgin says Britain's airlines will be following in the footsteps of Germany's Lufthansa which has been flying the short cut across China for the past two years. -Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 8982 Fax +44 171 542 5017
Virgin Atlantic Airways said it is considering replacing its Airbus Industrie A340 aircraft with higher capacity Boeing Co 747-400s because of high demand between Hong Kong and London.
But aircraft availability and scheduling preclude an immediate change, David Woodward, general manager commercial for the Virgin Atlantic Cargo division said in a statement.
"The Hong Kong service has been highly successful, in fact we have suffered too little capacity. There is a possibility though of the aircraft change happening in the near future," he added.
Another senior Virgin executive said earlier this year that the carrier was hoping to increase its daily flights from Hong Kong to London to 10 a week.
He also said Virgin has plans to start a London to Shanghai service.
Industry observers say lack of slots at the territory's overcrowded airport is thought to be a big stumbling block and larger aircraft would be a short-term solution until Hong Kong's new airport opens.
Virgin's assistant manager in Hong Kong, Brinkley Chan said there has been no progress on a proposal to add a freighter to its fleet because of low market rates between Hong Kong and Europe and low yields.
--Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 8982 Fax +44 171 542 5017
United Parcel Service of America Inc (UPS) said the first aircraft to use its US$4 million Asia-Pacific hub now under construction in Taiwan will arrive on September 10, Mark Sobolewski, UPS director of engineering for Asia-Pacific told Reuters.
He added that the first phase of the hub at Taipei's Chiang Kai Shek airport is due to formally open on October 10 and is on schedule to be fully operational by March next year.
Six Boeing aircraft -- two 747s, two 757s and two 767s -- are due to operate eight flights a day in and out of Taipei six days a week from March connecting the U.S. with the company's growing Asian network.
The fast package carrier confirmed this week that it had won traffic rights to operate five frequencies a week from Bangkok. Sobolewski says other cities to be linked to the Taipei hub are Singapore, Kuala Lumpur and Osaka.
"The hub will enhance our service throughout Asia, make us more competitive and as this market grows we will have a reliable product and give a superior service. We have had very positive feedback from our customers especially in Taiwan," Sobolewski told Reuters from his Singapore office.
With the six aircraft, some brand new, the total investment in Taipei will amount US$400 million, UPS said. It added construction work on the first phase of the 4,800 square metres sorting office began this month.
The first Taiwan-based aircraft due next month will activate traffic rights awarded to UPS under the recent Japan-U.S. bilateral agreement, allowing packages to be picked up at Osaka's Kansai airport for distribution throughout Asia.
Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
Freight forwarders in Hong Kong say they have been warned that there will be a 20 percent increase in transpacific air cargo rates from the territory when the peak season starts on September 1.
Anthony Lau, vice-chairman of the 260 member Hong Kong Association of Freight Forwarding Agents Ltd (HAFFA), told Reuters that the 20 percent increase in the run up to Christmas was not surprising.
"I think it is fair and in line with expectations," Lau said.
He added it will apply to cargo destined for both the U.S. east and west coasts.
Warning notices had been received from the major transpacific carriers including Northwest Airlines, China Airlines, Japan Airlines, United Airlines, Evergreen International Airlines and Polar Air Cargo, Lau said.
-- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
Hong Kong-based freight forwarding company U-Freight Holdings Limited is considering opening an office in Guangzhou to take advantage of China Southern Airlines' growing international network, U-Freight managing director Anthony Fong said.
Until now, U-Freight's Chinese operations which started nine years ago have been concentrated in the north with freight forwarding operations in Beijing, Dalian and Shanghai, Fong said. U-Freight's new US$2 million, 4,200 square meter warehouse near Shanghai airport is on schedule for completion in December and Fong said he sees new potential just across the border from Hong Kong where the company was established 28 years ago.
"If Guangzhou is to have foreign flights then eventually other foreign carriers will fly into Guangzhou. It should save the trouble of trucking cargo down from Guangzhou to Hong Kong and we are investigating opening an office there," Fong said.
Industry observers said Guangzhou-based China Southern has invested in a new fleet of Boeing 777 aircraft to begin transcontinental services to Europe and the west coast of the USA and U-Freight is among a group of many well known freight forwarders who are eyeing the potential new market. Recent Hong Kong press reports said China Southern is starting a Guangzhou-Beijing-Amsterdam service next month and planning additional services to Los Angeles and Brisbane next year. No one at China Southern could be contacted for confirmation.
"We are just awaiting a start date for China Southern's new trans-Pacific flight," Fong told Reuters in an interview here.
Fong said the licensing procedure to start operations, especially to gain a Class one licence which allows freight forwarders to hold a stock of airway bills, will take time and patience.
"A proper licence in Shanghai took three years to achieve so it is early days yet but we would like to go into Guangzhou and a first step would be to set up a liaison office in the near future," Fong added. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
Investment bankers Salomon Brothers forecast "phenomenal" long term growth prospects for Thai Airways International Ltd and said management is "finally getting serious" about cargo.
In a recent 24 page equity research report, its Hong Kong based author Peter Negline recommended traders buy Thai shares below 50 baht because of the carrier's good prospects.
"Thai has phenomenal long term growth prospects resulting from a strong local economy," the report said.
In an analysis of Thai's strengthens it noted its global alliances with Deutsche Lufthansa AG and United Airlines and its regional competitive advantage because it is closer to European markets and the stability of the baht currency.
"A robust Thai economy should support strong passenger and cargo traffic growth. We assume Thai's improved service and price competitiveness will support higher load factors," Negline told Reuters.
In his report's Forecast Assumptions, Negline says economic growth on the whole should remain robust but warns of lower yields.
"This should continue to provide an ongoing platform for solid growth in passenger and cargo traffic. At an operating level, the airline is likely to suffer from further yield declines in both passenger and freight operations. However, through fiscal 1997/98, management should be able to ensure costs fall as fast, or faster, than the corresponding yield decline - largely due to the lower operating costs of the new aircraft fleet," the report said.
It also highlights opportunities for growth in lower operating costs through cargo.
"Thai has only really started to focus on growing its cargo business over the last two years, (over the last four years, freight revenue tonne kilometres (RTK's) have grown at only 11 per cent per annum) which is on the low side compared with other regional competitors. Thai has improved its freight load factors from 60 per cent in 1991 to 71 per cent in 1995, although cargo still represents only about 13 per cent of total revenue. Volume increases have been at the expense of yield declines. The recent announcement of a joint lease with Lufthansa indicates management is finally getting serious about this market," says the report.
Earlier on Tuesday the Thai Cabinet approved a proposal to allow Thai Airways to take a 40 percent stake in a new cargo company. -- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 44 171 542 5017,JG 2987 7212
British Airways plans to offer more passenger flights to Hong Kong but will not be changing the current wet lease freighter service to the territory, said chief executive Robert Ayling.
"We quite successfully expanded our cargo business by bringing in quite a substantial proportion of freighter capacity from outside the airline and I don't see why that should not continue. It's true Hong Kong is a particularly good market for freight and I am sure the air cargo industry will continue in the future," Ayling told reporters in Hong Kong. He is visiting the territory as part of a tour of key BA destinations with the theme 'Taking British Airways into the new millennium.' promoting how he will be "reinventing" the airline
"We have had a firm policy for the past ten years not to buy freighters and I see no reason to change that. I think if you asked KLM and Lufthansa, they would prefer to be in my position. I think we will continue to operate freighters but only on a wet lease basis not involving any capital expenditure," he added.
BA says it currently offers a three times weekly service between London Gatwick and Hong Kong using a Boeing 747-200 freighter wet leased from Atlas Air Inc. It also has 14 Boeing 747-400 passenger flights a week to London offering belly cargo capacity. The airline says it hopes to increase the twice daily frequency when slots at Heathrow become available and before Hong Kong's new airport opens in 1998.
Rivals Virgin Atlantic recently said that it does not have enough capacity on the London to Hong Kong route and is considering replacing its popular but smaller Airbus A340 aircraft with higher capacity Boeing 747-400 aircraft to meet demand. But Virgin managers said it has no immediate plans to enter the freighter market. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
American cargo carrier Evergreen International Airlines Inc said on Wednesday it has increased the number of flights from Hong Kong due of high trans-Pacific demand.
Evergreen has six weekly Boeing 747 freighter flights a week instead of four per week and said it can't keep up with current demand.
"All flights are absolutely full and if we had additional flights into Hong Kong we would have no problem filling them because there is a lot of freight being moved and a backlog is building up," said Evergreen's vice-president Kersti Krepp told Reuters.
The additional flights on Mondays are to both the U.S. east and west coast - Columbus, Ohio then onto New York and Los Angeles. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd said it has retired the last of its Lockheed TriStars.
Cathay's 19 TriStar airliners in the carrier's old green and white livery have been a familiar sight in the Hong Kong skies since 1975 flying more than 487,000 hours and millions of passengers. At its peak the fleet was logging 609,000 kilometres every week - equal to the moon and halfway back.
"It is more than a piece of metal. The TriStar has got character and it's a bit of a thoroughbred," said veteran Cathay pilot Captain John Bent.
The three engined L1011 airliners have been gradually phased out over the past two years and replaced in a US$9 billion fleet replacement programme on Cathay's regional and medium-haul routes by new, twin engined Airbus Industrie A330-300 and Boeing 777-200 airliners offering greater fuel efficiency, passenger comfort and cargo handling capability. The A330 can carry up to 32 LD-2 cargo containers in its belly weighing up to 22 tons, the TriStar can only carry around eight tons of cargo, Cathay said.
The airline says many of its TriStar fleet, which have been renowned for reliability and as a pilot's favourite, have been sold to other airlines to continue faithful service in the USA and Europe. --Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax +44 171 542 5017
Demand for space has eased slightly as a recent backlog is cleared and some airlines provide extra capacity, but key ex-Hong Kong rates have continued to rise, Reuters research shows.
Airlines and freight forwarders report brisk business as the territory's traditional peak season gathers pace and high demand for space has allowed airlines on European routes to again raise rates for the second time within three weeks.
A rise of 50 HK cents a kg on October 16 follows a HK$2 a kg rise imposed on October 1 on key routes to Europe. Transpacific demand is also said to be especially strong allowing rates to firm slightly.
Pressure for cargo space is also being exacerbated by high demand on passenger flights which is reducing bellyhold capacity for many airlines.
Sam Chung, the chairman of the Hong Kong Association of Freight Forwarding Agents and director and general manager of Fritz Air Freight (HK) Ltd, said the market was very strong especially in his company's main sector, the United States.
"Every single flight is full but space should become a little better because some airlines are putting on extra capacity. In early October there was a backlog everywhere but that is now easing," Chung said.
He also highlighted the HK$2 a kilo rate rise on routes to Europe from October 1 with more "unfair rises" due to bite.
Two U.S. airlines have drafted in extra aircraft to cope with heavy trans-Pacific demand.
Polar Air Cargo is employing two additional Boeing 747 freighters between the territory and Chicago and New York.
"At the start of October it was really busy with a lot of airlines having a backlog in Hong Kong, Japan and Taiwan. But right after China's national day and the mid-Autumn festival when a lot of factories closed down it gave us the chance to move a lot of cargo out of Hong Kong and gave us the chance to clear the backlog," said David Sung, Polar Air's Hong Kong sales manager.
More extra capacity on the trans-Pacific route has come from Evergreen International Airlines Inc which says it now offers six Boeing 747 flights a week instead of four previously. The additional flights on Mondays are to Columbus,Ohio then onto New York and Los Angeles.
"All flights are absolutely full and if we had additional flights. into Hong Kong we would have no problem filling them because there is a lot of freight being moved and a backlog is building up," said Evergreen's Vice President Kersti Krepp.
There is also extra capacity being drafted onto a main European route. Lufthansa Cargo AG says it will put an additional freighter on the Hong Kong to Frankfurt route before the end of the month because of high demand.
The extra flight will increase the total number of flights Lufthansa operates to Germany in a joint venture with Cathay Pacific Cargo to 11 per week. September also saw an additional freighter being drafted onto the route increasing the number of joint freighter from nine a week during July and August to 10 now.
British Airways World Cargo ,which has three freighter flights per week between Hong Kong and London Gatwick wet-leased from Atlas Air, in addition to belly cargo space on its twice daily passenger flights to Heathrow, also reports a very strong market.
"This is the peak of the year and we have been very strong and are very pleased with our performance. Every available metre of space is full and we think that will carry on for the forseeable future," said Chris Humphrey, British Airways' regional cargo manager Pacific who is based in Hong Kong.
He said rates to Europe have increased to reflect the strength of the market and thinks another rate rise is justified.
"Fuel prices have gone through the roof. Yields are again at the same level they were last year but underlying costs are increasing, particularly fuel," complained Humphrey.
Mark Wilson, Managing Director of freight forwarders Benair Freight also said pressure for space has recently eased as a backlog is cleared.
"Space is tight but available which proves that the airlines are working together and not discounting too much. Rates have stayed firm and the airlines are trying to keep rates up," he said.
He said rates to Europe have recently increased by around 20 per cent and by 15 per cent to the U.S. Inter-Asian rates are stable where yields are traditionally stronger.
Stanley Hui, the chief operating officer of the territory's only all cargo airline AHK Air Hong Ltd, which flies 747 freighters both east and westbound, said he had no complaints especially about the trans-pacific sector.
"Unlike in previous years, there has not been that much additional capacity employed during the peak period. Demand both in and out of Europe is also firm and services to Japan are busy. After last year's record year and a slow start to this year we have high expectations about Japan," Hui said
The latest statistics from Hong Kong's Civil Aviation department show Tokyo-Narita to be the biggest importer of Hong Kong goods. 8,742 tonnes of air cargo was flown from Hong Kong to the Japanese capital during August, according to the statistics.
Hui also said he expected rates to Europe to continue to rise.
"We are not trying to be greedy but we can't lose money forever and all cargo airlines are trying to recover what we have lost," Hui said.
Many airlines report being especially badly hit by Hong Kong's seasonal monsoon winds. Northerly winds mean aircraft have to take off in a steep climb over densely populated Kowloon and payload has to be reduced.
Air France Cargo said all carriers were being affected on both European and trans-Pacific long haul routes by having to suddenly off-load pallets and a backlog of more than 400 tonnes built up in early October.
"Everybody is being hit by these weather conditions and customers are unhappy about having their cargo left behind - but so are we. It is the first time I've ever known so much having to be offloaded," said Philippe Bour, the airline's regional cargo manager for Hong Kong, China, Macau, Taiwan and South Korea.
Paul Choi, assistant general manager of MSAS Cargo International in Hong Kong said the back log has now eased, partly due to more cargo being flown from Macau.
Gemini Air Cargo flew its first McDonnell Douglas DC-10-30 freighter into the Portuguese enclave from New York on September 27 with about 40 tonnes of cargo mostly destined to be shipped to Hong Kong. The airport which opened last November says Gemini is the fourth all cargo service to serve Macau on a regular basis and unlike Hong Kong has no severe space and slot restrictions or curfew.
Hong Kong Air Cargo Terminals Ltd (HACTL), which enjoys a monopoly on cargo handling at Kai Tak airport said after a "pretty lack lustre" first half the market has picked up during August and September which should continue in the traditional peak period towards Christmas.
HACTL reported a 7.1 per cent increase in throughput during September over last year whnn exports and imports rose by 5.5 per cent to 68,673 tonnes and 7.3 per cent to 49,063 tonnes respectively over September last year.
HACTL managing director Anthony Charter said transshipments "soared" 13.7 per cent to 16,775 tonnes "which interestingly may point to sign of a regional pick-up."
"There seems to be a shortage of capacity which is traditional at this time of year along with the hike in rates. I think this year we are seeing a slightly more positive outloook," Charter said.
HACTL says it is on course for another record year and expects a rise of around four per cent which is a far cry from the 23 per cent growth in previous years but "still welcome." --Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 8982 Fax +44 171 542 5017
Hong Kong civil aviation department statistics show total air cargo handled in August by country rose by 6.7 percent compared with the same month last year.
Air cargo imports on both scheduled and non-scheduled flights reached 59,910.5 tonnes and 71,674.9 tonnes for exports.
The top 15 countries figures (rounded) are shown in tonnes in the table below in alphabetical order.
			AUGUST 1996 ALL CARGO
			Unloaded     Loaded    Pct change
						     from July 95
AUSTRALIA	    2,675	  2,327    -8.65
CANADA		 1,836	  1,508     8.95
CHINA MAINLAND     1,841	  2,896     9.46
FRANCE		 1,720	  2,010     5.69
GERMANY		3,365	  3,866     4.70
JAPAN		  5,570	 12,197     2.35
SOUTH KOREA	  3,026	  3,867     7.95
MALAYSIA	     2,052	  1.634     5.00
NETHERLANDS	  1,142	  1,167     4.70
PHILIPPINES	  1,600	  1,737    -6.12
SINGAPORE	    4,430	  3,945    12.30
TAIWAN		 9,880	  7,161    26.98
THAILAND	     5,475	  2,380     6.62
UK		     3,378	  3,850    13.72
USA		    4.812	 14,722    -1.15
- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 542 5017
Hong Kong civil aviation department statistics show cargo handled in August totalled by region rose by 6.7 per cent compared with the same month last year.
Air cargo imports on both scheduled and non scheduled flights reached 59,910 tonnes and 71,675 tonnes for exports.
Regional figures (rounded) in tonnes are shown in the table below.
		    AUGUST 1996 - ALL FLIGHTS
			    Unloaded    Loaded	Pct change
							    from Aug 95
 Africa			195	   241	20.0
 Asia - others	   4,013	 4,824	12.0
 Australasia	     2,996	 2,676	-6.1
 Continental Europe    8,850	 9,449	 1.6
 Japan		     5,570	12,197	 2.4
 Mainland China	  1,841	 2,896	 9.5
 Middle East		 700	 1,291	 2.7
 SE Asia		  15,306	10,845	 8.0
 South America		66	    65     -21.2
 Taiwan		    9,938	 7,163	27.0
 UK			  3,380	 3,850	14.0
 USA/Canada		6,940	16,176	 0.1
 Total		    59,910	71,675	 6.7
- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
This is Reuters' 2nd ex-Hong Kong air cargo market report.
It will be published regulary until a new version is published at a later date.
HONG KONG, Oct 17 - (Reuter) Current average ex-Hong Kong air cargo market rates in Hong Kong dollars per kg for a 100kg shipment, with volume-to-weight of six to one.
						Oct 17	     Sept 30
				EUROPE
HK-LHR					22.25		20.85
HK-FRA					22.40		21.09
				USA
HK-JFK					20.70		20.50
HK-LAX					21.05		20.95
				MIDDLE EAST
HK-DXB					15.80	     15.18
				ASIA PACIFIC
HK-SIN					 9.10		9.06
HK-TAIPEI				    4.10		3.90
HK-TOKYO				    30.70	     30.50
* The rates in this report were obtained by Reuters journalists on a confidential basis from a range of airlines, large forwarders and smaller cargo agents.
* All prices were quoted in Hong Kong dollars.
* The tariffs represent average calculated from a range of prices and are indicative of current market acitivity.  
Demand for space has eased slightly as a recent backlog is cleared and some airlines provide extra capacity, but key ex-Hong Kong rates have continued to rise, Reuters research shows.
Airlines and freight forwarders report brisk business as the territory's traditional peak season gathers pace and high demand for space has allowed airlines on European routes to again raise rates for the second time within three weeks.
A rise of 50 HK cents a kg on October 16 follows a HK$2 a kg rise imposed on October 1 on key routes to Europe. Transpacific demand is also said to be especially strong allowing rates to firm slightly.
Pressure for cargo space is also being exacerbated by high demand on passenger flights which is reducing bellyhold capacity for many airlines.
Sam Chung, the chairman of the Hong Kong Association of Freight Forwarding Agents and director and general manager of Fritz Air Freight (HK) Ltd, said the market was very strong especially in his company's main sector, the United States.
"Every single flight is full but space should become a little better because some airlines are putting on extra capacity. In early October there was a backlog everywhere but that is now easing," Chung said.
He also highlighted the HK$2 a kilo rate rise on routes to Europe from October 1 with more "unfair rises" due to bite.
Two U.S. airlines have drafted in extra aircraft to cope with heavy trans-Pacific demand.
Polar Air Cargo is employing two additional Boeing 747 freighters between the territory and Chicago and New York.
"At the start of October it was really busy with a lot of airlines having a backlog in Hong Kong, Japan and Taiwan. But right after China's national day and the mid-Autumn festival when a lot of factories closed down it gave us the chance to move a lot of cargo out of Hong Kong and gave us the chance to clear the backlog," said David Sung, Polar Air's Hong Kong sales manager.
More extra capacity on the trans-Pacific route has come from Evergreen International Airlines Inc which says it now offers six Boeing 747 flights a week instead of four previously. The additional flights on Mondays are to Columbus,Ohio then onto New York and Los Angeles.
"All flights are absolutely full and if we had additional flights. into Hong Kong we would have no problem filling them because there is a lot of freight being moved and a backlog is building up," said Evergreen's Vice President Kersti Krepp
There is also extra capacity being drafted onto a main European route. Lufthansa Cargo AG says it will put an additional freighter on the Hong Kong to Frankfurt route before the end of the month because of high demand.
The extra flight will increase the total number of flights Lufthansa operates to Germany in a joint venture with Cathay Pacific Cargo to 11 per week. September also saw an additional freighter being drafted onto the route increasing the number of joint freighter from nine a week during July and August to 10 now.
British Airways World Cargo ,which has three freighter flights per week between Hong Kong and London Gatwick wet-leased from Atlas Air, in addition to belly cargo space on its twice daily passenger flights to Heathrow, also reports a very strong market.
"This is the peak of the year and we have been very strong and are very pleased with our performance. Every available metre of space is full and we think that will carry on for the forseeable future," said Chris Humphrey, British Airways s regional cargo manager Pacific who is based in Hong Kong.
He said rates to Europe have increased to reflect the strength of the market and thinks another rate rise is justified.
"Fuel prices have gone through the roof. Yields are again at the same level they were last year but underlying costs are increasing, particularly fuel," complained Humphrey.
Mark Wilson, Managing Director of freight forwarders Benair Freight also said pressure for space has recently eased as a backlog is cleared.
"Space is tight but available which proves that the airlines are working together and not discounting too much. Rates have stayed firm and the airlines are trying to keep rates up," he said.
He said rates to Europe have recently increased by around 20 per cent and by 15 per cent to the U.S. Inter-Asian rates are stable where yields are traditionally stronger.
Stanley Hui, the chief operating officer of the territory's only all cargo airline AHK Air Hong Ltd, which flies 747 freighters both east and westbound, said he had no complaints especially about the trans-pacific sector.
"Unlike in previous years, there has not been that much additional capacity employed during the peak period. Demand both in and out of Europe is also firm and services to Japan are busy. After last year's record year and a slow start to this year we have high expectations about Japan," Hui said
The latest statistics from Hong Kong's Civil Aviation department show Tokyo-Narita to be the biggest importer of Hong Kong goods. 8,742 tonnes of air cargo was flown from Hong Kong to the Japanese capital during August, according to the statistics.
Hui also said he expected rates to Europe to continue to rise.
"We are not trying to be greedy but we can't lose money forever and all cargo airlines are trying to recover what we have lost," Hui said.
Many airlines report being especially badly hit by Hong Kong's seasonal monsoon winds. Northerly winds mean aircraft have to take off in a steep climb over densely populated Kowloon and payload has to be reduced.
Air France Cargo said all carriers were being affected on both European and trans-Pacific long haul routes by having to suddenly off-load pallets and a backlog of more than 400 tonnes built up in early October.
"Everybody is being hit by these weather conditions and customers are unhappy about having their cargo left behind - but so are we. It is the first time I've ever known so much having to be offloaded," said Philippe Bour, the airline's regional cargo manager for Hong Kong, China, Macau, Taiwan and South Korea.
Paul Choi, assistant general manager of MSAS Cargo International in Hong Kong said the back log has now eased, partly due to more cargo being flown from Macau.
Gemini Air Cargo flew its first McDonnell Douglas DC-10-30 freighter into the Portuguese enclave from New York on September 27 with about 40 tonnes of cargo mostly destined to be shipped to Hong Kong. The airport which opened last November says Gemini is the fourth all cargo service to serve Macau on a regular basis and unlike Hong Kong has no severe space and slot restrictions or curfew.
Hong Kong Air Cargo Terminals Ltd (HACTL), which enjoys a monopoly on cargo handling at Kai Tak airport said after a "pretty lack lustre" first half the market has picked up during August and September which should continue in the traditional peak period towards Christmas.
HACTL reported a 7.1 per cent increase in throughput during September over last year whnn exports and imports rose by 5.5 per cent to 68,673 tonnes and 7.3 per cent to 49,063 tonnes respectively over September last year.
HACTL managing director Anthony Charter said transshipments "soared" 13.7 per cent to 16,775 tonnes "which interestingly may point to sign of a regional pick-up."
"There seems to be a shortage of capacity which is traditional at this time of year along with the hike in rates. I think this year we are seeing a slightly more positive outloook," Charter said.
HACTL says it is on course for another record year and expects a rise of around four per cent which is a far cry from the 23 per cent growth in previous years but "still welcome." - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 8982 Fax +44 171 542 5017
British Airways said it will be able to carry an extra 70 tonnes of air cargo a week when its twice-daily passenger services between Hong Kong and London begin a new, shorter route over China later this month.
Chris Humphrey, BA's regional cargo manager Pacific said the new northern route over Chinese air space will mean shorter journey times for BA's Boeing 747-400 aircraft which won't need to carry as much fuel enabling the cargo payload to be increased by five to six tonnes per flight on average.
He said the new routing was negotiated during recent talks between the Chinese and British governments and also benefits BA's rivals on the route, Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd and Virgin Atlantic. Both Cathay Pacific and Virgin Atlantic said they are also due to start the new shorter route on October 27.
"The new routing via Urumqi in China will be a real benefit to us with the start of our winter schedule on October the 27th. It means a shorter distance, less fuel and more cargo. With the extra capacity it will generate of around 70 tonnes a week which is very close to getting another 747 freighter on the route," Humphrey said.
-- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
HONG KONG, Oct 21 (Reuter) Cathay Pacific Airways said it has successfully handled its first load of pigs destined for breeding in China.
Cathay's in house newspaper said 300 pigs with an estimated value of HK$2.8 million were recently flown from Taiwan to Hong Kong en route for breeding farms in China. It said the eight pallets of swine were housed in two and three deck boxes specially equipped with automatic watering to keep them cool.
"As the pigs have a higher skin temperature than human beings, they are very afraid of heat. That's why we have to sprinkle water on them from time to time," Taiwanese herdsman Li Siou Tong told the newspaper.
He said the pigs were valuable breeds including Duroc, Landrace and Yorkshire which had originated in Sweden, the Netherlands nnd the United States. They are now in the southern Chinese city of Shenzhen spending 45 days in quarantine before being transported all over China for breeding.
Paulo Chan, Cathay's cargo standards and performance manager, said it was the largest number of pigs yet flown by the airline.
- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
Pilots in Hong Kong are becoming better connected thanks to the Internet, says the general secretary of the Hong Kong Aircrew Officers' Association, John Findlay.
The association says it is now giving each of its 700 members an e-mail address so they can stay in touch no matter where they are flying.
Findlay told Reuters in an interview that his members already find out what's happening by using a telephone modem to access the association's bulletin board. With 300 members based outside Hong Kong, the association says it's becoming increasingly popular. Committee members who are also airline pilots constantly flying all over the world also can stay in touch with union business via their laptop computers.
"We've had the bulletin board for two and half years now and its very well used. It's fairly sophisticated and updated daily so pilots can access our newsletter. It also has its other uses like a leisure forum and a 'for sale' site," Findlay said.
Now members will be able to send and receive messages by e_mail anywhere in the world and the eventual aim is to have a website page specifically for Hong Kong pilots, he said.
"It's the way to go," Findlay said. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
The head of British Airways World Cargo (BAWC) in Hong Kong, Chris Humphrey, said he is confident of a "dramatic improvement" in freight handling service standards at London's Gatwick and Heathrow airports.
One leading Hong Kong air freight forwarder said he is just one customer who is "appalled" at BAWC's handling of ex-Hong Kong cargo in London. One recent consignment took three and a half days to clear Gatwick, the forwarder said speaking to Reuters on condition of anonymity, adding he tries to avoid Heathrow wherever possible because of "indefensible" service standards. BA recently had its ISO service standard award at its main Heathrow cargo hub revoked.
Chris Humphrey, BAWC's regional cargo manager Pacific said he is aware of the problems and has assured customers that improvements are under way.
In an interview in Hong Kong, he said major changes to working practices at Gatwick, which receives Hong Kong's three freighter flights per week, had caused a "short term downturn in service standards".
At Heathrow, there have also been changes. BAWC's newly opened dedicated centre for freight from the Pacific region began handling Hong Kong cargo earlier this month. BA has said the centre will create a series of customer benefits and relieve pressure from its World Cargocentre hub.
"Again I am confident that we will see a dramatic improvement in our service standards there. I won't deny that we have had problems working in a very old building which is over capacity. We are aware of that and are working very hard to bring our working practices up to date and doing an awful lot of changes in a short time which is causing pain on the labour relations front. We lost the ISO from our main cargo hub but Pacific routes and cargo from Hong Kong still goes through an ISO qualified warehouse," Humphrey said.
"Things are getting better," he added. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
British Airways World Cargo (BAWC) is to employ a fourth weekly freighter between Hong Kong and London from next year, BAWC's regional cargo manager Pacific, Chris Humphrey said.
"We will definitely be moving forward with a fourth freighter. We are very bullish about the prospects for Hong Kong and Chinese economic growth. There's definitely a growing market here and next year's handover from a cargo point of view is immaterial. Other concerns such as US-Chinese trade relations have a much greater impact," Humphrey told Reuters in an interview at the British flag carrier's Hong Kong regional headquarters.
British Airways currently flies three Boeing 747 freighters a week between Hong Kong and London Gatwick which are wet leased from Atlas Air Inc. Denver-based Atlas uses converted passenger 747's to fly for several major airlines on aircraft, crew, maintenance and insurance (ACMI) long term, wet-lease contracts which BA says it is happy to continue because no capital costs are incurred.
The cargo executive said statistics proved how strong the Hong Kong market is for BAWC. Humphrey said statistics of all Association of European Airlines (AEA) carriers in the Asia Pacific Region showed BAWC enjoyed an 18.5 percent increase in market share between January and July measured by Freight Tonne Kilometres (FTK). The traffic average for AEA carriers, which included Air France and Swissair, both to and from the region was 8.2 per cent, he said.
He also said freight tonnage from Hong Kong to BA's world-wide network in the first half of the financial year between April and September increased by 31 per cent.
"That's a pretty dramatic increase which is indicative of the market's strength," Humphrey said. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
Virgin Group's cargo unit in Hong Kong thinks it will move significant amounts of air freight from the territory to South Africa via its new service to Johannesburg from London.
"We think there is a big market out there which is rising and that we can compete effectively via London," said Brinkley Chan, Assistant Manager for Dyna Trans (Hong Kong) Limited, Virgin Atlantic Cargo's Hong Kong agent.
Chan told Reuters that Virgin is offering a dedicated LD-3 container for South African bound cargo on its daily flights from Hong Kong to London.
He said Virgin's new, three times a week service to Johannesburg from London which began on October 2 can do well despite being a "second class carrier."
Virgin will begin flying a new shorter route to London from Hong Kong overflying China on October 27 which will permit it to carry an extra six tonnes of freight westbound.
Direct services to South Africa from Hong Kong are flown by Cathay Pacific and South African Airways.
Chan says other airlines offering indirect competition on the route include Singapore International Airlines in Singapore, Brazil's Varig via Bangkok, Gulf Air via Abu Dhabi and Emirates Airline via Dubai.
Chan said the main ex Hong Kong exports bound for South Africa will be electronics, clothing and general freight. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542-7706 Fax+44 171 542-5017
Hong Kong Air Cargo Terminals Limited (HACTL) may retain its facilities at Kai Tak as a 'down-town' depot after the territory's new airport at Chek Lap Kok opens, its managing director Anthony Charter said.
Air freight forwarders in Hong Kong said they are putting new pressure on the Government to keep Kai Tak's twin terminals open. Charter said HACTL has now made new approaches to the Government but added that a final decision is not expected until next year when a team of planning consultants report on what should happen to the valuable land which the airport occupies.
"We would be very happy to protect this bit of infrastructure which would help freight forwarders get over some of the difficulties they have with the new airport. It makes sense not to see the highly automated facilities just knocked down. We are keen on the idea of serving the freight forwarding community in the future," Charter told Reuters.
HACTL's private franchise at Kai Tak is due to run out when the new airport opens in April 1998 and its terminal facilities returned to the Government for the nominal fee of one Hong Kong dollar. HACTL will then move into its new one billion HK dollar state-of-the-art Super Terminal at Chek Lap Kok which it says will be the world's largest air freight complex under one roof.
But some freight forwarders, especially smaller companies, are baulking at the high cost of moving to the new airport, said the Hong Kong Association of Freight Forwarding Agents (HAFFA). Many firms have invested heavily in infrastructure close to Kai Tak and fear large staff relocation costs and high rents at the new out of town airport, it added.
HAFFA has supported calls for Kai Tak's cargo facilities to be retained and said it first proposed the idea more than five years ago but HACTL management then rejected it.
"It would make agents life easier if, as we proposed, there was a town centre facility," said HAFFA's chief executive Pauline Hui.
DHL International (Hong Kong) Ltd is backing the call. Andy Tseng, DHL's area manager for Hong Kong and China said he's written a letter urging that Kai Tak's cargo facilities be retained as a consolidation centre.
Supporters said the terminals could be rented out to another operator or run by HACTL.
HACTL said the former is unlikely because they own the computer software which runs the highly automated centre. Another suggestion that cargo from Kai Tak could be taken by barge to the new airport as well as along the new toll expressway has been discounted by HACTL as too slow.
HACTL said its integrated and highly automated twin cargo terminals at Kai Tak handle more than 1.5 million tonnes from 70 airlines a year making it the second busiest international cargo airport in the world. About 20 per cent of Hong Kong's external trade passes through HACTL. The company has invested more than US$256 million in Kai Tak, excluding land costs, which is probably the largest investment in air cargo facilities worldwide.
Aviation analysts said much of that investment will wasted if the Kai Tak terminals are closed down.
The lobby to keep the cargo terminal open is running alongside another campaign to keep Kai Tak open as an airport for smaller commuter aircraft. The Hong Kong government says it has rejected that proposal but is being urged to rethink its long term policy by business interests including commuter aircraft manufacturers.
HACTL, which has a monopoly on all air cargo handling at Kai Tak airport, is jointly owned by Swire Pacific Ltd, Jardine Matheson Holdings Ltd, Wharf (Holdings) Ltd, Hutchison Whampoa Ltd, China National Aviation Corp, CITIC Pacific Ltd and Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542-7706 Fax+44 171 542-5017
DHL Worldwide Express is investigating whether to have a new Hong Kong operations centre near the territory's new airport, its Hong Kong and China area manager Andy Tseng said.
The proposed centre would be in addition to and complement the express freight centre now under construction at Chek Lap Kok in which DHL has an equity stake.
It would also be in addition to the firm's existing town centre base near Tai Tak airport and its satellite depots across the territory. DHL recently invested HK$15 million in a new automatic handling system able to process 4,000 items an hour at its existing airport base.
"It is a vital decision for our future and a huge involvement. We must make sure we make the right decision for us and for our customer's changing needs in the future. It is difficult and we are collecting as much information as possible on what our customers want," Tseng said.
DHL say they have been approached by four real estate developers offering green field sites or existing buildings for conversion in west Kowloon, a mainly industrial area close to the new bridge and motorway link to the new airport on Lantau island.
Other air cargo companies are also reported to be considering off-airport sites because they fear high building rents and staff relocation problems at the new airport.
DHL says a viability study being conducted by a task force should be complete by the end of the year. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
DHL Worldwide Express plans to strengthen its role as market leader in China by opening 14 new offices and employing another 600 staff within the next three years, said the company's area manager for Hong Kong and China, Andy Tseng.
DHL celebrates its tenth anniversary of China operations next month "far ahead of our competitors and with 30 per cent market share", Tseng told Reuters in his Hong Kong office near Kai Tak airport.
Tseng said China may win 10 per cent of all DHL sales within Asia by the year 2000. DHL expects to expand its Chinese network to 26 by the end of this year and 40 within the next three years from the current 19. The new offices, to include Harbin, Pudong and Kunming, are in 50-50 joint ventures witrh Chinese partners, DHL said.
DHL's China venture began in 1986 when it set up a joint venture with China's largest forwarding company Sinotrans. DHL says it received another boost three years ago when it became the first joint venture to offer express links between domestic Chinese companies.
"Choosing the right partner was vital as is demonstrating a long term committment to China. We have demonstrated that," Tseng said.
Like all fast freight companies trying to do business in China, Tseng says the lack of infrastructure is a handicap but DHL is leading the way by expanding its network.
"The distribution network and lack of freight links has been identified as the key problem. But service quality and flexibility is particularly important in China," he added.
The 20 year veteran with DHL said that unlike rivals such as Federal Express, it enjoys a competitive advantage in China by not having its own fleet of aircraft running in competition with Chinese airlines. Tseng says he wants to strengthen the company's "very good" existing relationships with third party local airlines such as China Northern and China Eastern.
Tseng also said the average express shipment is getting heavier and pointed to the marketing success of DHL's Jumbo Box as offering a simple one price product which customers find easy to understand. But he said DHL has not yet started offering the Jumbo Box to customers in China. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542-7706 Fax+44 171 542-5017
Cathay Pacific Airways is to add a fourth daily flight between Hong Kong and the Philippines because of increasing demand, a company spokeswoman has told Reuters.
The increase comes three weeks after the Hong Kong government announced the successful conclusion of six years of negotiations with the Philippines over a new Air Services Agreement (ASA).
The Confidential Memorandum of Understanding reached did not reveal how many more flights, and what increase in seat and cargo capacity was negotiated but industry sources said it is around 15 per cent. The Government described the route as one of the busiest and fastest growing in Asia.
From October 27, the Airbus A340 flight will leave Hong Kong at 7.50 AM local time and return at 10.50 AM local , Cathay says.
"There is an increasing amount of traffic between Hong Kong and the Philippines and this extra flight has very good convenient connectinns with flights out of Hong Kong to the USA and Canada," a Cathay spokeswoman said.
Filipino flag carrier Philippine Airlines already offers four flights per day from Hong Kong. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542-7706 Fax+44 171 542-5017
All three airlines flying directly between Hong Kong and London said they can start to use a new, short cut to Europe across China from this weekend with the start of winter timetables on Sunbday October 27.
This means more cargo and less fuel can be carried along with a cut in passenger journey times of up to an hour, industry sources said.
Cathay Pacific Airways, British Airways and Virgin Atlantic all say they can begin to utilise the new northern route over China instead of the traditional longer southerly route over Thailand and India in their winter schedules. The short cut was agreed during recent talks between the British and Chinese governments, they say.
A Cathay Pacific spokesman said up to an hour can be cut off the flying time for its Boeing 747-400 aircraft on some European routes which will also have the ability to carry an additional four tonnes of cargo. BA can carry an extra 70 tonnes of air cargo a week if its twice weekly 747-400 aircraft utilise the new routing, its Hong Kong based spokesman said.
A spokesman for Virgin Atlantic said the new routing will enable its Airbus A340 aircraft to carry an extra six tonnes of freight westbound and two tonnes eastbound and save around 50,000 pounds of fuel.
Aviation analysts say the new routing offers significant cost saving advantages and allows airlines to carry full cargo loads all year round because strong headwinds during the summer restricts cargo payload.
But they say it is not all good news because the airlines haven't been granted permission for all flights.
"It is fantastic news for the airlines and very influential on the bottom line but realistically Cathay can't utilise the new routes on all flights because it has not been given a full quota and neither have the others," Peter Negline, Vice President and senior research analyst of Asia Pacific equity research at Salomon Brothers Hong Kong Limited told Reuters in an interview.
A Cathay Pacific spokesman said it will have the most access to the number of flights that can use the new routing. Other European services to Paris, Amsterdam and Frankfurt will also be able to benefit as well as London bound ones, he added.
Curfews at both Heathrow and Kai Tak airports will also cause scheduling difficulties until Hong Kong's new, around the clock airport at Chek Lap Kok is due to open in 18 months time, analysts say.
"Aircraft need to leave Hong Kong before the 11.30 pm local (16.30 GMT) curfew starts but the new routing could mean arrival at Heathrow at round 04.30 GMT which is two hours before the end of their curfew so the new routing doesn't offer a lot there,"Negline said.
"You can also see a further deterioration in cargo yields because the airlines are getting extra capacity for next to nothing," Negline added.
Negline said the airlines will also benefit from better aircraft and crew utilisation; the aircraft will be able to fly extra sectors and its crew who fly for less hours can be redeployed on other services.
Declan Magee, a Hong Kong based airline analyst for regional stockbrokers and investment bankers HG Asia also said the new routing will obviously benefit aircraft utilisation and fuel efficiency.
"Yes shorter routes will save money but if all three airlines are allowed to do the same thing that rules out competitive advantage. If only one airline could use the new route then it would be different but the consumer will feel the benefit.
Magee said the Hong Kong to London route is Cathay's fourth largest passenger revenue generating route of around HK$1.4 billion a year.
"It is a relatively important route but even if they can save four or five per cent on this route compared to Cathay's total turnover of around HK$30 billion a year.it's not that much. Yes, it's a useful way in which Cathay can offset some of the negatives it is facing in terms of yield decline," Magee said.
Analysts reckon the airlines can save around 10 tons of fuel per flight but that may be offset by expected higher overfly fees set by the Chinese who are aware of how much the airlines can save.
Analysts say the airlines need all the help they can get by utilising shorter routes and using new technology such as FANS - Future Air Navigation System which allows aircraft more direct routing. Because of successful negotiations earlier, Swissair and Lufthansa have been able to fly the shorter route over China to Europe for the past two years. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542-7706 Fax+44 171 542-5017
Japan Airlines (JAL) is expanding its new express cargo service called "J Speed" to meet rising demand for rapid deliveries throughout Asia, a JAL spokesman told Reuters.
The recently introduced system guarantees delivery for shippers facing urgent deadlines on high volume cargo routes and also offers late acceptance at the departure airport and early delivery, he added in a statement.
Next on the J Speed network is a proposed service from Bangkok to Tokyo with plans for a gradual expansion over JAL's entire international network, JAL says.
Kazuto Yamamoto, JAL's assistant vice president, international sales and marketing department for freight and mail said he had high hopes for the new service which aims to boost high-yield cargo sales on key Asian routes.
"There is great potential on certain routes and we're looking closely at future expansion in the near future," he told Reuters.
The busy Tokyo Narita - Manila sector was chosen for the J Speed launch. With average annual growth in the Japan-Philippines market over the past three years of 50 per cent, JAL said there is an increasing need for an express service.
The flag carrier said there is usually a two hour deadline before departure from Japan while some regular cargo has to be accepted the day before.
J Speed cargo is accepted up to an hour before take off and, because the air waybill is faxed to Manila, the cargo is cleared through customs before the flight arrives, the airline says.
JAL said customers are prepared to pay a premium price.
"Yes, there is clear demand for this service on busy routes - from Narita to Manila and from Jakarta and Singapore to Japan. Shippers are prepared extra for the "on board" guarantee. The rates vary in each market," Yamamoto said.
The service has now been extended from Singapore and Jakarta to Japan. JAL also said it plans a return service soon from Japan to Jakarta, Kuala Lumpur and Bangkok and is also studying a service to Singapore.
JAL insists J Speed is a response to customer demand and not a competitive response to aggressive marketing by U.S. carriers.
"United Parcel Service and Federal Express Corp have many cargo products and services including door to door small package operations. J Speed is not such a small package service. It is an airport to airport guaranteed on board service featuring the latest acceptance of shipments at airport of departure with rapid clearance and delivery to consignees' agents at airport of arrival," Yamamoto said.
Typical shipments include high technology components but JAL says some cargoes are ineligible - valuables and fresh produce cannot use J Speed. --Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax +44 171 542 5017
Hong Kong Dragon Airlines (Dragonair) is increasing its flights to Sendai in Japan from October 29 to six a week from the present four, the carrier's chief operating officer Philip Chen said in a statement.
"Our services to Hiroshima and Sendai are a good example of how Dragonair is spreading out and serving the region. Since we started Hiroshima in 1992 and Sendai in 1993 both have been very successful and we are increasing frequencies on both these routes to cope with demand," he added
One of Dragonair's current fleet of seven Airbus Industrie A320 will be used for the extra frequency, a spokeswoman added.
On October 24, Airbus said Dragonair had signed a contract an order for two more A320s, plus options for five others along with the lease of another Airbus A330-300.
The new planes will be used to cope with further route expansion to China and other Asian destinations, especially when Hong Kong's new round the clock airport opens in 18 months time, industry sources said.
--Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax +44 171 542 5017
Korean Air Ltd (KAL) said there was an 8.4 percent rise in the amount of cargo by weight on both domestic and international flights during July compared with the same month last year and in August there was a 6.3 percent increase.
However there was a 2.6 percent drop in July's cargo load factor and a 2.4 percent fall during August, the KAL statistics show.
 Period	  AFTK    '95     Pct chge   Weight   95    Pct
chge
July Intl
 One month	 560	512    9.4	  62	57    8.8
 Cumulative    3,641    3,217   13.2	 397     367    8.2
Domestic
 One month	  16	 12   28.1	  17	15   13.3
 Cumulative	 99	 88   13.6	 130     119    9.2
Total
 One month	 576	524    9.8	  79	72    9.7
 Cumulative    3,740    3,300   13.2	 527     486    8.4
August Intl
 One month	 547	483   13.4	  60	55    9.1
 Cumulative    4,188    3,699   13.2	 457     422    8.3
Domestic
 One month	  16	 12   25.1	  16	16    0.0
 Cumulative	115	100   15.0	 146     135    8.1
Total
 One month	 563     495    13.7	  76	71    7.0
 Cumulative    4,303   3,799    13.3	 603     557    6.3
 Period	    FTK    '95     Pct chge   Weight   '95   Pct
chge
July Intl
 One month	 419     380    10.1	  75	74    0.5
 Cumulative    2,693   2,465     9.3	  74	76   -2.7
Domestic
 One month	   6	 5    12.0	  36	41   -5.1
 Cumulative	 46	41    10.2	  46	47   -1.4
Total
 One month	 424     386    10.1	  73	74    0.2
 Cumulative    2,739   2,507     9.3	  73	76   -2.6
August Intl
 One month	 411     366   12.3	   75	76   -0.7
 Cumulative    3,104   2,831    9.7	   74	77   -2.4
Domestic
 One month	   6	 5    2.2	   36	43   -7.9
 Cumulative	 51	47    9.3	   44	47   -2.3
Total
 One month	 416     371   12.2	   74	75   -1.0
 Cumulative    3,155   2,878    9.6	   73	76   -2.4
KAL's statistics also show a 9.6 percent rise in the number of international and domestic passengers carried 1.341.400 this year from 1,224,200 last July. In August there was a nine percent increase to 1,580,000 from 1,439,200.
AFTK &amp; FTK unit: 1,000,000 ton.km. Cargo weight unit:1,000 ton.
-  Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
Work will start on October 30 on Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd's new HK$1.6 billion headquarters at Chek Lap Kok, the main contractor, Dragages et Travaux Publics (HK) Ltd, said in a statement.
The subsidiary of the French, Bouygues Group said the work includes a 10-storey office building, a 333 room staff complex, a three-storey workshop and stores building and a three storey leisure centre with a total floor area of 102,630 square metres.
The new building is scheduled to be completed in stages from January 1998 with an overall construction period of 22 months, the statement added.
The new airport at Chek Lap Kok is due to open in April 1998.
Dragages said it is also building the new base maintenance facility for Hong Kong Aircraft Engineering Company Limited (HAECO) and Cathay Pacific's new flight kitchen at the Chek Lap Kok.
-- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax +44 171 542 5017
The chairman of Hong Kong freight forwarding company Baltrans Ltd, Anthony Lau, said he expects to enjoy considerable synergy and economies of scale following the acquisition of a majority stake this summer in a Los Angeles competitor, Fond Group.
"As yet there is no integration of the companies, which are still operating on a parallel basis, but as time goes on we will enjoy economies of scale and expect to see further growth," he added.
Baltrans is well positioned in Asia while Fond is well placed in the US west coast, "so additional synergy is there," Lau said.
Baltrans completed the HK$32.2 million deal for a 67.4 per cent stake in the Fond Group in July, Lau told Reuters in a telephone interview from his Kowloon office.
Fond specialises in shipping cargo from Hong Kong to the west coast of America and its acquisition is aimed at increasing the overall profitability of the Baltrans group on trans-Pacific segments, Lau said.
Baltrans added the Fond Group includes Fondair Express (HK), Fondocean Express (HK) and Fondexpress (USA) which have a combined turnover of around HK$300 million. --Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax +44 171 542 5017
Lauda Air is enjoying "huge passenger growth" on the Hong Kong to Vienna route but cargo is disappointing, the airline's Hong Kong general manager Sunny Yu told Reuters.
While there's been a 34 percent increase in the number of passengers along with a 42 percent growth in revenue over the past year, cargo revenue is up to three per cent below last year's level, he said. Lauda's Boeing 767-300 twice weekly flight from Hong Kong to Vienna via Bangkok averages eight to nine tonnes of belly cargo with watches a particularly common commodity, Yu said.
"Cargo is staying at more or less the same level as it was last year. A small price war and overcapacity with ad hoc charters operating into Hong Kong are major obstacles. I'm not optimistic about getting cargo rates back to the good old days," Yu said.
He said the cargo situation is not mirrored on the passenger side where Lauda expects another double digit rise in passenger numbers this year. The current number of passengers flying between Hong Kong and Vienna is around 9,000, Lauda says.
The Austria carrier also said it's being constricted in adding more frequencies to Hong Kong from its Vienna hub because of slot restrictions at Kai Tak airport but hopes to eventually benefit when the territory's new, round the clock airport opens in 18 months time. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017.
Major airlines operating cargo flights to Europe are to raise their ex-Hong Kong cargo rates by HK80 cents per kg from November 4 to try and offset increased jet fuel prices, airline officials told Reuters.
Stanley Hui, the chief operating officer of the territory's all-cargo airline, AHK Air Hong Kong Ltd, said an emergency meeting of airlines was held in Hong Kong this morning to discuss a fuel surcharge.
Among the airlines represented were Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd, Lufthansa Cargo, Air France, Martinair and Cargolux, he said.
However British Airways World Plc -- a major carrier from Hong Kong to London was not represented, industry sources said.
"Fuel costs have escalated to such a level that it is only right and fair that the shippers share some of the cost because the impact on the airlines has been very obvious," Hui said.
Other carriers operating trans-Pacific routes for instance are also expected to follow suit with a similar increase, Hui added.  
Philippe Bour, regional cargo manager for Air France in Hong Kong said his airline will apply the increase from November 4 along with Lufthansa Cargo. Cargolux, Air Hong Kong and other carriers would follow a few days later, he added.
"It is a world-wide problem. Fuel prices in France rose 51 per cent from June to October, in Asia they have risen 33 per cent this year and something has to be done. We hope this will help us," Bour said.
Another cargo manager said, "It is not a case of running out of patience but of running out of money."
Japan Airlines Co Limited yesterday reported a 60.7 percent slump in profits in the six months to September due to higher fuel costs and the yen's retreat against the dollar.
JAL said fuel costs had risen by US$128 million compared with a year ago.
Other major Asian cargo airlines in the region say they are watching the situation closely.
Ming Fai Lai, cargo manager for China Airlines in Hong Kong, said it is waiting before deciding to follow suit but said an 80 cents rise would only have a limited benefit.
"If all European carriers unanimously raise their rates then we will follow but it is not clear if they will all adopt the same policy. 80 cents may help a little bit but for the future I don't think it will help that much," said Lai. --Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax +44 171 542 5017
Israel's flag carrier El Al is to start using a Boeing 747 on its once weekly Tel Aviv to Hong Kong service as part of a drive to increase tourism and trade with the Middle East, Abraham Roter, the carrier's the airline's general manager for China, Hong Kong and east Asia said.
From the end of this month the 747 will replace a smaller Boeing 767 which flies via Tashkent. The 747 will be a direct flight from Israel to Hong Kong which will stop in Bombay to refuel on the return leg, Roter said.
El Al said it was the only airline offering a direct link to the Middle East, as opposed to carriers such as Emirates which fly to the Gulf, and which offers good connections around the Mediterranean region. The larger aircraft will increase cargo capacity from 10 upto 24 tonnes and increase passenger comfort, Roter told Reuters in an interview from his Hong Kong office.
El Al is holding a series of seminars with travel agents to try and entice more tourists from Hong Kong. Current passenger levels to Tel Aviv are between five and six thousand a year.
"We believe that the market has big potential because Hong Kong people are big travellers and we are offering them a wonderful destination which is just 10 hours away," Roter said.
Israel does not have an Air Services Agreement with Hong Kong and Roter said if demand increases the carrier could utilise its second weekly flight allowed under the current informal arrangement. -- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
Zhuhai, China Nov 5. (Reuter) China's flag carrier and largest airline, Air China is planning to restart flying to Los Angeles next year, Zhang Jinming, general director of the airline's advertising division said
The Beijing, Shanghai service would be "at least twice weekly" and use a Boeing 747-400 or Boeing 747 Combi aircraft, Zhang stated.
Los Angeles used to be part of the network but was stopped some time ago. Speaking through an interpreter, Zhang said it would be Air China's third service to the USA after San Francisco and New York.
Zhang was speaking on the opening day of China's first official air show held at the showpiece Zhuhai airport about 35 miles across the Pearl River delta from Hong Kong. Another major Chinese airline, China Southern Airlines, also confirmed at the show that it too was planning to start a Los Angeles service in March of next year.
Zhang also said Air China was expecting to soon announce a new service from Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou to Sydney and Melbourne. He could give no further details.
A recent New China News Agency report said Air China planned to open both the US west coast and Australian routes last month. No reason was given by Zhang for the apparent delay. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542-7706 Fax+44 171 542-5017
China Southern Airlines is ready to start its first European service to Amsterdam on November 26, Ma Ting Wei, manager of the airline's advertising division told Reuyters.
Speaking at China's first air show held at the showpiece Zhuhai airport about 35 miles across the Pearl River delta from Hong Kong, Ma also said China Southern plans to start flying to Los Angeles in the middle of March next year. But plans to start a third international destination to Brisbane in Australia have not yet been finalised, he said.
The twice weekly non-stop service to Amsterdam and the Los Angeles link will both use Boeing 777 aircraft, two of which have arrived and two more will be flown into the carrier's home airport of Guangzhou within the next two months, Ma said.
Speaking through an interpreter, Ma said the new European destination will be the airline's 26th international route which opens up new opportunities.
"We hope it will be a success and is in response to customer demand. We expect good passenger and cargo numbers to be carried," he said.
The Amsterdam service is the result of an Air Service Agreement between the Dutch and Chinese governments which industry observers say took five years to hammer out. The agreement also allowed Dutch flag carrier KLM to fly to Beijing and Dutch cargo airline Martinair to fly a 747 freighter service into Guangzhou. A Martinair spokesman told Reuters last week that the service was due to begin this month but could not give a definite start date.
Freight forwarders say both the China Southern and Martinair connection will mean cargo which up to now had to be flown from Hong Kong to Europe will now eliminate cross border expense and save time. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542-7706 Fax+44 171 542-5017
Airbus Industrie is for the first time in Asia marketing cargo space aboard the world's largest civil transporter, the consortium's press relations manager in China, David Velupillai, told Reuters.
Speaking at China's first airshow being held here, he said the Airbus A300-600 Super Transporter fleet has 800 hours a year available for wet lease. Known as the Beluga because of its giant, whale like appearance and cavernous 7.4 metre high jaw-like door, it is one of the world's most unusual aircraft which Airbus said can carry more voluminous freight than any other.
The first two of an eventual fleet of four aircraft are being used to transport large sections of fuselage and the wings for the Airbus family which are made near Chester, England and are flown to Toulouse for assembly. Other fuselage sections weighing up to 45 tons and 30 metres long are transported from Spain and Germany.
When the aircraft are not busy doing that, Airbus says it hope it can profit from wet leases of other outsize cargoes such as helicopters, aircraft engines and space satellites in which field China is a key world player with its Long March launcher.
"No other aircraft in the world can carry such large and unusual loads. The thing about satellites is they need to be transported whole and cannot be broken down for transport. It is a niche market but one we think there are opportunities in," Velupillai said.
Airbus said its large transporter has already been used to carry a satellite module which will form part of space station Alpha from Turin in Italy to Toulouse . Other projects include ferrying aviator Richard Branson's balloon to Morocco for his aborted round the world attempt.
The Beluga made its air show debut at Paris last year but is not being exhibited in China.
The twin engined purpose-built jets replace veteran four propellor engined Super Guppy aircraft which Airbus said are destined to become museum pieces. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
A labour shortage is threatening to delay completion of Hong Kong's new airport, a senior airport official has told Reuters.
The official, Clinton Leeks, director of corporate development for the Airport Authority Hong Kong, the body set up to oversee completion and run the HK$49.8 billion airport at Chek Lap Kok, said an additional two to three thousand construction workers are needed if the opening target of April 1998 is to be met.
Trade unions in Hong Kong are expected to resist attempts to import more workers from overseas. The Confederation of Trade Unions has said contractors should give priority to local tradesmen.
"I am not sounding an alarm just stating the facts. If we don't get these two to three thousand extra workers then certain things are at risk but we hope it won't come to that," Leeks said in an interview from his Hong Kong headquarters.
One specific skills shortage is of electrical and mechanical workers, not just at the airport but throughout the territory's increasingly sophisticated construction industry. The government is aware of the problem through twice monthly regular meetings to discuss progress. Despite the shortage, all construction work is on target at the moment, Leeks said.
This latest warning of a potential delay comes three months after a senior official from the Mass Transit Railway Corporation said 5,000 imported workers were needed to ensure the vital airport rail link was completed on time.
In a statement, the Hong Kong Government said 5,000 or 18 per cent of the new airport and related infrastructure's total labour force is imported.
The Special Labour Importation Scheme is set at 17,000 giving "ample" room for more imported workers providing local workers are given priority and their rights and benefits safeguarded, the statement said.
The Government also said the scheme has recently been made more flexible.and contractors facing a genuine shortage are encouraged to use it.
-- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
Asiana Airlines is to take delivery of a third new Boeing 747-400 freighter next month to replace a wet leased DC-10 cargo aircraft on the Seoul to New York route, the airline's cargo marketing and sales director, T.S. Kang said.
The South Korean carrier uses two DC-10 freighters wet leased from U.S. operators Gemini Air Cargo and World Airways for its six flights per week to New York.
The World Airways freighter is to be returned and Gemini's retained until the end of next year to continue to fly three times a week to New York with the new Boeing flying the other three, Kang told Reuters in a telephone interview from Seoul.
The 747-400 will offer Asiana extra cargo carrying capacity as it carries more than 100 tonnes compared to around 65 tonnes for the DC-10.
"The new 747 which is about to be delivered will replace one of the DC-10s which is being returned. One 747 equals two DC-10 flights and is a welcome addition to our fleet," Kang said
Asiana has two 747-400 and one 767 freighter and has  plans to expand its cargo aircraft fleet to 10 by 2005.
Kang said Gemini has now received permission from Korea's Ministry of Transportation and Construction to fly into Korea under its own name. Gemini specialises in offering its converted aircraft to established airlines on wet lease contracts known as ACMI - aircraft, crew, maintenance and insurance.
-- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
Federal Express Corporation (Fedex) is planning to utilise another former U.S. military base in the Philippines, Fedex and Philippine officials told Reuters.
Senior officials from Fedex, which has its main Asian hub at the former U.S. naval base at Subic Bay, have made detailed visits to the former Clark U.S. air force base, which is trying to attract traffic to its special economic zone.
Operations Vice President at Clark International Airport Corporation, Tereso Isleta, said Fedex is expected to become the airport's first cargo operator next month with the first flight of breeding cattle from Australia.
"We have been very happy to show senior Fedex officials around and we have been to their main hub in Memphis to see how they work. The first flight of cattle from Australia is expected in the next few weeks. It is very important for us to see Fedex coming here and hopefully Clark will become a hub too and attract many more airlines," Isleta told Reuters in a telephone interview from Clark, north of Manila.
Asia Pacific public relations manager for Fedex, David Clarke, said the former base could be used as an alternative to Subic in case of bad weather and for charter traffic.
He emphasised his company's commitment to Subic Bay where Fedex recently completed the first anniversary of operations as its Asian hub.
Better known for its overnight express freight business, Fedex says the transport of live breeding cattle from Sydney, Australia would be flown into Clark aboard a Fedex McDonnell Douglas MD-11 specially adapted as an animal transport.
"It's a branch of our general operations. Charter has always played a role for us. Transporting cattle is a specialised business but we're also used to handling thoroughbred horses in Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore and the Middle East and we hope more business of this type will come our way," Clarke said.
Clark International Airport Corporation is funded by the Philippines government's Bases Conversion Development Authority, which helped establish the Clark Special Economic Zone, following the withdrawal of U.S. forces. --Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax +44 171 542 5017
All-cargo airline Polar Air Cargo is to take delivery of its first Boeing 747-200F series aircraft at Hong Kong's Kai Tak airport on December 13, an airline statement said.
The handover of the aircraft fresh from a 'C' check at Hong Kong Aircraft Engineering Company brings the number of B747s in the Polar fleet to 14, it added.
The carrier's chief executive officier, Ned Wallace said in the statement that Polar's fleet will increase by two to three 747's each year over the next five years. The next 747-200F is scheduled for delivery in first quarter 1997, he added.
Industry observers say Polar has a reputation for being a low cost airline using first generation former passenger 747 aircraft converted to carry around 100 tons of cargo.
The U.S. based carrier said it is anticipating a "significant jump" in its Asian operations if the U.S. Department of Transportation finalises a "tentative" decision awarding Polar the new U.S.-Japan all-cargo route.
Polar said the Department of Transportation's favourable evaluation was partly due to its proposal to increase using Anchorage, Alaska as a hub to trans-load traffic between Asia, South America, Europe and the U.S.
"The final award of the Japan route will mark the culmination of a three year strategy by Polar to create an effective global network of operations. As we extend our geographic reach, we enhance our competitiveness by giving our customers the market access and route flexibility they need," Wallace added.
--Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax +44 171 542 5017
Polar Air Cargo is to start new services to New Delhi, Dubai, Bangkok, Kansai in Japan and Manila within the next four months, the all cargo carrier's executive vice president Jack Kane said.
Speaking after the handover of Polar's first Boeing 747-200 and 14th 747 freighter in all, Kane said the new acquistion from Air Hong Kong will offer longer ranges, higher weights and reduced fuel consumption for the company's Asian network which is about to rapidly expand.
Polar is awaiting final U.S. Depart of Transportation approval to begin flying to Kansai after agreement with the Japanese transportation ministry that Polar should become the third U.S. all cargo carrier, he said.
"The indications seem very favourable," he said.
The U.S.-based airline has also won permission to fly to Bangkok and expects to start services to Manila in the first quarter of 1997. With approval for Kansai, and new services to London and Amsterdam which began in April, Kane said the way is now opens for a round the world service to begin early next year.
"In the next 120 days we will inaugurate services to New Delhi, Dubai, Bangkok, Kansai and the Philippines," Kane told reporters.
When the Kansai operation begin, Polar expects to offer four cargo flights a week from Hong Kong to the U.S. west coast and five or six to east coast all via Anchorage . The 747-200 means Polar no longer has to stop in Khabarovsk in Russia to refuel.
Polar does not have rights into China but has been holding discussions with Chinese airlines on a possible joint venture. Kane declined to name the possible partners but said Polar has already cooperated with China Eastern on charter cargo flights.
Kane said Polar intends to start operating a second 747-200 aircraft, an ex Philippine Airlines Combi which is to be converted, in the first quarter of next year. The company's long term strategy is to acquire two or three 747-200 aircraft each year for the next five years bringing the fleet total then to 23 or 24 aircraft.
"Our commitment is to provide our customers with a global network and let them compete against the integrators," Kane said. -- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
The Hong Kong Shippers' Council is urging the government to tell airlines that a fuel surcharge on air cargo rates is illegal, the council's executive director Clement Yeung told Reuters.
Cargo managers from major airlines operating to Europe met in the territory on October 31 and some agreed to raise ex-Hong Kong cargo rates by HK80 cents per kilo from November 4 to try to offset increased jet fuel prices.
The Hong Kong Shippers' Council said it had written to the Civil Aviation Department urging it to outlaw the surcharge.
"We are reasonable people. We don't necessarily object to each and every increase but we feel the airlines should follow the rules by obtaining approval. Their case should be supported by facts and figures," Yeung said.
"In this case, it seems only a few airlines have decided to impose the surcharge. Others have not followed which begs the question: What is Hong Kong going to do about it and if airlines should be allowed to keep their surcharge? If they are, then it is a gross injustice to shippers and freight forwarders. The airlines should abide by the book and the governments should tell them it is illegal," Yeung said.
The council represents 15 of the leading trade associations in the territory including the Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce and the Chinese Manufacturers' Association.
The Federation of Asia Pacific Air Cargo Agents (FAPAA) is also reported to be opposing the fuel surcharge. A report in the South China Morning Post quoted its chairman Bernard Angeles as saying the airlines' surcharge bid might fail because they had not applied for approval from Hong Kong's Civil Aviation Department which he said was required by law.
-- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
Air Hong Kong Ltd (AHK) chief operating officer, Stanley Hui said the August 25 start of its first trans-Pacific service means the airline is now firmly headed in the right direction.
The head of Hong Kong's only all-cargo airline told Reuters in an interview said it was "an important milestone towards a much brighter future."
However Hui said the cargo carrier did not make any money in the first half of 1996 suffering, like many others, from low yields.
Last year AHK made its first ever profit and although Hui would not disclose the exact amount, he said it was "very healthy" after "huge losses" in the past.
Four years ago, things were so bad that the airline was just a telephone call away from going under, industry sources said.
But then a new management team was installed, Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd came to the rescue by taking a 75 percent stake, loss-making routes were cut, old aircraft were retired and three newly converted Boeing 747-200s acquired, Hui added.
The new aircraft are able to carry 25 tons more tonnes than the carrier's old aircraft and complete with a new Chinese wheel company logo signifying brisk business, they began a twice weekly service to Chicago on August 25.
When Air Hong Kong's third converted 747 leased from Cathay Pacific for 15 years joins the fleet in October, the Chicago service will become three times weekly.
Hui says the new route has been possible with the leasing of the three former combi 747s which formerly flew with the Brazilian airline Varig.
The aircraft, converted at Boeing facilities in Wichita, Kansas and at Hong Kong Aero Engine Services Ltd, will give AHK a much higher aircraft utilisation rate from 12 to 14 hours per day.
AHK existing fleet of older 747s are being returned to the leasing company.
"We're talking about more expensive aeroplanes but they're more reliable, with better payload and can help save on maintenance so it's a good investment for this company."Hui said.
Cathay Pacific has handed its once weekly Chicago service over to AHK in order to concentrate on its own new twice weekly freighter service to New York which also started on August 24.
The new U.S. services have been made possible after a new air agreement was drawn up between the U.S. and Hong Kong government.
AHK also fly to Dubai, Brussels and Manchester five times a week and twice weekly to Osaka. It has applied for a twice weekly service to Seoul in South Korea on Friday.
Hui said there has been a 20 per cent drop in cargo selling rates over the past six months.
"But I'm not surprised, the market is very competive, very seasonal and slow in the first half. We have seen a slower market this year consequently rates have dropped, tonnage is down, rates and yields are down but I think we are seeing a nice recovery. Developing for us and Chicago will help that. It is a very important gateway for us," Hui said.
--Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44-171-542-7706 Fax+44-171-542-5017
Landing fees at Hong Kong's new Chek Lap Kok airport must be competitively priced compared to other airports in the region, the chairman of Cathay Pacific Airways Limited Peter Sutch said.
Reports of fees double those at Kai Tak airport have already caused alarm among airlines and representative groups such as the Orient Airlines Association.
As one of the main users of the new airport, industry observers say Cathay managers are especially concerned about the level of the new fees which will heavily influence long term profitability.
The International Air Transport Association (IATA) Users' Group is one group closely watching the situation, Sutch noted at the ceremonial start of work on Cathay's new headquarters at the site of the new airport.
"As airlines compete against each other, so do airports such as Taipei, Singapore and Bangkok's new airport. It is important for the industry and the economy of Hong Kong that the airport is competitive for its users," Sutch said.
A spokesman for the Airport Authority, the body set up to manage Chek Lap Kok said the consultation process is still going on and the fee structure is expected to be revealed in the first or second quarter of next year.
Sutch said Cathay is considering raising passenger ticket prices and air cargo rates because of increased fuel costs.
"We are seriously considering reducing some of the increased fuel cost through higher ticket prices and cargo rates. As soon as a decision is made we will let you know," he said.
Airlines belonging to IATA agreed on Friday on a three per cent rise in air fares to cover higher fuel bills. -- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
Cathay Pacific chairman Peter Sutch on Monday dug the first turf for the airline's new corporate headquarters in Hong Kong.
"This headquarters... is a firm, visible and concrete example of our commitment to Hong Kong," Sutch told guests and reporters at the huge airport construction site.
The US$448 million or HK$3.5 billion HQ at the territory's Chek Lap Kok airport will house almost all the airline's staff under one roof for the first time. Sutch described the new building as a very important stage in Cathay's 50 year history offering a "home from home" for more than 4,000 employees.
The move to th will open up many new commercial, business and marketing opportunities.
Hank Townsend, chief executive officer of the Hong Kong Airport Authority, the body set up to run the new airport assisted at the ceremony.
"We wish you success, luck and great prosperity in the future and welcome you as one of the family, as one of the tenants here at Chek Lap Kok," Townsend said.
The one million square foot complex, being built by Dragages et Travaux Publics (HK) Ltd, part of the French Bouygues Group, includes a 10 storey office block, a 23 storey staff hotel with 350 rooms and a leisure area.
Cathay hopes for savings and improvements in efficiency by not having its staff and 30 department offices spread aronnd Hong Kong. Managers hope to overcome staff concerns about commuting time to the new airport site on Lantau island.
The new airport is due to open in April 1998, and Cathay said its new HQ is due to be completed in August 1998.
-- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
Engineers are investigating the cause of an engine failure aboard a Cathay Pacific Airways Limited airliner on November 11 which forced return to Ho Chi Minh City on one engine, an airline spokesman said commenting on a report in Flight International.
The Airbus A330-300 and 132 passengers had reached 37,000 feet after take-off when one of its two Rolls Royce 700 engines suffered a suspected gearbox failure. The pilots could not restart the powerplant and decided to return to Ho Chi Minh City where the engine was removed and flown back to Hong Kong for a detailed inspection, the spokesman stated.
The suspect gearbox part has since been returned to the U.K. for detailed analysis, a Rolls Royce spokesman in Hong Kong said.
Cathay has a fleet of nine Airbus A330s which seat around 320 passengers and carry up to 17 tonnes of belly cargo on inter-Asian routes. A spokeswoman for Hong Kong Dragon Airlines known as Dragonair, in which Cathay holds a minority stake, operates 4 R-R powered A330s.
R-R is a long term supplier to Cathay and since the Trent 700 engine entered service with Cathay in February 1995, this is the second recorded inflight shutdown, the Cathay spokesman said.
Industry observers say aircraft engines are now so reliable that mechanical failures are extremely rare.
Intense rivalry for new engines, particularly for the next generation of the Boeing 747 family, exists between R-R and its U.S. competitors Pratt &amp; Whitney and General Electric s, the industry sources said. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
An American airline has successfully completed a proving flight over Russian air space which the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) said is an important milestone in the introduction of the Future Air Navigation System (FANS) on trans-Pacific routes.
The United Airlines Boeing 747-400 flight from Chicago to Tokyo's Narita airport on November 15 is expected to be followed by more pioneering trials over the next three weeks by Singapore Airlines, Japan Airlines and Cathay Pacific Airways Limited, said David Behrens, international programme officer of the FAA.
FANS, or Communication Navigation Surveillance/Air Traffic Management (CNS/ATM), is the next generation air traffic management system which uses satellite navigation for the more efficient use of air space.
"Aircraft which are FANS equipped will have the competitive edge with reduced costs all round. The technology will mean more direct routes, less fuel burned, more cargo carried, reduced air traffic controls costs, reduced errors and ground delays -- there is no turning back", David Behrens told this week's Asian Air Cargo Summit.
The U.S. was working towards a new bilateral agreement with Russia to develop air traffic control infrastructure in the Far East to open up air space to airlines flying between Asia and American cities such as New York, Chicago and Detroit.
"There have been a lot of problems in getting demonstration flights approved by the Russian authorities. The use of English which is the international language of the skies is still a major problem. This is another milestone in the development of FANS and the most successful proving flight to date although it is still early days," Behrens said.
Speaking after the conference Behrens said further advances are hoped for at the Informal Pacific Air Traffic Control Co-ordination Group meeting in Tokyo on January 20.
Airlines which have already invested in FANS cockpit technology are waiting on the go ahead for a new "fast track" routing across the central Pacific Ocean cutting up to an hour off journey times between Hong Kong or Taipei to San Francisco or Los Angeles. China Airlines, United Airlines and Cathay Pacific which is awaiting Hong Kong government approval to use FANS cockpit technology, could be the first airlines to benefit, Behrens said.
Korean Airlines, which has to make a big U-turn to avoid military training areas near North Korea air space, is also expected to make "huge savings" from FANS technology with a 40 minute saving on U.S. bound flights from Seoul when a new agreement with the North is signed, the FAA estimate.
Only about 70 Boeing 747-400 aircraft, the inter-continental workhorse of many airlines, are currently equipped with FANS avionics but that total is about to mushroom and all airliners will be FANS equipped by the year 2002, Behrens predicted. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
Korean Air Lines Ltd's cargo load factor dropped 3.2 percent in the six months to end-June this year compared to the same 1995 period, the airline's official traffic results provided to Reuters show.
The cumulative cargo tonnage carried to end-June was 448,000 tonnes, a rise of 8.2 percent over last year's 414,000 tonnes, the figures show.
International cargo in June was up 11.1 percent on last year to 60,000 tons, bringing the cumulative total to 335,000 tonnes, an 8.1 percent rise.
Domestic cargo in the month reached 16,000 tonnes, an increase of 6.7 percent from June last year, the figures show. The month's total cargo tonnage of 76,000 tonnes is 10.1 percent up on 1995.
Load factors for the month were 77.7 percent for international cargo in June down 0.1 percent last year. The domestic cargo load factor fell 1.8 percent to 38.7 percent. last year.
The cumulative totals are down 0.1 percent on the month compared to last June and 3.2 percent down on the year so far.
The international cargo flight tonnage kilometres (FTK) totals for June increased 16.4 percent to 407 million from 350 million last year.
The June FTK domestic total is up 10.3 percent from 5 million to 6 million. The cumulative FTK total is 9.1 percent higher at 2,315 million.
Korean Air also reported an 8.3 percent increase in the number of passengers carried in the first six months at 11,416,000. -- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44-171-542-7706 Fax +44-171-542-5017
