Channel tunnel operator Eurotunnel on Monday announced details of a deal giving bank creditors 45.5 percent of the company in return for wiping out 1.0 billion pounds ($1.6 billion) of its massive debts.
The long-awaited but highly complex restructuring of nearly nearly nine billion pounds of debt and unpaid interest throws the company a lifeline which could secure what is still likely to be a difficult future.
The deal, announced simultaneously in Paris and London, brings the company back from the brink of bankruptcy but leaves current shareholders, who have already seen their investment dwindle, owning only 54.5 percent of the company.
"We have fixed and capped the interest payments and arranged only to pay what is available in cash," Eurotunnel co-chairman Alastair Morton told reporters at a news conference. "Avoiding having to do this again is the name of the game."
Morton said the plan provides the Anglo-French company with the medium term financial stability to consolidate its commercial position and develop its operations, adding that the firm was now making a profit before interest.
Although shareholders will see their holdings diluted, they were offered the prospect of a brighter future and urged to be patient after months of uncertainty while Eurotunnel wrestled to reduce the crippling interest payments negotiated during the tunnel's construction.
Eurotunnel, which has taken around half of the market in the busiest cross-Channel route from the European ferry companies, said a strong operating performance could allow it to pay its first dividend within the next 10 years.
French co-chairman Patrick Ponsolle told reporters at a Paris news conference that the dividend could come as early as 2004 if the company performed "very well".
Eurotunnel and the banks have come up with an ingenious formula to help the company get over the early years of the deal when, despite the swaps of debt for equity and bonds, it will still not be able to afford the annual interest bill of 400 million pounds.
If its revenue, after costs and depreciation, is less than 400 million pounds, then the company will issue "Stabilisation notes" to a maximum of 1.85 billion pounds to the banks. Eurotunnel would not pay interest on these notes (which would constitute a debt issue) for ten years.
Analysts said that under the deal, Eurotunnel's ability to finance its debt would become sustainable, at least for a few years.
"If you look at the current cash flow of between 150 and 200 million pounds a year, what they can't find (to meet the bill) they will roll forward into the stabilisation notes, and they can keep that going for seven, eight, nine years," said an analyst at one major investment bank.
"So they are here for that time," he added.
The company said in a statement there was still considerable work to be done to finalise and agree the details of the plan before it can be submitted to shareholders and the bank group for approval, probably early in the Spring of 1997.
Eurotunnel said the debt-for-equity swap would be at 130 pence, or 10.40 francs, per share -- considerably below the level of 160 pence widely reported in the run up to the deal
The company said a further 3.7 billion pounds of debt would be converted into new financial instruments and existing shareholders would be able to participate in this issue.
If they choose not to take up free warrants entitling them to subscribe to this, Eurotunnel said shareholders' interests may be reduced further to just over 39 percent of the company by the end of December 2003.
Eurotunnel's shares, which were suspended last week at 113.5 pence ahead of Monday's announcement, will resume trading on Tuesday.
Shareholders and all 225 creditor banks have to agree the deal. "I'm hopeful but I'm not taking it (approval) for granted," Morton admitted, "Shareholders are pretty angry in France."
Asked what would happen if the banks reject the deal, Morton said, "Nobody wants a collapse, nobody wants a doomsday scenario."
($1=.6393 Pound)
Anglo-French Channel Tunnel operator Eurotunnel Monday announced a deal giving its creditor banks 45.5 percent of the company in return for wiping out one billion pounds ($1.56 billion) of its debt.
The long-awaited restructuring brings to an end months of wrangling between Eurotunnel and the 225 banks to which it owes nearly nine billion pounds ($14.1 billion).
The deal, announced simultaneously in Paris and London, brings the company back from the brink of insolvency but leaves shareholders owning only 54.5 percent of the company.
"The restructuring plan provides Eurotunnel with the medium-term financial stability to allow it to consolidate its substantial commercial achievements to date and to develop its operations," Eurotunnel co-chairman Alastair Morton said.
The firm was now making a profit before interest, he added.
Although shareholders will see their interests diluted, they were offered the prospect of a brighter future after months of uncertainty while Eurotunnel wrestled to reduce crippling interest payments negotiated during the tunnel's construction.
Eurotunnel, which has taken around half the cross-Channel market from the European ferry companies, said a strong operating performance could allow it to pay its first dividend within the next 10 years.
French co-chairman Patrick Ponsolle said shareholders would have to be patient before they could reap the benefits of the company's success.
He called the debt restructuring plan "an acceptable compromise" for holders of Eurotunnel shares.
The company said there was still considerable work to be done to finalise and agree on the details of the plan before it can be submitted to shareholders and the full 225 bank syndicate for approval, probably early in 1997.
Monday's announcement followed two weeks of highly secretive negotiations between Eurotunnel and its six leading banks. This was extended to the 24 "instructing banks" at a meeting late last week in London.
Eurotunnel said the debt-for-equity swap would be at 130 pence, or 10.40 francs, per share. That is considerably below the level of around 160 pence widely reported before announcement of the deal, and will reduce outstanding debt of 8.7 billion pounds ($13.6 billion) by 1.0 billion ($1.56 billion).
The company said a further 3.7 billion pounds ($5.8 billion) of debt would be converted into new financial instruments and existing shareholders would be able to participate in this issue.
If they choose not to take up free warrants entitling them to subscribe to this, Eurotunnel said shareholders' interests may be reduced further to just over 39 percent of the company by the end of December 2003.
Eurotunnel's shares, which were suspended last week at 113.5 pence ahead of Monday's announcement, should resume trading on Tuesday, the company said.
Anglo-French Channel Tunnel operator Eurotunnel on Monday announced a deal giving creditor banks 45.5 percent of the company in return for wiping out one billion pounds ($1.56 billion) of its debt mountain.
The long-awaited restructuring brings to an end months of wrangling between Eurotunnel and the 225 banks to which it owes nearly nine billion pounds.
The deal, announced simultaneously in Paris and London, brings the company back from the brink of insolvency but leaves shareholders owning only 54.5 percent of the company.
"The restructuring plan provides Eurotunnel with the medium term financial stability to allow it to consolidate its substantial commercial achievements to date and to develop its operations," Eurotunnel co-chairman Alastair Morton said.
The firm was now making a profit before interest, he added.
Although shareholders will see their interests diluted, they were offered the prospect of a brighter future after months of uncertainty while Eurotunnel wrestled to reduce crippling interest payments negotiated during the tunnel's construction.
Eurotunnel, which has taken around half the cross-Channel market from the European ferry companies, said a strong operating performance could allow it to pay its first dividend within the next 10 years.
French co-chairman Patrick Ponsolle said shareholders would have to be patient before they could reap the benefits of the company's success.
He called the debt restructuring plan "an acceptable compromise" for holders of Eurotunnel shares.
The company said in a statement there was still considerable work to be done to finalise and agree the details of the plan before it can be submitted to shareholders and the full 225 bank syndicate for approval, probably early in 1997.
Monday's announcement followed two weeks of highly secretive negotiations between Eurotunnel and its six leading banks. This was extended to the 24 "instructing banks" at a meeting late last week in London.
Eurotunnel said the debt-for-equity swap would be at 130 pence, or 10.40 francs, per share. That is considerably below the level of around 160 pence widely reported in the run up to the deal, and will reduce outstanding debt of 8.7 billion pounds by 1.0 billion.
The company said a further 3.7 billion pounds of debt would be converted into new financial instruments and existing shareholders would be able to participate in this issue.
If they choose not to take up free warrants entitling them to subscribe to this, Eurotunnel said shareholders' interests may be reduced further to just over 39 percent of the company by the end of December 2003.
Eurotunnel's shares, which were suspended last week at 113.5 pence ahead of Monday's announcement, should resume trading on Tuesday, the company said. ($1=.6393 Pound)
Britain's Barclays Plc said on Monday it was in talks with U.S. group Morgan Stanley about its global custody business and banking sources confirmed the unit is up for sale.
Barclays and Morgan Stanley were coy in responding to press speculation, saying only that they are "in discussions to explore the potential for future co-operation".
The move would be another step in the consolidation of the global custody business which is becoming dominated by those banks who are willing to make the large front-end investment in systems which are necessary to later rake in fees.
Barclays' custody business has 350 to 400 staff worldwide, with some working in the Far East, but has for some time been treated as not in the bank's core business.
Securities worth some 150 billion pounds ($239.2 billion) have been placed with the unit.
In its interim results, published in August, Barclays included custody in its "Businesses in Transition" category which includes restructuring businesses in France and the United States. The category including custody made a profit of 23 million pounds in the half-year to June 30.
The report said, "Businesses in Transition primarily comprises lendings and other assets that are unlikely to be of long-term interest to the Group or that require significant restructuring."
It was not clear when the deal will be finalised but analysts said it would mark a further step in the consolidation of the global custody market.
"Consolidation is a natural if you look at the economic of the business," said John Leonard, banking analyst at Salomon Brothers. "It's a scale economy buisiness."
Leonard said that some banks had taken the decision not to invest the large sums needed to get computer systems up to scratch to be competitive.
Custody businesses range from traditional safekeeping of securities, which in Britain is dominated by Lloyds TSB and Royal Bank of Scotland, to performance measurement and stock lending.
As such, it has ceased to be the largely risk-free business it once was although risk levels are still relatively low.
"It guarantees a steady income stream but it's not totally insensitive to market volumes," Leonard added.
Analysts said Barclays has presumably decided that without further investment, the business will be too small to compete on the global stage. They expect Morgan Stanley to pay well under 100 million pounds for the business. "It could well be less than fifty million (pounds)," said one.
Finance workers' union BIFU attacked the leak of the discussions, saying staff face an uncertain future if the business was sold.
It called on the bank to "come clean" over its intentions. ($1=.6270 Pound)
Italian business tycoon Silvio Berlusconi on Wednesday lost an appeal in the London High Court against the transfer of documents to Italian authorities investigating allegations of fraud and false accounting.
Britain's Serious Fraud Office seized 15 bags of documents in April from the office of London lawyer David Mills who represents the interests of former Italian Prime Minister Berlusconi in Britain.
The judges, Lord Justice Simon Brown and Mr Justice Gage, rejected all the grounds of the appeal, but Brown agreed to hear an application by the appellants on Friday morning, which could lead to an appeal to the House of Lords, although legal sources said this was unlikely to succeed.
The hearing stemmed from an appeal by Berlusconi, who was Italian Prime Minister for seven months in 1994 and is on trial in Milan on corruption charges, his company Fininvest and company president Fedele Confalonieri against a court ruling earlier this year that the papers should be sent to Italy.
Brown said the papers were linked to fraud and false accounting allegations amounting to 51 million pounds ($82 million) which had been "surreptitiously removed from Fininvest and used for criminal purposes."
He noted that prosecutions were already underway in Italy against Berlusconi for bribing Revenue inspectors and for making illicit donations to former Prime Minister Bettino Craxi.
Italian investigators suspect Berlusconi who, among other holdings, owns three TV channels and the football club AC Milan, may have used offshore companies to channel payments to politicians.
At the end of his judgement Brown pointed out that, "It is imperative to recognise, however, that none of the applicants has yet been convicted of anything and that nothing I have said should be thought to raise the least presumption of guilt against them."
He rejected all the grounds of the appeal on the basis that the Italian request was not too wide, that it was justified and that the offences in question were not "political".
One of the grounds of appeal had been that the SFO had gone to Berlusconi's lawyer's office on a "fishing expedition" -- an unspecific search -- which is illegal under English law.
Brown described the case as a "wide-ranging, multi-faceted, international fraud involving far-reaching allegations against a large number of individuals in connection with an even larger number of companies."
The SFO said it was "happy" with the ruling.
"The SFO's fight against fraud on an international level has been strengthened by this welcome judgement," it said in a statement.
The SFO said the judges had rejected all of the main arguments put forward by the appellants. "We look forward to the speedy transfer of the documents to Milan so that the investigators can get on with their job," it said.
A hearing on Friday will decide whether Berlusconi can appeal against today's ruling to the British House of Lords.
SFO senior assistant director Chris Dickson said the judges in the current hearing were aware that, if any House of Lords hearing did not take place until next year, this would mean the papers would arrive too late to be used in Italian proceedings.
He said that if the appellants were not given leave to appeal on Friday he expected the papers to be transferred immediately, although this was a decision for the Home Office.
($1=.6260 Pound)
Banking analysts said on Monday they were positive on implications for Bank of Scotland in its joint venture into supermarket banking with J Sainsbury, with one analyst even upgrading his recommendation.
Others maintained their positive stances on the Scottish bank and played down the negative impact the innovative plan would have on the rest of the retail financial services sector.
"The Sainsbury move is a confirmation of Bank of Scotland's strategy of alternative distribution into England," Goldman Sachs banking analyst David Townshend said.
Goldman Sachs and BZW reiterated their positive stances on the group while SBC Warburg upgraded its recommendation on the stock to "trading buy" from "hold," market sources said.
Bank of Scotland's link with Sainsbury is seen giving the bank a boost in the British market. The move is expected to help the bank enlarge its small retail customer base in England and find a new outlet for its range of financial services, which it can sell through its excellent technological infrastructure.
Bank of Scotland's low-cost operation could mean Sainsbury's Bank could offer a better rate to depositors than customers currently get through retail store group Tesco's link with National Westminster Bank, BZW said in a research note. Tesco currently offers five percent on deposits.
But even so, analysts doubted existing banks will lose many accounts to Sainsbury's Bank, which is due to begin trading in the first half of next year.
"I don't see a material threat of switching," said Nick Collier, banking analyst at Morgan Stanley.
Analysts said there is a certain amount of inertia in the banking market and many consumers already have more than one account so they could easily take on a Sainsbury account without necessarily closing their more conventional one.
Some also noted that British banks, with already large customer bases, were addressing different problems.
A lack of customers is not the problem for Barclays or Lloyds, said Tim Sykes, banking analyst at BZW.
"These banks don't have the same need," Sykes said, "The thing they want to achieve is to sell more of their products to their existing customers."
Most British banks have moved heavily into "bancassurance" style operations in recent years, offering a wide range of lending, investment and insurance products.
Plain banks are also still seen as having an advantage in terms of the "horses for courses" argument. Analysts said many customers prefer a more traditional approach.
While telephone banking has grown quickly in popularity in recent years, for example, the vast majority of bank customers still prefer having a "normal" account although seemingly few visit their branch very regularly.
Fund management company Mercury Asset Management Plc is expected to post a good rise in pre-tax profits for the first half next Tuesday, having benefited from buoyant exchanges.
On Friday, MAM shares stood near their year highs at 11.32 stg, with analysts expecting pre-tax profits of around 80 million stg, up from 63.6 million stg last time
The market expects a higher interim dividend after six pence last year and some analysts see the company rebalancing the pay-out between the interim and final stage.  
Analysts said Mercury has already proved it can go it alone since it was broken away from former owner S.G. Warburg when the latter was bought by Swiss Bank Corp last year.
At the time, there was talk of Mercury being taken over as banks looked to expand their fund management interests. But, this speculation has evaporated, although the bid premium in MAM's share price may not have, and there is more interest in what Mercury itself might buy.
UBS analyst Martin Cross said any bid premium is unjustified and points out that MAM has a lot of capital, some of which it might want to spend on expansion in the U.S. markets.  
"That could be a worry, however, as there might be a fear that MAM would be buying at the top of the market," Cross said.
Phillip Gibbs, an analyst at BZW, said he expects MAM to follow the trend of recent years in making relatively small strategic acquisitions.
"It's been a pretty helpful period in terms of the markets, especially London where the FTSE index went up from 3,700 to 3,954 in the six months we're looking at," Gibbs added.
Analysts will be looking at Maercury's cost base to make sure there has been no untoward growth. In any case, cost growth is expected to have been comfortably exceeded by revenue growth.  
Gibbs said the key element would be how much new money MAM has been able to attract as this is the main indicator of the fundamental health of the business.
Mercury will also have profited from realisations in its venture capital business but the effects of problems at other fund managers, notably Morgan Grenfell Asset management, are not expected to have had too much impact in the first half.
Mercury may have picked up some business and the effect may be more marked in the second half. -- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864.
British fund management group Mercury Asset Management on Tuesday posted a 29 percent jump in first half pretax profits to 81.8 million pounds ($133.9 million), up from 63.6 million in the first half last year.
It also saw its cash pile rise sharply to 261.6 million pounds from 189.9 million at the end of March, raising speculation that the firm might use the surplus to fund expansion in the lucrative U.S. fund management industry.
MAM chairman Hugh Stevenson said the company would consider acquisitions but only if they increased value for shareholders.
Asked if MAM was considering a U.S. acquisition, where MAM already operates, Stevenson said: "The US is obviously an extremely important market, it's the biggest savings market in the world but value for our shareholders is the main aim."
On the cash pile, Stevenson said that the company prefers a conservative balance sheet.
"Cash has risen materially in the last six months," he said. "It's a question of a balance between a prudent balance sheet and returning value in the form of dividends to shareholders. We've had a very progressive dividend policy over recent years."
Mercury, formerly controlled by investment bank S.G. Warburg before Warburg was bought by Swiss Bank Corp last year, raised its interim dividend to 10 pence per share from six pence last time. It said the significant increase was due to a rebalancing between interim and final payouts.
Funds under management rose to 85.9 billion pounds at the end of September after 70.9 billion at the same time last year. The most recent figure includes two billion pounds of net new business, which analysts said follows its recent growth trend.
MAM said it had seen a rise in defined contribution pension scheme business in the last six months and expected this to be a growth area.
Mercury shares were 23.5 lower at 11.19 pounds at 1130 GMT with analysts reporting some profit taking after the stock reached a year's high of 11.50 this week.
The profit figures were just under some expectations but were mostly unsurprising. Some analysts, including Martin Cross of UBS, say the shares are fully valued.
"The price/earnings ratio (at 21.6) is at the top end of the sector," Cross said. "It's near companies like Perpetual and M &amp;G which are much more retail oriented and have better grwoth prospects in my opinion."
Perpetual has a P/E ratio of 25.4 and M &amp; G 22.3.
Stevenson said it was too early to tell what effect problems at Morgan Grenfell Asset Management, where alleged irregularities are being investigated by Britain's Serious Fraud Office, might have on the funds industry in the longer term.
"It's a growth industry," Stevenson said, "and it continues to grow. The UK market is changing and we have been doing more in defined contribution business."
About two thirds of MAM's business is in the institutional pension fund management area, 20 percent for investors overseas and the rest for private investors.
Costs continued to rise but were more than matched by revenue growth.
Stevenson said the rise reflected the consolidation of its Australian subsidiary, large investment in systems and infrastructure, and "higher provision for variable remuneration" -- otherwise known as bonuses. ($1=.6107 Pound)
Fund management Group Mercury Asset management will make acquisitions if it can enhance shareholder value, its chairman Hugh Stevenson said on Tuesday after announcing bumper profits and a sharp jump in its cash pile.
Profits rose 29 percent to 81.8 million stg from 63.6 million stg in the first half last year while cash rose to 261.6 million stg from 189.9 million at the end of March.  
Asked if MAM was considering a U.S. acquisition, Stevenson said: "The U.S. is obviously an extremely important market, it's the biggest savings market in the world but value for our shareholders is the main aim."
Stevenson said an acquisition which enhanced this value would have to be considered.
On the cash pile, Stevenson said that the company prefers a conservative balance sheet.
"Cash has risen materially in the last six months," Stevenson said.  
"It's a question of a balance between a prudent balance sheet and returning value in the form of dividends to shareholders. We've had a very progressive dividend policy over recent years."
Stevenson said the rise in the interim dividend to 10 pence per share from six pence last time reflected a desire to rebalance the interim and final payout.
He was unsure if this rebalancing was complete given the uncertainty of how the full year will turn out.  
Stevenson refused to comment on the state of world equity markets and thus the company's prospects for the second half, "We tend to reserve comments on the markets for our clients."
But in a statement earlier, he said the firm was determined to create value through profitable expansion notwithstanding short-term market movements.
MAM again showed that it is not missing its tie to former owner S.G. Warburg which was cut when the latter was gobbled up by Swiss Bank Corp last year.  
Stevenson said the first half had been positive with funds under management rising to 85.9 billion stg from 70.9 billion at the same point last year and 81 billion at the end of March.
The current figure included 2.0 billion stg of net new business which was lower than the 2.5 billion stg seen in the second half of last year.
He said it was too early to tell what effect problems at Morgan Grenfell Asset Management, where alleged irregularities are being investigated by the Serious Fraud Office, might have on the industry in the longer term.
"It's a growth industry," Stevenson said, "and it continues to grow. The UK market is changing and we have been doing more in defined contribution business."
About two thirds of MAM's business is in the institutional pension fund management area, 20 percent for investors overseas and the rest for private investors.
Costs continued to rise but were more than matched by revenue growth.
Stevenon said the rise reflected the consolidation of its Australian subsidiary; large investment in systems and infrastructure; and the coyly termed "higher provision for variable remuneration", otherwise known as bonuses. -- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864.
Former Barings executive Ron Baker rejects a lawsuit filed by Dutch bank ING Barings which makes a claim for repayment of a 100,000 pounds ($165,000) loan he is alleged to have received, his lawyer told Reuters on Thursday.
ING Barings earlier confirmed a press report it is suing Baker for 113,000 pounds, representing the loan given while Baker was employed by Barings, plus interest.
It is alleged to have been paid in two 50,000 pounds tranches, the last of which was made just two weeks before the collapse of the bank in February 1995.
"He (Baker) is satisfied that he doesn't owe them (ING Barings) any money," Baker's lawyer Lindsay Hill, a partner at Fox Williams, said. "This doesn't constitute a good claim against Mr Baker."
Hill said Baker, who was head of financial products at Barings, "roundly rejects" the ING claim and says that whatever money was paid to him, it was not sufficient to cover what he was owed.
Asked if Baker was considering making a claim against ING Barings for unpaid money, Hill said his client was currently concentrating on a tribunal hearing where he is challenging charges levelled against him by Britain's Securities and Futures Authority (SFA).
In May, Baker said he was satisfied he had acted properly throughout his time at Barings. He said he was not involved in the bank's agency business through which rogue trader Nick Leeson racked up $1.4 billion losses which bankrupted the blue-blooded investment bank.
The tribunal hearing has been going on for around two weeks and is expected to conclude soon. If Baker loses, he has the opportunity to appeal. ($1=.6093 Pound)
Britain's Serious Fraud Office has yet to contact London-based securities houses after a request for help with a French probe into Eurotunnel SA /Plc share dealings, market sources said on Monday.
The SFO said on Sunday it had been asked to lend a hand in an investigation by the French authorities into alleged market manipulation of the debt-laden channel tunnel operator's shares.
The SFO said it would help in the French probe although it had no grounds to launch an investigation of its own into the dealings which form the basis of the latest Paris investigation.
Securities firms contacted by Reuters on Monday said they had received no approach from the SFO and did not expect to do so. They all said they would co-operate fully if they were approached.
The investigation is another chapter in a troubled corporate story littered with incidents, which earlier this year saw two firms -- Salomon Brothers and Swiss Bank Corp (SBC) -- cleared of insider trading.
The two had been among underwriters of a Eurotunnel rights issue in 1994 and, although never named by Paris stock exchange watchdog the Commission de Operations de Bourse (COB), said that they were under investigation in July last year.
The underwriting group also included Banque Indosuez, Morgan Grenfell, now owned by Deutsche Bank AG, Societe de Banque, Banque Nationale de Paris, Banque Paribas, Caisse des Depots, Crdit Agricole, Credit Lyonnais, Robert Fleming, S.G. Warburg (now part of SBC) and Belgian utility Tractebel SA.
About two thirds of Eurotunnel shares are held in France and, as a general rule, more trading in the shares goes on in Paris than in London.
The SFO's usual practise is to issue notices which require a person or institution to be interviewed or hand over documents, although it can also apply for a search warrant if it wants to surprise its target.
On Monday, it remained unclear what period is currently under investigation.
The COB has already investigated the period surrounding the rights issue, though it could be revisiting this highly volatile time.
There have been persistent suggestions that some operators were short-selling at around the time of the rights issue -- forcing the prices down by selling shares they do not own in the hope of buying them back more cheaply later.
Eurotunnel has called on stock exchange authorities on both sides of the Channel to investigate volatile dealings at various times over the years.
Another example was in Agust 1995, when a rogue report that the company had signed a debt rescheduling agreement sent the stock reeling.
The Anglo-French tunnel operator at that time denied it had signed a debt agreement and demanded an inquiry into the trading activity and erroneous reports surrounding its shares and the incident might well be the focus of the French probe.
The incident occurred around three weeks before Eurotunnel announced a payments freeze on its huge debts and entered into negotiations on a rescheduling resulting in a restructuring of the debt announced a year later -- a year which also saw its fair share of leaks and speculation.
Sir Chippendale "Chips" Keswick who, it was announced on Wednesday, will take over the chair of Hambros, one of the few remaining British independent investment banks, has been regarded by some as an outsider.
The firm has been dominated by the Hambro family but Keswick, 56, has over 30 years under his belt at the bank where he will fill both the chairman's and chief executive roles from July next year. He can hardly be called a complete outsider.
Nevertheless, it will be the first time in the bank's history that a Hambro has not occupied the chair.
That history is a long one, dating back to 1839 in London and back into the 18th century and its Danish origins.
Universally known as "Chips", Keswick is a member of the family which controls the Jardine group of companies in the Far East. He was born in Shanghai in 1940 and attended Eton College completing his studies at a French university.
After a few years with Glynn Williams, Keswick joined Hambros Bank in 1965. He became chairman of the bank in 1986, vice-chairman of the group in the same year and chief executive last year.
Keswick is known as a private person who is much more at home talking about the business than about himself.
Married with three sons, Keswick is a non-executive director of the Bank of England as well as of De Beers Consolidated Mines, Anglo American and British housebuilder Persimmon.
He lists his pastimes as bridge and field sports.
Keswick, who takes over from Charles, Lord Hambro, chairman since 1983, has been involved with the bank during some recently troubled times.
Hambros had appeared to lose its way, not following its peers into the competitive world of modern investment banking but still managing to make losses.
Ironically, along with a few others, it has managed to remain independent while other names such as S.G. Warburg, Kleinwort Benson, Barings and Morgan Grenfell have fallen into the hands of foreign parents.
Some observers would remark that Hambros wasn't worth buying but those people are beginning to feel that Hambros' new strategy of concentrating on its core banking and investment management businesses could be the way forward.
Keswick says he is confident of the strategy and is unlikely to be be aloof from the business.
"Chips will inevitably be a hands-on chairman," one of his senior colleagues said.
British property giant Land Securities said on Wednesday there were signs of rental growth in some sectors of the British property market and that it expected more to come.
Company chairman Peter Hunt said that while there was a feeling there was more rental growth to come, so far it had been patchy.
Growth in rental rates would be slower than in the 1980s and because it was not across the board it was crucial to be selective in the properties and developments chosen.
Land on Wednesday reported a pre-tax profit of 128.9 million pounds ($213 million) for the first half, including sales of properties, from 118.1 million pounds last time.
The company, which reported an increased interim dividend of 7.35 pence, said it had plans for "major shopping centre schemes" in a number of British towns, including Canterbury, York and Sunderland, as well as "several proposed new leisure developments".
The group said the annual level of expenditure on its current development programme was expected to peak during the second half of the financial year.
It said revenue profit, which was down to 115.5 million pounds from 118.2 million pounds for the period, "is being affected by our prudent policy of not capitalising interest as part of the cost of carrying our substantial programme".
But it was upbeat on its overall prospects. "We believe that our strategy of creating growth assets through development will result in a considerable addition to the rental income and capital value of the portfolio in years to come," Hunt said.
"Yes, they (the developments) are on target, although you can never be totally sure," he added in an interview.
Finance director Jim Murray told Reuters a drop in revenue profit for the half year, to 115.5 million pounds from 118.2 million pounds the previous year, was widely expected and had been flagged in advance.
This reflected the fact that the group was financing a large development programme and was not capitalising interest as part of the cost of carrying this out.
Hunt said property developments continued to be higher yielding business but that most land-owners were holding out on the sale of good land.
"(There is) a much better performance on a development. It is the best growth stock...it's very much in demand. That's why we are concentrating on doing as much development as we can," Hunt added.
The group was also buying investments in the "second-hand" market. "We are pursuing both avenues," he said, pointing out that Land Securities had recently added the Team Valley Retail Park, south of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, to its portfolio.
This would make "a substantial and valuable addition to our 500 million pound retail warehouse portfolio," he said in his chairman's statement.
During the half year the company had bought, or agreed to buy, nearly 80 million pounds of investment properties.
Hunt said he did not think there would be a less favourable environment for the group if Britiain's opposition Labour party won power from the ruling Conservative government at the next general election, due to be held by May 1997.
"I believe the strategies we are pursuing will apply equally within a New Labour environment as in a Conservative (one)."
Hunt said that while he could not comment on possible acquisition targets, the firm looked at "everything from time to time" but would have to "want to own quite a high proportion of the properties" of any target company before making a bid.
BZW, the investment banking arm of Barclays Plc, has restructured its Global Markets division in another step towards reshaping its business to compete wth global rivals, banking sources said on Thursday.
BZW has been carrying out a top-to-bottom review of the markets business including matching staff profiles and skills against the needs of sustaining a profitable business.
The review resulted in around 30 people leaving this week, including Alex von Ungern-Sternberg, deputy chief executive of Global Markets, and Klaus-Peter Moeritz, head of foreign exchange trading in the UK and Europe.
But not all were at such high levels. Those departing also include seven foreign exchange traders, metals traders, secretaries and telephonists.
In an internal memo, Bob Diamond, who has been Global Markets chief since July, said von Ungern-Sternberg had decided to leave after the new structure was put in place as his role "was substantially narrower."
Since Bill Harrison joined BZW as chief executive from Robert Fleming there have been the usual personnel changes associated with the investment banking business.
There was no room, for example, for Barclays veteran Donald Brydon who had been running BZW after its previous head, David Band, died earlier in the year.
Harrison and Diamond are thought to be working on methods to make profitability more sustainable -- a quandary which is at the centre of the debate on the investment banking industry.
The industry's detractors, among them Lloyds TSB chief Brian Pitman, always point to the fact that the revenue stream cannot be relied upon as it is subject to market volatility.
In the good times, when markets are booming and mergers and acquisitions on a roll, investment banks rake in profits as if there is no tomorrow and the participants get paid huge bonuses.
But in the bad times, the banks can rack up heavy losses in markets which suddenly look very over-populated.
Diamond, in common with the head of the Barclays group, chief executive Martin Taylor, is known to want to intensify the return on capital employed in the business.
He knows that unless BZW's profits are sustained at high levels, he will find it difficult to put together the kind of team needed to succeed in an increasingly competitive and crowded environment.
No aspect of BZW's markets business from gilts to JGBs (Japanese government bond) and dollar/yen to copper will be left out of the in-depth review, banking sources added.
In the meantime BZW, along with other banks, will also continue to react to more short-term events in the markets.
For example the departure of foreign exchange traders follows a period of reduced volatility in the market over the last few months.
Ironically, such periods of volatility are key to both outperformance and underperformance which dictate returns on capital for investment banks.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864
NatWest Markets, the investment banking arm of National Westminster Bank, on Monday named Peter Hall as the man to run its expanding operations but other questions over the bank's strategy remained, analysts said.
NatWest said Hall, who currently runs its American operations, would take over as chief operating officer of the investment bank, reporting to chief executive Martin Owen.
At the same time, NatWest Markets said it would streamline origination and distribution functions into one Global Financial Markets division from the current capital markets and treasury divisions.
NatWest said no job losses would result from the consolidation.
The bank has been on the acquisition trail recently, buying corporate finance boutique J O Hambro Magan in October, spending $590 million on U.S. primary dealer Greenwich Capital and 472 million pounds on Gartmore, the British fund manager. It also acquired U.S. merger and acquisitions specialist Gleacher for $135 million.
But analysts have expressed concern that NatWest will find it difficult to bring these all together, despite the fact that the businesses seem to compliment each other.
Some feel that NatWest is spending large amounts of cash on buying businesses that could be near the top of their business cycle.
"The NatWest markets business is robust and it can make returns while it is still building," said one analyst. "But a revenue downturn will tend to hit the players who are building rather than those who are already established."
Currently, investment banks are enjoying generally the low-inflation, steady growth conditions seen in many major economies with an accompanying healthy amount of mergers and acquisitions activity.
But a substantial downturn on Wall Street, predicted by many strategists, could leave some high-cost acquisitions looking a little less appetizing, analysts say.
Owen said the fast growth of NatWest markets, both organically and by acquisition, had led him to the conclusion that the day-to-day operational management should be separated from strategy, client development and financial supervision.
"As President and COO, Peter will be charged with implementing our operational plan, leaving me more time to work with global product heads to shape our strategies," Owen said.
Analysts were happy that NatWest had brought an insider to the job.
"Sometimes it gets difficult to keep continuity and things can start to fall apart," said one analyst. "I would class this appointment as continuity, so that's good."
The world's major banks are busy jockeying for position in an emerging super-league that is set to dominate the massive and higly lucrative private banking market in the next decade, a survey showed on Wednesday.
Private banking concentrates on "high net-worth individuals" -- people whose liquid assets, their easily available cash, is a number with a lot of noughts, usually at least $500,000.
The survey, by accountancy and consulting firm Price Waterhouse, estimates the global market for these super-rich people at somewhere between $17 and $20 trillion.
Of this, a sizeable amount, probably between $4 and $6 trillion is estimated to be in Europe, both in domestic markets and offshore.
Ian Woodhouse, head of Price Waterhouse's private banking practice, said the survey sees the emergence of a private banking super-league comprising, perhaps, 25 to 30 banks.
These will have at least $75 billion under management with many in the $100 billion-plus bracket.
They will be banks like Chase/Chemical and Citicorp in the U.S.; Swiss Bank Corp, Credit Suisse, Union Bank of Switzerland, ABN AMRO and Deutsche Bank in Europe; and the HSBC group 00005.HK with its huge Asian franchise plus Midland Bank in Britain.
In comparison, one of Britain's biggest private banking operations, the Coutts Group owned by National Westminster, has around 20 billion pounds ($33.6 billion) under management, putting it in the medium-sized bracket.
Woodhouse says one of the trends to emerge from its latest survey, which received responses from 116 leading names in the industry, is that they all see the environment getting more and more competitive,
"Competitive pressures are building. Clients used to walk through the door, now you have to go out and get them," he said.
The super-rich are becoming more and more demanding and less and less loyal -- they will often use more than one bank or compare what is on offer from a number before making a choice.
They are also demanding ever increasing levels of sophistication in the products they are sold. Complicated cross-border trust structures, for example, which can earn a huge margin for the private bank concerned.
Private banks with healthy investment bank cousins are also looking to make the most of this resource.
Client managers will often work with their investment banking colleagues to think up a product tailored to a client's needs or to beat what they are being offered elsewhere.
Currently, Europe takes the biggest slice of the global private banking cake but the fastest growth is in India and the Far East and this latter region is set to take the lead soon, Woodhouse said.
The survey shows that over half the private banks expect offshore business to grow by between 11 and 15 percent annually over the next five years.
To take advantage of this, given greater client demands and competition, banks will have to manage their cost base as well as their revenue income.
The survey also sees a continuation of the recent restructuring, merging and alliance-forming, which has been going on. New players are also expected as plain retail and investment banking areas become more and more congested. ($1=.5950 Pound)
British Chancellor of the Exchequer Kenneth Clarke could cut tax credits on dividends in a "robbing Peter to pay Paul" measure which would help fund widely expected cuts in income tax in his budget speech next Tuesday.
Roger Bootle, group chief economist at HSBC Markets, thinks Clarke may well see pension funds as one target to provide him with some resources to distribute elsewhere.
From a tax credit reduction to 15 percent from 20 percent, "the sufferers would be tax-exempt pension funds and higher rate tax payers with dividend income," Bootle said on Thursday.
Accountancy firm Coopers &amp; Lybrand, in its survey of budget options, says such a measure could save the Inland Revenue around 1.0 billion pounds ($1.68 billion) a year, although this would take some time to come through.
But Coopers point out that such a move would act against the Government's long-term objective of encouraging increased private savings provision and might turn out to be a burden on the corporate sector if institutional shareholders press companies to compensate by raising gross dividend payouts.
Bootle raises another negative aspect.
"It would not necessarily be popular either," he says. "It would probably cause the equity market to fall and might well be described in the press as "Mr Clarke raids your pension - to give you an income tax cut'."
Clarke has already removed the tax credit on targeted share buy-backs and special dividends associated with share consolidations and take-overs.
Most economists expect no change in the basic structure of Corporation Tax itself, although Coopers say the Chancellor might introduce some minor measures to aid small business and entrepreneurs.
But they are not so confident that the profit-related pay scheme, first introduced in 1987, will survive the budget unscathed.
Under the scheme, employees get relief at their marginal rate of tax on 20 percent of their salary up to a maximum of 4,000 stg and the benfits are linked to the company reaching profit goals agreed with the Revenue.
Estimates vary on how many employees are in the scheme from 3.5 to 4.5 million, but accountancy firm Ernst &amp; Young says it is costing the Government some 1.5 billion pounds annually in lost revenue and rising.
There also seems to be a measure of agreement on the idea that the scheme does not really link employees' pay to profitability since some companies guarantee no reduction in final salary if profits disappoint.
Outright abolition of PRP is thought unlikely given it is firmly entrenched in many pay structures and would again put pressure on companies to make up the difference and so economists see Clarke possibly limiting the relief to the lower 20 percent rate of income tax.
BZW economists say this could raise some 700 million pounds. ($1=.5950 Pound)
Royal Bank of Scotland, which reports full year data next Thursday, is expected to raise its pre-tax profit from last year's 602 million stg but not by as much as analysts thought just a few months ago.
They expect Royal Bank's profits to rise to between 670 and 700 million stg, with a much smaller contribution from its Direct Line low cost insurance, but benefits continuing to accrue from the bank's efforts to reduce costs.
Total dividend is expected to be around 18.6 pence a share versus last year's 16.2p.  
The pre-tax figures will be complicated by an exceptional gain from Royal Bank's disposal of its 50 pct stake in Germany's CC Group, from which it said it would make 70 million stg, and by restructuring costs of around 23 million pounds stemming from an acquisition by its New England subsidiary Citizens.
Forecasts for Direct Line vary widely but analysts are generally pessimistic, with the company's main market -- motor insurance -- going through "probably the most diffucult period in its history", as chief executive Ian Chippendale told Reuters in an interview last week.  
"I think Chippendale was sending a strong message," said one analyst who declined to be named. "I think he was softening up the market for a poor set of results."
Some analysts suspect the results may not be quite as poor as hs been feared by some.
They see the core bank as continuing to perform quite well with the positive results of its "Project Columbus" helping costs and income.
David Poutney expects a pre-tax profit of 695 million stg, which includes the exceptional items, while BZW analysts expect 675 million.  
The market received a big clue on the performance of Citizens from the recent results of Bank of Ireland which owns 23 percent of the operation.
"Citizens is doing reasonably well," Poutney said, but analysts say it is being affected by the rather lacklustre New England economy.
The market will be expecting improvement in the cost income ratio but analysts say that even an improvement this time will leave the bank plenty of scope for improvement.  
The market will be looking for further clues on lending which showed good growth, mostly in corporate lending area, in the first half.
Inevitably, Royal Bank will also be watched for signs of acquisitions.
It is known to be interested in buying a building society to extend its presence in England but in the current climate, it is unlikely to be willing to pay the high prices likely to be asked.
In any case, analysts say Royal Bank would have to raise cash to be able to perform any major acquisition.  
In the meantime, the market will be looking to its relationship with mutually owned insurance and pensions firm Scottish Widows, which some think may result in an eventual merger.
Royal Bank shares were 15p higher on Friday to stand at 519-1/2p.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864
British Chancellor of the Exchequer Kenneth Clarke on Tuesday took the expected step of phasing out tax relief on profit related pay (PRP) schemes.
But analysts were pleasantly surprised the proposal still allowed new schemes to be registered as the tax relief is reduced and were relieved the Chancellor did not abolish the arrangement in one go.
Clarke said there would be no change to the upper limit of pay that is free of income tax, currently 4,000 stg, in profit periods beginning before January 1 1998.  
For 1998 the ceiling will be reduced to 2,000 stg and 1,000 stg in 1999. No relief will be given for profit periods starting on or after January 1, 2000.
"I'm not surprised that the relief was not abolished in one go," said Bob Rothenburg of accountancy firm Blick Rothenberg. "It would have created a lot of pressure on employers to compensate employees."
Douglas Fairbairn of Ernst and Young said he was relieved at the Chancellor's proposals, which could have included immediate abolition.  
For Fairbairn, the main surprise was that new schemes would be allowed at the lower rates of relief.
This was confirmed by the Inland Revenue, where a spokeswoman said if existing schemes were to be allowed to continue, it was only fair that companies wishing to introduce new schemes, even at the lower rates of relief, should be allowed to do so.
Fairbairn said the fact that new schemes were to be allowed, meant he doubted the government's estimate of the yield from the measure would be met.
The Inland Revenue said it expected the proposal to yield 100 million stg in 1997/98; 700 million stg in 1998/99; 1.7 billion stg in 1999/2000; and 3.1 billion stg in 2000/2001.
Tax experts contacted by Reuters said one other possibility for Clarke would have been to limit the relief on PRP to the standard rate of tax, which he reduced to 23 percent from 24 percent, rather than the marginal rate -- currently 40 percent.
After a slow start following its introduction in 1987, there are now around 14,000 PRP schemes covering 3.7 million employees. Take-up of the schemes increased considerably after the tax relief was doubled in 1991.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
Three of Britain's largest bulding societies, which plan stock market flotations in 1997, on Thursday said draft legislation relating to protection from takeovers had forced them to examine their float plans closely.
The mutually-owned societies, who specialise in mortgage lending, the Woolwich, Alliance &amp; Leicester and the Northern Rock, all plan to convert to bank status next year and have combined assets of around 70 billion pounds ($117 billion).
But a change in the draft of a new Building Societies Act has thrown their plans into confusion as the government proposes to change the way converted societies will be treated in the crucial area of takeover bids.
The issue is most pressing for the Alliance &amp; Leicester as it seems highly unlikely that the new draft will be ready before Alliance members meet on December 10 to vote on conversion.
Previously, converting societies were protected by a rule which protected them from takeover for five years after flotation, allowing them to make the transition successfully.
Until now, the only one to have gone through the process is the Abbey National, which converted to a bank in 1989.
Draft legislation is now under consideration although it is doubtful whether there will time for it to become law before next year's general election.
The draft proposes that societies lose their immunity from takeover if they merge with another "financial institution" (after flotation) even on an agreed basis.
A Treasury spokeswoman said this did not include the buying of mortgage portfolios from other financial institutions.
The Treasury argues that converting societies should play by the market rules and that the focus of the bill is on those societies who want to remain mutual.
"The loss of the five year protection if any acquisition is undertaken - not just a hostile bid - seems a little unfair," Adam Applegarth, director of Northern Rock told Reuters.
The Teasury said it was considering representations to retain immunity in the case of friendly mergers where a large society might merge with a small local institution.
Applegarth said the Northern Rock and other societies were also very concerned at another proposed clause which would allow shareholders of the new company to waive the five year protection, saying this could allow takeovers by the backdoor.
He said a predator might be able to buy up 10 percent of the stock of the company and announce a bid at the same time, calling an extraordinary general meeting of shareholders which would be asked to waive the protection, bypassing the board.
The societies all said the uncertainty was the biggest problem at the moment -- what the bill will say and also when it will be published and whether it will have time to be passed.
"We think that if there is little chance that the bill will be passed, it would be better not to publish it at all, frankly," said Applegarth.
The societies have a duty to inform members of all possible relevant information so they can make an informed decision.
The Treasury said it hoped to publish its revised proposals next month regardless of whether the bill is likely to pass into law before the election which must be held by May 1997.
A Woolwich spokeswoman said there was no more than a possibility that the draft bill would delay its float. "If the rules are changed, then the board would have a duty to reconsider," she said.
The other societies took a similar view, but the Alliance &amp; Leicester has a particular problem as its members have already been voting on the change by post.
"At the moment we are steaming ahead, we are on schedule," a spokesman for the Alliance said. But he agreed that timing could be affected and confirmed that the Alliance board would discuss the problem at a meeting on Thursday.
The Northern Rock plans to issue its transfer document, to members in early March of next year, but it must be printed in February, leaving little time for the government to produce the finished version of the proposed law ahead of this.
($1=.5956 Pound)
Royal Bank of Scotland on Thursday reported a 15 percent rise in full year pretax profits to 695 million pounds ($1.2 billion) as strong growth in its UK and U.S. banking operations offset a dip at its insurance unit.
Chief Executive George Mathewson told Reuters the bank is constantly reviewing its options to expand market share, especially in the south east of England.
"It's right to assume we've been talking to a lot of people," Mathewson said in an interview. "People (who are looking for a tie-up) assume they should talk to us because of our lack of penetration in the south east. All I can say is that we are reviewing all the options."
Earlier this year, Royal Bank's arch-rival Bank of Scotland announced a banking joint venture with retailer Sainsburys and other banks are making moves in the same direction including Abbey National, which on Thursday said it would offer financial services in conjunction with supermarket chain Safeway's loyalty card.
It has long been assumed that Royal Bank would boost its distribution by buying an English home loans institution and Mathewson again refused to rule this out.
"That remains a possibility," he said. "Assuming that a building society became available and that the price was not ridiculous."
Mathewson said any such purchase would have to take into account shareholder value and business criteria like the strength of the brand name.
Some analysts have doubted that Royal Bank's capital position would allow a major purchase but Mathewson dismissed such doubts.
Noting that its capital position had strengthened over the past year, Mathewson said Royal Bank would have no trouble raising money if necessary.
"Whatever we have done with our money has been open to market scrutiny unlike some other companies," Mathewson said. "We didn't just pay it down the drain. If we need money, we will make a case and we will get it."
Royal Bank said its U.S. bank Citizens, based in New England, lifted profits by 61 million pounds, or 57 percent, adding that it will continue its strategy of deepening its franchise and expanding its core business.
Profits were also higher in UK Banking, up 97 million pounds or 22 percent, and this part of the business also showed a healthy improvement in cost-to-income ratio.
The latter fell to 59.2 percent from 63.2 percent while the group ratio was down to 50 percent from 51.7 percent.
Direct Line, which sells motor, house and life insurance, saw profits shrink by 86 million pounds to 26 million for the year as premium rates continued under pressure and it saw increased claims.
Mathewson said he was not really disappointed by the Direct Line result -- "But I'd prefer it (profit) to be bigger, don't get me wrong" -- saying that it stemmed from the higher rate of claims and market pressure against higher prices.
"The pressure in the market means we couldn't put up prices to compensate but we are making an awful lot more than any of our competitors," he said.
Mathewson said the outlook was positive for Direct Line.
"But I'm not jumping to any conclusions. Prices are beginning to move (higher), many companies are losing substantial amounts of money and history tells me that can't continue for very long."
Royal Bank of Scotland is constantly reviewing its options to expand its distribution channels, especially in the south east of England, its chief executive George Mathewson said on Thursday.
"It's right to assume we've been talking to a lot of people," Mathewson told Reuters in an interview. "People (who are looking for a tie-up) assume they should talk to us because of our lack of penetration in the south east. All I can say is that we are reviewing all the options."  
He was speaking after the bank announced a 15 percent rise in pretax profits to 695 million stg, towards the higher end of market expectations, which saw Royal Bank shares rise 8p to 530p.
Earlier this year, Royal Bank's arch-rival Bank of Scotland announced a banking joint venture with retailer Sainsburys and other banks are making moves in the same direction.
It has long been assumed that Royal Bank would boost its distribution by buying an English building society and Mathewson again refused to rule out this possibility.  
"That remains a possibility," he said. "Assuming that a building society became available and that the price was not ridiculous."
Mathewson said any such purchase would have to take into account shareholder value and business criteria like the strength of the brand name.
Some analysts have doubted that Royal Bank's capital position would allow a major purchase but Mathewson dismissed such doubts.  
Noting that its capital ratios had strengthened over the past year (tier one to 6.8 pcercent from 6.3 and total to 11.0 from 10.3), Mathewson said Royal bank would have no trouble raising money if necessary.
"Whatever we have done with our money has been open to market scrutiny -- unlike some other companies," Mathewson said. "We didn't just pay it down the drain. If we need money, we will make a case and we will get it."
The Royal Bank results included a 22 percent gain for the UK banking operations and a 57 percent rise for its New England banking unit Citizens.  
But difficult trading conditions at its insurance unit Direct Line saw profits there collapse by 86 million stg to just 26 million.
Mathewson said he was not really disappointed by the Direct Line result -- "But I'd prefer it (profit) to be bigger, don't get me wrong" -- saying that it stemmed from the higher rate of claims and market pressure against higher prices.
"The pressure in the market means we couldn't put up prices to compensate but we are making an awful lot more than any of our competitors," he said.
Mathewson said the outlook was positive for Direct Line.
"But I'm not jumping to any conclusions. Prices are beginning to move (higher), many companies are losing substantial amounts of money and history tells me that can't continue for very long."
In the UK bank, cost to income ratio dipped to 59.2 percent from 63.2 percent as the effects of the bank's "Operation Columbus" restructuring continue to come through. -- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864.
International accountancy and consultancy partnership Ernst &amp; Young said it made a profit of 75.2 million pounds ($125.4 million) in Britain as it revealed financial details of its operations for the first time on Tuesday.
The 21 percent rise in profit in the year to June 30 was made on gross fee income of 456 million pounds and represented a 17 percent rise in average profit per partner of 200,000 pounds.
Ernst &amp; Young's senior partner Nick Land also confirmed that the firm was still planning to become a limited liability partnership registered in the Channel Island of Jersey despite the fact that the government has said it intends to introduce legislation recognising partnerships of this kind in Britain.
Land also said that Ernst &amp; Young's worlwide revenue for the year to September would show a 13 percent rise to $7.8 billion.
Ernst &amp; Young is the world's largest tax accontancy practice and the second largest management comsultancy after Arthur Andersen. It was formed in 1989 from the merger of Ernst &amp; Whinney and Arthur Young.
Ernst &amp; Young's move to limited liablity reflects an industry-wide change whereby accountancy firms feel exposed by their current unlimited liablity status, which puts personal assets in jeopardy if the firm were to become insolvent.
Under an LLP, only the capital subscribed by each partner, which currently totals some 72 million pounds, and the personal assets of those partners shown to be directly responsible for any negligent act leading to a loss would be at risk.
Land said there was too much political uncertainty in Britain ahead of next year's general election to rely on British legislation regarding LLPs emerging any time soon.
The firm's move to LLP status is dependent on Jersey's legislation being finally approved and on the LLP's tax status being agreed with Britain's Inland Revenue.
Land said that Ernst &amp; Young's decision to publish its results had not been taken to gain any advantage.
"We are not doing this for any competitive advantage," Land said. "We just thought it was time that we did it."
He added that Ernst &amp; Young wanted to take a full part in the debate on corporate governance and could hardly do so unless its own financial affairs were transparent.
"Clients are also beginning to ask questions about our financial strength."
Fastest growth in the past year was shown by Ernst &amp; Young's management consultancy which increased gross fees by 40 percent to 77.4 million pounds.
Only its insolvency practice saw a decline in fees during the year, ironically hit by the recovery in the British economy.
($1=.5995 Pound)
After a five year struggle, creditors of the collapsed, fraud-ridden BCCI will receive a payment of $2.65 billion on Tuesday, equal to 24.5 percent of their claims, a spokesman for the liquidators said on Monday.
Bank of Credit and Commerce International, founded in 1972, was closed by central banks in 1991 and collapsed with debts of more than $12 billion when evidence of massive fraud and money laundering was unearthed leading to a tangled web of litigation which shows no sign of reaching an early conclusion.
BCCI had assets of $24 billion and operations in 71 countries at the time of its collapse.
Liquidator Deloitte and Touche said a further payment, reportedly of 10 percent, of the admitted claims which total some $10.5 billion should be made in the next 12 to 16 months.
The gross fund of amounts recovered by the liquidators stands at around $4.0 billion and includes $1.5 billion paid by BCCI's majority shareholder, the government of Abu Dhabi, which will pay a further $250 million in due course following a settlement reached earlier this year.
This, in addition to efforts by US authorities which resulted in the recovery of more than $500 million from the United States paved the way for the first dividend payment.
A further $245 million was paid by Saudi billionaire Sheikh Khalid bin Mahfouz who the liquidators alleged was involved in covering up the BCCI scandal. Under a 1995 Luxembourg court settlement, Mahfouz agreed to pay without admitting liability, in return for the lawsuits being dropped.
The liquidators still have outstanding claims against the Bank of England, the Institut Monetaire Luxembourgeois (BCCI's operations were based in Luxembourgh) and the auditors of the bank, international accountancy firms Price Waterhouse and Ernst &amp; Whinney, now part of the merged Ernst &amp; Young.
Price Waterhouse has said it is making a multi-billion dollar counter claim against Abu Dhabi.
Further law suits are also pending around the world in an attempt to recover further amounts.
The two biggest groups of creditors of BCCI are in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and in Britain.
The English liquidators of BCCI, Deloite &amp; Touche, have recovered over $1 billion and have been paid a massive $200 million in fees.
In a report to the High Court earlier this year, the liquidator said legal fees in the liquidation ammounted to over $75 million so far.
British bank Barclays Tuesday sold its global custody business to investment bank Morgan Stanley for an undisclosed sum thought to be less than 50 million British pounds ($83 million).
The purchase by Morgan Stanley marks another step in the consolidation of custody business, which is increasingly being seen as a banking activity where "big is beautiful."
The custody business includes traditional safekeeping of securities, increasingly electronically, performance measurement and stock lending.
"Barclays believes global custody has become very much a ... business requiring substantial investment in technology," said Chief Executive Martin Taylor.
A Barclays spokeswoman said the investment in technology would be considerable and that Barclays had decided this would not be an effective investment.
Sir David Walker, chairman of Morgan Stanley Europe, said, "This transaction enables us to offer a broader range of products to our clients. It will strengthen Morgan Stanley's global franchise, particularly in Europe, and will increase our fee-based revenues."
Morgan Stanley said the combined custody assets of the two business would amount to some $390 million, taking it up the global custody ladder dominated by large American players.
The list is headed by Chase Manhattan, which has more than $1 trillion in assets in custody, followed by Citibank, Bank of New York, Deutsche Bank, the largest European player, and State Street Boston.
Barclays had Britain's largest custody business, followed by Lloyds TSB and Royal Bank of Scotland.
Barclays Global Custody employs some 488 staff members worldwide, of which only those in sales, relationship management, marketing and client support will be moving to Morgan Stanley -- considerably fewer than half of the total.
Barclays employee union UNIFI said only 67 of the staff would transfer with the business.
Analysts said Morgan Stanley was thought to have paid less than 50 million pounds ($83 million) for the business, but the banks said a final price would not be fixed for some time. The deal is expected to be closed at the beginnning of April 1997.
British bank Barclays on Tuesday sold its global custody business to U.S. investment bank Morgan Stanley for an undisclosed sum thought to be below 50 million pounds.
The purchase by Morgan Stanley marks another step in the consolidation of custody business which is increasingly being seen as a banking activity where "big is beautiful".
The custody business includes traditional safekeeping of securities, increasingly electronically, performance measurement and stock lending.
"Barclays believes global custody has become very much a scale business requiring substantial investment in technology," said Chief executive Martin Taylor.
A spokeswoman for Barclays said the investment in technology would be considerable and continuing and that Barclays had decided this would not be an effective investment.
Sir David Walker, chairman of Morgan Stanley Europe, said, "This transaction enables us to offer a broader range of products to our clients. It will strengthen Morgan Stanley's global franchise, particularly in Europe, and will increase our fee-based revenues."
Morgan Stanley said the combined custody assets of the two business would amount to some $390 million, taking it up the global custody ladder which is dominated by large American players.
The list is headed by Chase Manhattan which has over $one trillion of assets in custody, followed by Citibank, Bank of New York, Deutsche Bank, the largest European player, and State Street Boston.
Barclays was Britain's largest player followed by Lloyds TSB and Royal Bank of Scotland.
Barclays Global Custody currently employs some 488 staff worldwide of which only those in sales, relationship management, marketing and client support will be moving to Morgan Stanley -- considerably fewer than half of the total.
Barclays staff trade union UNIFI said only 67 of the staff would transfer with the business.
Analysts said Morgan Stanley is expected to have paid under 50 million sterling for the business but the banks said that a final price would not be fixed for some time. The deal is expected to be closed at the beginnning of April 1997.
Barclays had included custody in its "Businesses in Transition" category. These include "lending and other assets that are unlikely to be of long-term interest to the group or that need significant restructuring."
"Barclays was going to have to pump a lot of cash into the business to make it work and obviously has other uses for its money," said one analyst who declined to be named.
The British government on Wednesday published proposed new laws governing home lenders which watered down the building societies' immunity from takeover if they converted into banks.
The new legislation provoked a cool response from some home lenders and prompted one leading player to say its plans for conversion may well have been different if it had known what the government was planning.
Under the new draft law, a building society  would forfeit its five-year immunity from takeover after it converted to bank status if it took over another financial institution.
The Woolwich, which has assets of just under 30 billion pounds ($50 billion) and plans to float next July, said it was disappointed the government had not taken account of its "serious concerns" on the timing of the draft.
"Had our board known when it took the decision to convert that this (change in the law) was even a possibility, then we might have chosen to convert in a different way," a spokeswoman for the Woolwich said.
The Treasury acknowledged the new Building Societies Bill might not even make it to the statute book before an election because of a lack of parliamentary time between now and next May, the last date for the polls to be called.
If it went ahead, the Woolwich spokeswoman said the board would have a duty to revisit its conversion plans.
The Alliance &amp; Leicester in a statement also expressed disappointment, and said areas of concern "have still not been fully resolved."
"We will now need to move forward while carefully considering outstanding issues," the Alliance statement said, noting the move came in the middle of "a long and costly conversion process".
In contrast the Northern Rock, a third society which plans a flotation in 1997, welcomed the changes.
"We are delighted with it," said Adam Applegarth, a director of the Northern Rock. "It's a prefectly reasonable compromise and you can't ask for more than that."
A Treasury spokeswoman said it still hoped to find time for the bill in the Parliamentary agenda in the New Year.
"The societies converting to banks will go ahead if that is what their members want," said Treasury Minister Angela Knight in a statement. "When converted they will be allowed to establish themselves. But if they want to play the takeover game then they will have to play by the same rules as everyone else."
The Building Societies Association welcomed the revised Bill and encouraged its early introduction to Parliament.
BSA chairman Brian Davis, who is also chief executive of the Nationwide Building Society that is not planning to convert, said the BSA fully supported the Treasury's "thoughtful compromise" on the question of takeover protection.
Under current company law, 10 percent of shareholders can call a special general meeting of the company and this will not change for converting societies. But any proposal to waive its five-year immunity to takeover will have to be approved by 75 percent of the voting shareholders.
Some societies had criticised the Treasury's proposals because they did not allow friendly takeovers, such as between one large society and a local smaller one.
"We came to the conclusion that the distinction between friendly and hostile takeovers was too difficult to define and that it would have been unworkable," the Treasury said.
The Halifax, the country's biggest home lender has already waived its right to takeover protection by transferring its business to an existing subsidiary. ($1=.6003 Pound)
The British government on Wednesday published new draft legislation governing home lending institutions but a lack of parliamentary time might mean it will not reach the statute book before a general election.
The Building Societies Bill, if passed, would remove a society's five-year immunity from takeover once it converts to bank status if it, in turn, took over another financial institution.
Immunity would not be affected by one of the new banks buying mortgage books or by joint ventures, however.
The draft received a mixed reception from the four societies currently planning to convert themselves into banks.
A Treasury spokeswoman admitted that there was currently no slot for the bill in the Parliamentary agenda but added it remained hopeful an opportunity could arise in the New Year.
"The societies converting to banks will go ahead if that is what their members want," said Treasury Minister Angela Knight in a statement. "When converted they will be allowed to establish themselves. But if they want to play the takeover game then they will have to play by the same rules as everyone else."
The Woolwich, which has assets of just under 30 billion pounds ($49.97 billion) and plans to float next July, said it was disappointed the government has not taken into account its "serious concerns" on the timing of the draft.
"Had our board known when it took the decision to convert that this (change in the law) was even a possibility, then we might have chosen to convert in a different way," a spokeswoman for the Woolwich said.
If the bill was enacted, she said the Woolwich board would have a duty to revisit its conversion plans.
In contrast the Northern Rock, also planning a flotation in 1997, welcomed the changes.
"We are delighted with it," said Adam Applegarth, a director of the Northern Rock. "It's a prefectly reasonable compromise and you cant ask for more than that."
The Building Societies Association also welcomed the revised Bill and encouraged its early introduction to Parliament.
BSA chairman Brian Davis, who is also chief executive of the Nationwide Building Society that is not planning to convert, said the BSA fully supported the Treasury's "thoughtful compromise" on the question of takeover protection.
Under current company law, 10 percent of shareholders can call a special general meeting of the company and this will not change for converting societies. But any proposal to waive its five-year immunity to takeover will have to be approved by 75 percent of the voting shareholders.
Some societies had criticised the Treasury's proposals because they did not allow friendly takeovers, such as between one large society and a local smaller one.
"We came to the conclusion that the distinction between friendly and hostile takeovers was too difficult to define and that it would have been unworkable," the Treasury said.
The Halifax, the country's biggest home lender has already waived its right to takeover protection by transferring its business to an existing subsidiary.
The mutually-owned building societies have traditionally been the largest mortgage lenders in Britain although in recent years, commercial banks have taken some market share. ($1=.6003 Pound)
Britain's Woolwich Building Society on Monday set the timetable for a three billion pounds ($5.1 billion) stock market flotation in July which will bring an average windfall of over 1,200 pounds to its members.
The mutually-owned building society, the third largest in the country with assets of more than 30 billion pounds, said qualifying customers would receive at least 450 free shares upon its conversion to public limited company (Plc) status.
The Woolwich said it expected a basic distribution of 450 free shares to around 2.57 million people, which includes qualifying employees and qualifying pensioners.
Chief executive John Stewart said the Woolwich would be among Britain's top 10 banks and would be included in the FT-SE 100 index of blue-chip shares.
"(The conversion and flotation) will give the Woolwich a corporate structure which will allow it to meet its strategic objectives by remaining an independent provider of a wide range of personal financial services," Stewart added.
The Woolwich said its financial advisers, investment banks Schroders and BZW, have made an historic valuation that puts its market capitalisation at between 2.96 and 3.38 billion pounds with a mid value of 3.17 billion had the conversion happened on December 20, 1996.
This represents a range of price per share of between 175 and 200 pence with a mid-price of 187.5 pence and is at the top end of market expectations, analysts said.
Rob Thomas, building society analyst at UBS, said the eventual flotation price was likely to use the fairly strong performance of Abbey National Plc, the only other building society to have floated, as a benchmark.
The Woolwich is one of four building societies -- traditionally mainly mortgage lenders but now expanding their role -- which plan stock market flotations in 1997.
They are led by Britain's largest mortgage lender, the Halifax, which is expected to be valued at around 10 billion pounds, the Alliance &amp; Leicester worth around 2.5 billion and the Northern Rock, which is expected to raise around one billion pounds.
The Woolwich will be protected from takeover for five years after flotation but, if proposed legislation goes through this year, it would lose protection if it buys a financial company or if 75 percent of its shareholders vote to waive it.
Banking analysts said the Woolwich would have to weigh up the pros and cons of losing its protected status. But to compete effectively in a congested market it would have to grow, especially in the life assurance and independent financial advice areas.
"The Woolwich may decide that the 75 percent rule still makes it very vulnerable and the best chance for long-term survival is to grow through acquisitions," Thomas said.
Stewart became chief executive last June after his predecessor Peter Robinson, architect of the flotation strategy, left amid allegations that he "misused the facilities" of the group, where he had worked for more than 30 years.
Stewart at once identified life insurance and fund management as gaps in the Woolwich armoury. He has ruled out a move into commercial or investment banking, stressing that the bank will specialise in personal financial services.
The Woolwich said the average distribution to members, including a variable element, would be 1,233 pounds, although the exact distribution would depend on how much people have in their accounts on the qualifying dates.
An additional handout of up to 2,000 free shares will be made to savers who have been with the society for more than two years.
($1=.5899 Pound)
Ailing Union Plc, formerly a pillar of the London money market scene, could be broken up to release shareholder value after the company said it would not pay a final dividend for 1996, analysts said on Tuesday.
They said a buyer might be found for Union's profitable fees and commission businesses to break them away from the loss making trading division which has been hard-hit by changes in the money market.
"Union has lurched from crisis to crisis in the past few years," said one analyst who declined to be named.
"It could be that they have come to the conclusion that it's time to salvage what they can for shareholders."
Formerly known as Union Discount and with famously palatial offices in Cornhill in London's financial heartland, Union has had limited success in its struggle to diversify away from its traditional role as a discount house in the mysterious and highly cyclical and volatile workings of the money market.
Forays into medical equipment leasing and equities market-making, in the shape of Winterflood Securities, ended in disposals and the years have seen Union shrink to a shadow of its former self with a market value of only 25 million pounds.
Now, Union says the Bank of England's plan to remove the exclusive right of the seven discount houses to deal directly with the Bank in its liquidity operations will "have a significant impact on the group's future."
As a consequence, it said that Advance Corporation Tax (ACT), which it had intended to carry forward on its books, would now have to be written off.
It gave no figures but said this would rule out the payment of a final dividend for 1996.
It also said that it would not receive any profit contribution in the 1996 year from a venture to sell equity index options trading software in Canada.
Analysts said they had expected Union to hold its full year payout at three pence per share, with 1.5 pence coming in the second half.
Union has said that it wants to develop its fee earning businesses and move away from a dangerous dependence on trading.
The fee and commission businesses include the Union CAL futures and foreign exchange broking, liquidity fund manager Union Fund Management and Cornhill Commercial Services, which provides project finance advice and consultancy.
Late last year the two "discount houses", Gerrard &amp; National and King &amp; Shaxon, merged but with them, the money market side of the business takes a back seat compared to private-client stockbroking and fund management.
Union shares closed 12 pence lower at 81-1/2, having collapsed to 73p at one point.
Directors at Union were not immediately available for comment.
Morgan Grenfell Asset Management, the fund management arm of Germany's Deutsche Bank AG, said on Tuesday trading would resume on Thursday in its three European funds suspended earlier this week.
The three funds -- the 788 million pound ($1.23 billion)  MG European Growth Trust, the 137 million MG Europa and the 444 million Dublin-listed MG European Capital Growth -- were suspended pending investigation into what DMG called "possible irregularities centring on certain unquoted securities."
MGAM said fund managers will meet their liabilities "in respect of any irregularities identified in the course of the investigation into the three funds."
Britain's Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO) has said it is investigating the management of the funds in conjunction with MGAM.
A spokeswoman for IMRO said it had been working hard with MGAM to remove investors in the three funds from the state of limbo they had been in since Monday when dealings were suspended.
IMRO said it was far too early to tell when the investigation into the funds would be complete.
The investigation is thought to centre on the level of unquoted securities in the fund and their valuation. These include stock in some high-tech Scandinavian companies.
The company said its parent bank, Deutsche, has bought some of the securities in the funds for its own account with a view to protecting investors' interests. It said that after taking this action "the prices at which the funds recommence dealing should not be affected by such irregularities".
Industry sources said Deutsche Bank may have spent around 150 million stg buying securities for its own account and thus removing them from the funds.
The sources said the theory behind the action was that, with the suspect securities removed, the funds should resume dealing at prices close to where they were suspended.
But the 150 million pounds spent by Deutsche may not be lost because the stock will have a certain value which remains to be set.
MGAM said enquiries centre only on the three funds and that dealing in all other Morgan Grenfell investment funds are unaffected.
MGAM confirmed that Peter Young the manager of two of the funds -- MG European Growth Trust and MG European Capital Growth -- has been suspended and said he has been replaced by Stuart Mitchell who until February 1996 was manager of its offshore MG European Profund.
Industry sources said the market will be relieved that MGAM has moved quickly to quell speculation and return the funds to an even keel but said confidence in MGAM may take longer to restore.
Lloyds Bank was on Wednesday fined 325,000 pounds ($550,000) by a British investment industry watchdog and looks set to pay millions of pounds in compensation to disadvantaged customers.
The Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO) said it had fined Lloyds, which merged with TSB last year to form Lloyds TSB Group Plc, for breaches of rules relating to its pensions transfer business between April 1988 and June 1993.
Lloyds agreed to a settlement of disciplinary proceedings brought against it, the fifth such settlement IMRO has made with firms who have been found guilty of mis-selling pensions products.
IMRO said Lloyds "did not obtain or have systems to obtain all relevant facts about the personal and financial circumstances of its customers needed to advise them properly about pensions transfers".
It said Lloyds had not provided certain customers "with all the information needed to enable them to make a balanced and informed decision on whether to carry out a pension transfer".
Lloyds, which must pay IMRO's investigation costs of 63,000 pounds and make a contribution to its disciplinary costs, has already offered redress to some customers and the review of some 2,600 Lloyds transfer cases "is well advanced and will be substantially completed by December 31, 1997", IMRO added.
The bank expressed its regret in a statement.
"Lloyds Bank deeply regrets the errors which have resulted in charges being brought against it by IMRO for its pension transfer business," it said.
As a group, Lloyds TSB has made provisions totalling 165 million pounds for possible compensation payments to do with the mis-selling of pension products.
These relate to the Lloyds Bank business as well as the pensions activities of TSB before the merger, and of Lloyds' insurance subsidiary Lloyds Abbey Life.
The pensions mis-selling scandal, whereby individuals transferred their pension and were disadvantaged as a result, has been one of the most serious faced by the British financial services industry in recent years.
The affair knocked a big hole in the public's confidence in the industry which is only now being repaired and companies look set to pay a price running into hundreds of million of pounds as a result.
In November, Britain's top financial markets regulator the Securities and Investments Board (SIB) announced a new strategy to try and clear a logjam in the pensions industry's review of the mis-selling of pensions products and the payment of compensation to investors.
Both regulators and insurance and investment companies have come under a barrage of criticism over the length of time it has taken to complete a review of cases.
Lloyds said it has identified some 2,600 pension transfer customers of which it anticipates having to pay compensation to around 1,500.
It said its procedures had been fully overhauled three years ago to ensure that other customers will not be similarly affected in future.
Lloyds Bank was fined 325,000 pounds ($550,000) Wednesday by a British investment industry watchdog and appears set to pay millions of pounds in compensation to disadvantaged customers.
The Investment Management Regulatory Organisation said it fined Lloyds, which merged with TSB last year to form Lloyds TSB Group Plc, for breaches of rules relating to its pensions transfer business between April 1988 and June 1993.
Lloyds agreed to a settlement of disciplinary proceedings brought against it, the fifth such settlement IMRO has made with firms that have been found guilty of improper sales of pension products.
IMRO said Lloyds "did not obtain or have systems to obtain all relevant facts about the personal and financial circumstances of its customers needed to advise them properly about pensions transfers."
It said Lloyds had not provided certain customers "with all the information needed to enable them to make a balanced and informed decision on whether to carry out a pension transfer."
Lloyds, which must pay IMRO's investigation costs of 63,000 pounds ($107,000) and make a contribution to its disciplinary costs, has already offered redress to some customers and the review of some 2,600 Lloyds transfer cases "is well advanced and will be substantially completed by Dec. 31, 1997," IMRO added.
The bank expressed its regret in a statement.
"Lloyds Bank deeply regrets the errors which have resulted in charges being brought against it by IMRO for its pension transfer business," it said.
As a group, Lloyds TSB has made provisions totalling 165 million pounds ($279 million) for possible compensation payments to do with the mis-selling of pension products.
These relate to the Lloyds Bank business as well as the pensions activities of TSB before the merger, and of Lloyds' insurance subsidiary Lloyds Abbey Life.
The pension scandal, whereby individuals transferred their pensions and were disadvantaged as a result, has been one of the most serious faced by the British financial services industry in recent years.
The affair knocked a big hole in the public's confidence in the industry and companies are set to pay a price running into hundreds of million of pounds as a result.
In November, Britain's top financial markets regulator the Securities and Investments Board announced a new strategy to try and clear a logjam in the pensions industry's review of the selling of pension products and the payment of compensation to investors.
Both regulators and insurance and investment companies have come under a barrage of criticism over the length of time it has taken to complete a review of cases.
Lloyds said it has identified some 2,600 pension transfer customers of which it anticipates having to pay compensation to around 1,500.
British banks have a made a positive start to 1997.
Share prices are buoyant and analysts on Thursday saw few serious clouds on the horizon to jolt the sector out of its seemingly inexorable rise.
The sctor, which has outperformed the FTSE 100 index by around 20 percent over the past six months, has become more diverse in recent years.
But, for differing reasons, analysts are quietly confident that based on a benign economic environment, the banks should continue to show good profit growth.
There are also positive stories to be told on an individual basis with Barclays and National Westminster, for example, expected to offer further share buybacks and HSBC and Standard Chartered set to continue reaping the benefits of their strong Far East franchise.
"The Far East is still looking attractive and we still have Standard Chartered on an outperform rating," said Nick Collier, banking analyst at Morgan Stanley. "We also like Natwest, it's the cheapest stock in the sector, and looks likely to emerge with a more compelling story in 1997,"
Analysts expect NatWest to consolidate its recent heavy acquisition programme and spend possibly 300 million pounds on buying back shares as its Tier One capital ratio measure rises. Barclays is also expected to continue repurchases on which it has already spent around one billion pounds.
Lloyds TSB could also eventually join the share buy-back club as its capital ratios improve, though most analysts do not see this happening before 1998.
Salomon Brothers banking analyst John Leonard said he expects the British economic outlook to remain favourable.
The strength of sterling, while affecting those banks that report dollar income in sterling, looks set to keep the lid on inflation and interest rates, a scenario the banks should be able to deal with.
If rates were to rise more than expected then that could be a problem for bank share prices if the market thought bad debt provisions were set to rise.
On the other hand, many analysts are not convinced by the link between interest rates and bank share prices.
"It's sometimes dificult to tell what causes prices to fall from the outside," said one analyst who declined to be named. "Bank shares have done very well in recent years and operators may well take profits on any (market) setback to lock them away. But that doesn't mean they have changed their view."
On domestic banking, analysts are happy that banks have been moving more into higher-margin personal sector borrowing at the expense of the lower margins seen in the corporate sector.
But they are less happy about the competitive mortgage market which, despite an upturn, is hardly setting the world alight.
While bad debts remain stable, net bad debt charges could rise as releases of old provisions work their way out of the system.
Other share markets could also have an influence, analysts say.
Some investors compare the British and U.S. bank sectors and last year, the U.S. rather lost out. If this were to turn, then the British banks could come under some pressure, said Salomon's Leonard.
But analysts are already a little nervous given that the banks' good run has continued with such strength.
"Some stocks are definitely looking less compelling given the rush of blood we've seen in the New Year," said one.
Britain's largest mortgage lender, the Halifax Building Society, on Friday said its planned stock market flotation in June could be worth as much as 12 billion pounds ($20 billion).
Unveiling a price range and details of share allocations to the society's members, Halifax chief executive Mike Blackburn said it "will represent the largest single extension of private share ownership ever witnessed in the UK," said
The mutually-owned Halifax, with assets of over 100 billion pounds, said flotation adviser Deutsche Morgan Grenfell had estimated a share price of between 390 and 450 pence per share if the flotation had taken place on December 16, 1996.
This equals a market worth of between 10.4 and 12 billion pounds, and analysts expect the final outcome to be at the top end of this range given the recent positive performance of the most comparable stock in the market, former building society Abbey National Plc.
"The valuation of 12 billion (pounds) is right in line with our expectations," said Peter Toeman, banking analyst at ABN AMRO Hoare Govett.
Other analysts agreed and many expect the price on flotation day to be higher, saying that Friday's figures looked a little conservative.
The Halifax said each qualifying member will receive a basic allocation of 200 shares in a flotation of 2.675 billion shares.
The Halifax has 6.7 million investing members and two million borrowing members. Of these, there is an overlap 700,000 which means that the Society is sending out a total of around 8.0 million voting packs.
Investing members will also get a variable share allocation depending on how much money they had in their accounts on particular dates. This will range from 200 shares to a maximum of 1,181 for those with 50,000 pounds ($84,430) or more.
At its special general meeting on February 24, over 50 percent of the investing members must vote in favour of the proposal or it will fail. The society has started a huge advertising campaign to encourage members to vote.
The Halifax is expected to be in the top 20 companies by market capitalisation in the FTSE 100 index of blue-chip firms and is sure to threaten the Abbey's position as Britain's fifth largest publicly-quoted bank.
It said it sees room for huge expansion in the British insurance and long-term savings sectors.
"We'll focus on the UK personal financial services sector," Halifax spokesman Davis Gilchrist told Reuters Financial Television in an interview.
"That's a very wide area, both on the borrowing side and, increasingly, on the savings side -- traditional savings and long-term savings."
Asked whether the expansion would be by acquisition or through organic growth, Gilchrist ruled nothing out.
"That will give us a major programme of expansion in life assurance and general insurance as well," he said. "We'll look at the best (expansion) method. In some cases, organic growth from a solid base can be the best way."
The Halifax joins the Woolwich, Alliance &amp; Leicester and Northern Rock which are all coming to the market this year from the building societies sector in flotations worth an aggregate of around 18 billion pounds.
Economists have expressed concern that a large chunk of the proceeds will be spent as a windfall and could stoke up inflationary pressures in the British economy later this year.
The flotation price of the Halifax Building Society is expected to materialise at the high end of an estimate prepared by the Society's bankers last month, banking analysts said on Friday.
Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, the Halifax's investment banking advisers, set a price range for the June float of between 390 and 450 pence which would produce a market capitalisation of between 10.4 billion and 12 billion stg.
"The valuation of 12 billion (stg) is right in line with our expectations," said Peter Toeman, banking analyst at ABN AMRO Hoare Govett.
Other analysts were in agreement but some expect the price on flotation day to be higher, saying that today's figures look a little conservative.
"Based on a 1997 earnings per share figure of 44 or 45 pence, a share price of around 475 pence or even 490 pence would seem to fit," said John Leonard, banking analyst at Salomon Brothers.
Analysts tend to use a comparison with Abbey National Plc to do their calculations.
Abbey is the only building society to have converted so far, it became a bank in 1989, and still makes 65 percent of its money from its core mortgage and deposit activity, according to Rob Thomas, building societies analyst at UBS.
The Halifax makes about 80 percent of its income from its core activities and looks set to expand vigorously into other areas like life and general insurance, long-term savings and funds management.
"There's a good possibility that the Halifax will be rated higher than the Abbey when it comes to the market but the other societies will probably be lower," Thomas said.
The Woolwich, Alliance &amp; Leicester and Northern Rock will join the Halifax in floating later this year.
Thomas added that the prospective flotation levels of the societies will fluctuate broadly in line with movements in the Abbey's share price between now and the summer.
"Using the Abbey as a pointer is fine because banking sector valuations are pretty close together at around 10 times earnings, except for Lloyds TSB," said David Poutney, analyst at Panmure Gordon. "But there's nothing clever or scientific about it."
Analysts agreed that one cloud on the horizon for potential shareholders may be the possibility of higher interest rates in Britain, especially after the general election which must be held by May 22.
Currently, sterling strength is seen by some economists as keeping a lid on inflationary pressures and consequently rates, but there is a feeling that rates will have to rise.
But analysts say a rise of 100 basis points or more would be needed to seriously dent the banking sector and damage the summer's flotations.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864
Britain's largest mortgage lender, the Halifax Building Society, said Friday its planned initial public offering in June could be worth as much as 12 billion pounds ($20 billion).
Unveiling a price range and details of share allocations to the society's members, Halifax Chief Executive Mike Blackburn said it "will represent the largest single extension of private share ownership ever witnessed in the UK."
The mutually-owned Halifax, with assets of over 100 billion pounds ($167.8 million), said flotation adviser Deutsche Morgan Grenfell had estimated a share price of between 390 and 450 pence ($6.54 to $7.55) per share if the IPO had taken place on Dec. 16.
This equals a market worth of between 10.4 billion ($17.5 billion) and 12 billion pounds ($20.1 billion), and analysts expect the final outcome to be at the top end of this range given the recent positive performance of the most comparable stock in the market, former mortgage banker Abbey National Plc.
"The valuation of 12 billion (pounds) is right in line with our expectations," said Peter Toeman, banking analyst at ABN AMRO Hoare Govett.
Other analysts agreed and many expect the price on flotation day to be higher, saying that Friday's figures looked a little conservative.
The Halifax said each qualifying member will receive a basic allocation of 200 shares in a flotation of 2.675 billion shares.
The Halifax has 6.7 million investing members and two million borrowing members. Of these, there is an overlap 700,000, which means that the Society is sending out a total of around 8.0 million voting packs.
Investing members will also get a variable share allocation depending on how much money they had in their accounts on particular dates. This will range from 200 shares to a maximum of 1,181 for those with 50,000 pounds ($84,430) or more.
At its special general meeting on Feb. 24, over 50 percent of the investing members must vote in favour of the proposal or it will fail. The society has started a huge advertising campaign to encourage members to vote.
The Halifax is expected to be in the top 20 companies by market capitalisation in the FTSE 100 index of blue-chip firms and is sure to threaten Abbey's position as Britain's fifth-largest publicly-owned bank.
It said it sees room for huge expansion in the British insurance and long-term savings sectors.
"We'll focus on the UK personal financial services sector," Halifax spokesman Davis Gilchrist said. "That's a very wide area, both on the borrowing side and, increasingly, on the savings side -- traditional savings and long-term savings."
Britain's largest mortgage lender, the mutually-owned Halifax Building Society, on Thursday (corrects from Wednesday) said its planned stock market flotation in June could value it at as much as 12 billion pounds ($20 billion).
"This will represent the largest single extension of private share ownership ever witnessed in the UK," said Halifax chief executive Mike Blackburn.
The Halifax, which has assets of over 100 billion pounds, said its investment bank adviser Deutsche Morgan Grenfell had estimated a market price of between 390 and 450 pence per share if the flotation had taken place on December 16, 1996.
This would have meant a company worth between 10.4 and 12 billion pounds and analysts expect the final outcome to be at the top end of this range, given the recent positive performance of the most comparable stock in the market -- former building society Abbey National Plc.
The Halifax said each qualifying member will receive a basic allocation of 200 shares in a flotation of 2.675 billion shares.
The Halifax has 6.7 million investing members and 2.0 million borrowing members. Of these, there is an overlap 700,000 which means that the Society is sending out a total of around 8.0 million voting packs.
Investing members will also get a variable share allocation depending on how much money they have in their accounts on particular dates, this will range from 200 shares to a maximum of 1,181 for those with 50,000 pounds ($84,430) or more.
At its special general meeting on February 24, over 50 percent of the investing members must vote in favour of the proposal or it will fail.
The Halifax is expected to be in the top 20 companies by market capitalisation in the FTSE 100 index of blue-chip firms and is sure to threaten the Abbey's position as Britain's fifth largest publicly quoted bank.
Due to its conversion route -- the Halifax is not setting up a seperate flotation vehicle -- the legal requirement is that over 50 percent of its investing members must vote in favour of the proposal at the special meeting.
"It is a big voting requirement," said Halifax assistant general manager Graham Johnston, "50 percent is a higher hurdle than others have faced...we're very confident we'll get it."
The society has started a huge advertising campaign to encourage members to vote.
The Halifax will also not face the problem of other converting societies in that it has waived the protection from takeover that others will enjoy.
It joins the Woolwich, Alliance &amp; Leicester ALL.CN and Northern Rock who are all coming to the market this year in flotations worth an aggregate of around 18 billion pounds.
Economists have expressed concern recently that a large chunk of the proceeds may be seen as a windfall by beneficiaries and will be spent. This could stoke up inflationary pressures in the British economy later this year. ($1=.5922 Pound)
BZW, the investment banking arm of Barclays Plc, said on Wednesday it plans to use state-of-the-art defence technology to help it with a perennial problem -- managing risk in the financial markets.
The bank has formed the Financial Laboratory Club to develop new risk management solutions, using the scientific and computing potential of the Defence Evaluation and Research Agency of the British Ministry of Defence -- the biggest research and development organisation in Western Europe.
Also involved in the project, which has funding of 1.8 million pounds ($3.0 million) for the first two years, are Silicon Graphics, insurance company Royal Sun Alliance, the London Stock Exchange, the City University and Business School and risk management consultancy Z/Yen.
The British government is providing a grant of 750,000 pounds for the project and BZW is putting in 500,000 over two years.
With margins getting ever finer in the highly competitive investment banking world, BZW hopes defence technology can help it keep ahead.
"We have to manage our risk well," said Martin Dooney, global head of money markets at BZW. "We want to start setting the standard and make strides to be ahead of the pack."
Dooney and DERA scientists believe there is enough common ground between the worlds of the trading room and the battlefield to make the exercise worthwhile.
"The risks are obviously different," he said. "For the crew of a main battle tank it could be the missile defences of the opposing force and for the bond trader it could be the movement of short-term interest rates."
But Dooney said there are many similarities, not least the fact that that both are high-stress environments which both require the sophisticated modelling and simulation techniques which have, until now, been largely the preserve of the defence industries.
One reason for this is that research into this field needs massive computing power which DERA can provide via its four Cray Computer Corp super-computers which are millions of times more powerful than the average desktop PC.
BZW believes the project can help people at every level in the company to better understand the firm's risk position by replacing a mass of numbers by visualisation techniques.
The project will also look into using modelling techniques used to develop military consoles to look at the design of future trading stations and try to develop different ways of evaluating dealer performance.
This will, in particular, provide early warning of problems based on trading pattern evidence.
"The financial services industry wants something that it can use in the heat of battle," said Michael Mainelli, development director at DERA.
"If financial markets are destabilised they could be as, or even more, damaging than a conventional war."
$1=.5976 Pound)
Former Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM) star fund manager Nicola Horlick continued her battle against her ex-employer on Tuesday but, after a meeting with her lawyer, said her chances of being reinstated were slim.
"Reinstatement doesn't seem very likely," she told Reuters.
Horlick is waging a campaign for reinstatement or compensation from the firm from which she resigned in a blaze of publicity last week after allegations that she planned to defect and poach some of her colleagues.
But so far MGAM, and its parent company Deutsche Morgan Grenfell (DMG), have remained deaf to her pleas.
Horlick met her lawyer John Farr of law firm Herbert Smith again on Tuesday and although her advisers hinted it was far too early to talk of legal action against DMG, this has not been ruled out by Horlick's camp.
The advisers indicated an early resolution of the dispute was unlikely and could take several weeks as Deutsche and MGAM had still to complete an internal inquiry into the affair.
"It will take several days, if not weeks, I should think," one adviser said.
Despite indications that discussions took place on Tuesday between Farr and DMG's legal representatives, a DMG spokesman denied there had been further contact.
The bank is sticking firmly to its guns in the row with the 35-year-old mother of five, one of London's most prominent fund managers.
It says Horlick, having been promoted to the rank of managing director, was suspended just days later for "soliciting staff" to join a rival firm and then resigned her position.
The plot has thickened amid unconfirmed allegations that this was a prelude to a takeover of MGAM's pension fund business by Dutch bank ABN AMRO.
ABN AMRO declined to comment on the latest reports but has already denied having tried to poach Horlick and her team.
On Tuesday, however, the Dutch bank acknowledged it would be interested in buying a large British fund manager and its global asset management director Jan Vroegop told Reuters it would like to make "big steps" in London funds management.
Horlick continues to deny allegations that she was leading a breakaway group.
DMG's line is that Horlick will not be reinstated and that there will be no compensation because she had resigned. DMG's parent Deutsche Bank also said late Monday that it did not expect to go to court with Horlick.
Deutsche board member Rolf Breuer, who is poised to take over the helm of Deutsche in May from Hilmar Kopper, said: "The facts are clear. Mrs Horlick inflicted damage on the bank with her attempt to poach staff and then resigned."
Meanwhile, differing versions of what led up to her suspension continued to trickle out.
British newspaper reports said ABN AMRO was involved with Horlick in planning to fund a management buyout of the 18 billion pounds ($30 billion) pension fund business which Horlick headed.
They said ABN ARMO planned to recruit Horlick and her team and then to offer to buy the residue from Morgan Grenfell for a reported 385 million pounds.
Horlick's colleagues were reported to have been unconvinced by the merits of ABN's alleged plan to poach the team, not least because one of the team's key aims had been to have Horlick promoted to a more influential position within MGAM. Once this happened it removed a key complaint against top management.
MGAM has had a troubled time since the sacking of fund manager Peter Young last September after irregularities came to light in three of the group's funds, hitting staff morale and also rattling clients.
Young has denied any criminal activity and is being investigated by Britain's Serious Fraud Office.
So far no clients have withdrawn their business from MGAM as a result of the Horlick affair. However, several major clients have expressed their concern and said they would be reviewing their relationship with the firm. ($1=.6021 Pound)
Bankers in London say they hope to sign a package restructuring the 8.7 billion pounds ($14 billion) debt of channel tunnel operator Eurotunnel well before a new year-end deadline runs out.
"Just as the previous deadline of April was a bit optimistic, the new one errs on the side of caution," said one banking source. "It'll look good now if they bring it in ahead of time."
Earlier this week, Eurotunnel and its creditor banks agreed a nine-month extension of a debt payment standstill until the end of the year. The debt standstill went into effect in September 1995 and was due to run for 18 months.
Bankers said, despite the fact that the extended standstill would mean interest would continue to accrue, this would have no effect on the debt deal which will continue to be applied to Eurotunnel's debt position as of October 15, 1996.
"The interest and any other charges due since the cut-off date will become payable when the deal goes into effect," the banking source said.
Last October, following marathon negotiations, Eurotunnel and the steering committee of banks agreed a restructuring deal which will have to agreed by a total of 225 creditor banks and the shareholders of the company.
The deal included a 1.0 billion pounds swap of debt for equity at 130p per share, a swap for interest-bearing equity notes, shareholder warrants, loan notes and resettable bonds.
An amount of 4.0 billion pounds would remain as junior debt, paying a fixed interest rate until the end of 2003 and then reverting to 1.25 percent above the London Interbank Offered Rate.
The company also has the right to issue "stabilisation notes" to cover any unpaid interest resulting from the deal. These would be interest-free until the start of 2006 and would then pay 1.25 percent over Libor.
Suspended at 113-1/2p ahead of the debt refinancing announcement last year, Eurotunnel shares quickly fell to below 90p in the days following and have remained relatively stable since then.
On Wednesday, they were quoted up 2-1/2p at 86-1/2.
The lower price means the 130p debt to equity swap price looks even better for shareholders but bankers say this is unlikely to cause a problem for the deal.
"They (the shareholders) are getting a better deal on that portion of the debt but the shares were probably overvalued and I can't see my colleagues ditching the deal because of that," the banking source said. "The deal has to happen, both sides know that." ($1=.6035 Pound)
The London High Court on Thursday adjourned a hearing to decide whether British authorities will hand over to Italy documents related to the business affairs of Italian media tycoon Silvio Berlusconi.
The judge decided the hearing could not be finished in the two days allotted and lawyers would have to return in the first week of October before two new judges.
Britain's Serious Fraud office (SFO) seized the documents -- 15 bags full -- earlier this year from London lawyer David Mills who represents the business interests of former Italian Prime Minister Berlusconi, who, among other things, owns three TV channels and the football club AC Milan.
An SFO statement after the adjournment said: "We regret that the court has not been able to hear this matter, particularly as it is now nearly five months since the documents were seized."
The hearing stemmed from an appeal by Berlusconi and his company Fininvest and others against a decision that the papers be handed over to Italian magistrates.
An earlier court hearing was told the papers were linked to fraud and false accounting allegations amounting to 41 million pounds ($64.33 million) at overseas companies which were moved from Switzerland to England.
Italian investigators suspect Berlusconi's Fininvest may have used offshore companies to channel payments to politicians.
Berlusconi is on trial in Milan for alleged complicity in bribing tax officials for lenient audits of Fininvest companies.
The tycoon, who leads the centre-right Freedom Alliance, has also been indicted in another case in which he is charged with illegal party funding.
In court on Thursday, a lawyer for the appellants told the judge the SFO had allowed Italian police too much time to see the documents before a decision was made on whether to send them officially to Italy.
She also alleged that the Italian government's request for documents was too wide and amounted to a "fishing expedition", which is not allowed under British law.
Britain's Northern Rock Building Society, due for flotation in the autumn, on Wednesday reported pretax profits of 167.5 million pounds ($270 million) for 1996, up 14 percent from 147 million the previous year.
The home loan provider said it would publish its transfer document giving details of the flotation and a preliminary valuation in the first week of March. Members will meet to vote on plans to convert the institution into a bank in April.
Northern Rock, based in the north-east of England and fiercely independent, said its profit figures excluded a non-recurring cost of 10.3 million pounds related to the conversion to bank status.
Uniquely, the society has said it will create a foundation to which it will covenant five percent of its annual pre-tax profits after flotation. The money will go to worthy causes, mostly local communities in its area of operation.
Northern Rock director Adam Applegarth declined to speculate on the value in shares each member would receive from the flotation. Predictions range between 750 and 1,000 pounds, valuing the floated company at more than one billion pounds.
Applegarth highlighted the fact that business had continued to perform well during the conversion process which he described as "onerous".
"As one of the most cost-efficient lenders, it's important for us to improve those efficiencies and we've done that," he said in an interview.
The society's cost to income ratio dipped to 33.1 percent at the end of 1996 compared with 33.5 percent at the end of 1995.
Applegarth pointed to the society's lending performance as a highlight of last year.
Net lending for the year rose 44 percent to 1.9 billion pounds from 1.3 billion with its share in Britain's net mortgage lending market rising to 10 percent from eight percent. Assets grew 19 percent to 13.7 billion pounds from 11.6 billion. Net receipts from savers rose to 584 million pounds from 560 million in the previous year.
Applegarth said the Northern Rock would not try to compete with Britain's large retail banks after its conversion in terms of the range of products they offer.
"I have no doubt that if we attempted to become an all-singing, all-dancing high street clearing bank we would be too small and we would get eaten up."
Applegarth rejected any charge that in the long-term, the society's members would be worse off because of conversion.
"What matters to customers is not the status of the company but the value of the packages they get."
Applegarth said that "hairshirt" mutuals who are trying to justify the maintanence of that status by effectively paying dividends to their members through deflating their profits will not be able to count on this strategy in the longer term.
"They don't have the profitability to go out and buy new customers," he said.
Applegarth said Northern Rock's cost to assets ratio of 0.72 percent compares with around 1.2 percent for the top 10 building societies. "That means I've got a 50 pence margin to play with. We can use some of it to improve profitability and some of it, frankly, to cherry-pick business." ($1=.6199 Pound)
Northern Rock Building Society will publish detailed proposals for its stock market flotation, including a preliminary valuation of the company, in the first week in March, director Adam Applegarth said on Wednesday.
Applegarth told Reuters in an interview that the document will be followed by a special meeting of members in April to vote on the approval.
But he declined to speculate on what value in shares each member would receive from the flotation, an amount which has been predicted at between 750 and 1,000 stg.  
Earlier, Northern Rock announced record profits in 1996, making a pre-tax profit of 167.5 million, a rise of 14 percent over the 145 million seen in 1995. This excluded 10.3 million stg of non-recurring costs related to the flotation.
Applegarth highlighted the fact that the business had continued to perform well during the conversion process which he described as "onerous".
"As one of the most cost-efficient lenders, it's important for us to improve those efficiencies and we've done that," Applegarth said. Cost to income ratio dipped to 33.1 percent at the end of 1996 compared with 33.5 percent at the end of 1995.  
Applegarth also pointed to the society's lending performance as a highlight of last year.
Net lending jumped 44 percent 1.9 billion stg, giving the Northern Rock around 10 percent of the UK net mortgage market.
Applegarth said market conditions were improving. "The general summary is that the market is looking slightly better than it did a year ago. With a bit of luck, this will be a sustained rise instead of falling back or a boom."
He said that if British interest rates needed to rise it would be better for the home lending market if this were to happen gradually.  
Applegarth said the Northern Rock will not try and compete with Britain's large retail banks after its conversion in terms of the range of products they offer.
"I have no doubt that if we attempted to become an all-singing, all-dancing high street clearing bank we would be too small and we would get eaten up," he added.
Applegarth rejected any charge that in the long-term, the society's members would be worse off because of conversion.
"What matters to customers is not the status of the company but the value of the packages they get."  
Applegarth said that "hairshirt" mutuals who are trying to justify the maintanence of that status by effectively paying dividends to their members through deflating their profits will not be able to count on this strategy in the longer term.
"They don't have the profitability to go out and buy new customers," he said.
Applegarth said Northern Rock's cost to assets ratio of 0.72 percent compares to around 1.2 percent for the top 10 building societies. "That means I've got a 50 pence margin to play with. We can use some of it to improve profitability and some of it, frankly, to cherry-pick business."
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864
A thankful Elizabeth Forsyth, a former aide of Polly Peck head Asil Nadir, walked free from court on Thursday after three judges allowed her appeal against a five-year sentence for handling stolen money.
Forsyth, 60, who is also appealing against the money-laundering conviction itself, described her 10 months in prison as an "experience".
"I would just like to thank the court for its understanding and consideration," Forsyth told reporters as she was freed from the cells of London's Royal Courts of Justice.
Forsyth, who was chairman of South Audley Management, a firm set up by Turkish Cypriot Nadir to deal with his wealthy family interests before his Polly Peck empire collapsed in 1990 under a mountain of debt, said she could not comment further on the appeal as it was still continuing.
Earlier, the appeal judges surprised the court by making it clear at once that Forsyth would not be returning to spend another night at Holloway prison.
"We have formed a view that this sentence cannot stand," Lord Justice Beldam said at the outset of the appeal hearing, adding that the sentence was so disproportionate that, "taking into account the time she has already served...she should not serve any longer."
Beldam, hearing the appeal with two other judges, then moved on to consider Forsyth's appeal against her conviction on two counts of dishonestly handling 400,000 pounds ($650,000) of stolen funds.
Forsyth's lawyer, Geoffrey Robertson, later made a bail application so that Forsyth could be freed pending the outcome of the rest of the appeal.
At the end of the court session, Forsyth told reporters she was heading for her mother's home.
"I'm looking forward to going home...and it won't be an iron bed with a thin mattress," she said, adding that her son was arrving for a family reunion.
She said of her time in prison, "I learnt an awful lot, it was an education process." She took up art in prison and was a library orderly.
Asked if she bore any grudges against the legal system, she said: "There's a lot wrong with the system. The prison officers work very hard to do a difficult job under difficult circumstances."
Forsyth has been in prison since March 1996 when Justice Sir Richard Tucker surprised those following the case with the severity of his sentence.
During her five-week trial, the jury accepted that Forsyth had helped to launder money that had been stolen from Polly Peck by Nadir.
Nadir still faces charges connected to Polly Peck but in 1993 he fled to northern Cyprus, a territory not recognised by the British government, skipping 3.5 million pounds ($5.67 million) bail.
Former Barings treasury and risk chief Ian Hopkins has been banned from being a director in the City, industry sources said on Thursday after a three-day disciplinary hearing.
Britain's Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) said in a statement that the outcome would not be formally announced until after any appeal process had ended.
But the sources said the tribunal had banned Hopkins from being a registered director for three years and ordered him to pay an unspecified amount of costs.
Hopkins, who was not immediately available for comment, did not appear before the tribunal, chaired by Judge Colin Kolbert, and was not legally represented.
After he has been formally given the full written judgment, he will have 10 business days to lodge an appeal.
Hopkins was among a group of former Barings executives against whom the SFA brought disciplinary charges for their part in the downfall of the investment bank. It collapsed nearly two years ago when Singapore-based trader Nick Leeson ran up debts of almost $1.4 billion in unauthorised derivatives trades.
Hopkins, who worked for Barings in London, has always maintained that he tried to warn other Barings executives of the bank's dangerous position but that he was effectively ignored.
He told a parliamentary committee investigation into Barings last year that his attempts to alert more senior Barings staff to potential problems had failed. He painted a picture of culture clashes between the traditional Barings banking activities and its newer securities activities.
In the official Singaporean report into the Barings affair, executives of the bank were criticised for not heeding Hopkins's warnings.
"In our view, the collapse might have been averted if Mr Hopkins's concerns had been taken seriously, and acted upon promptly and effectively," the Singapore inspectors said.
The tribunal heard the SFA case, put by prominent barrister Presiley Baxendale, and questioned seven witnesses. It also took into account evidence given by Hopkins to the Singapore enquiry and to Britain's Board of Banking Supervision.
Earlier this month the SFA reprimanded Barings former head of equity derivatives Mary Walz for her part in the bank's collapse and has already banned several other former Barings executives including former chief executive Peter Norris.
A thankful Elizabeth Forsyth, a former aide of Polly Peck head Asil Nadir, walked free from court on Thursday after three judges allowed her appeal against a five-year sentence for handling stolen money.
Forsyth, 60, who is also appealing against the money-laundering conviction itself, described her 10 months in prison as an "experience".
"I would just like to thank the court for its understanding and consideration," Forsyth told reporters as she was freed from the cells of London's Royal Courts of Justice.
She said she could not comment further on the appeal as it was still continuing.
Earlier, the appeal judges surprised the court by making it clear at once that Forsyth would not be returning to spend another night at Holloway prison.
"We have formed a view that this sentence cannot stand," Lord Justice Beldam said at the outset of the appeal hearing, adding that the sentence was so disproportionate that, "taking into account the time she has already served...she should not serve any longer."
Beldam, hearing the appeal with two other judges, then moved on to consider Forsyth's appeal against her conviction on two counts of dishonestly handling 400,000 pounds ($650,000) of stolen funds.
Forsyth's lawyer, Geoffrey Robertson QC, later made a bail application so that Forsyth could be freed pending the outcome of the rest of the appeal.
Forsyth has been in prison since March 1996 when Justice Sir Richard Tucker surprised those following the case with the severity of his sentence.
She was chairman of South Audley Management, a firm set up by Turkish Cypriot Nadir to deal with his wealthy family interests before his Polly Peck empire collapsed in 1990 under a mountain of debt.
During her five-week trial, the jury accepted that Forsyth had helped to launder money that had been stolen from Polly Peck by Nadir.
Nadir still faces charges connected to Polly Peck but in 1993 he fled to northern Cyprus, a territory not recognised by the British government, skipping 3.5 million pounds ($5.67 million) bail.
One of Forsyth's supporters told Reuters outside the court that her 90-year-old mother had been told and was said to be "well pleased". At the time of her sentencing, Forsyth's lawyers had argued for leniency saying she should remain outside prison to care for her mother.
Another of Forsyth's lawyers, Peter Krivinskas, said an application by Nadir to have the charges against him dropped would probably depend on the outcome of Forsyth's appeal against her conviction.
The outcome of the original trial was seen as a boost for Britain's Serious Fraud Office (SFO) which prosecutes big fraud cases but has failed to secure convictions in several high-profile cases.
($1=.6172 Pound)
A British High Court judge rejected on Thursday a $1.8 billion claim by the liquidators of Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI) against accountancy firm Ernst &amp; Whinney, now known as Ernst &amp; Young.
BCCI was closed by central banks in 1991 and collapsed with debts of more than $12 billion amid evidence of massive fraud and money laundering which has since led to a complex series of court cases, both criminal and civil, in several countries.
Judge Hugh Laddie said the claim by the liquidators of BCCI (Overseas), Deloitte &amp; Touche, that Ernst &amp; Whinney owed a duty of care to the bank was based "long on assertion and deficient on relevant facts".
Ernst &amp; Young said the original claim against its predecessor firm was for $10 billion but this was reduced to $3.5 billion in June 1995.
Following this judgement, the principal claim against Ernst &amp; Whinney now stands at around $1.7 billion in respect of the firm's 1985 and 1986 audit of BCCI Holdings SA and BCCI SA.
A similar claim remains outstanding against another international accountancy firm, Price Waterhouse, which took over as auditor to BCCI in 1987 when Ernst &amp; Whinney resigned.
"The BCCI liquidators have now had struck out, or been forced to withdraw, 85 percent of the claims originally brought against Ernst &amp; Whinney," said Ernst &amp; Young senior partner Nick Land. "We look forward to dealing with the remaining 15 percent in a similar fashion and to recovering our costs which are substantial."
Land attacked the liquidators for choosing to spend millions of pounds pursuing what he called "speculative and unfounded claims" rather than making money available to those who suffered losses from the BCCI collapse.
Deloitte &amp; Touche was not immediately available to comment on the judgement.
After a five year struggle, BCCI creditors began to receive payments last month. Deloitte &amp; Touche said it was making a payment of $2.65 billion, equal to 24.5 percent of their claims.
BCCI had assets of $24 billion and operations in 71 countries at the time of the collapse.
Lloyds TSB Group kicks off the UK bank reporting seson on February 14 and, despite trading at big premiums to the sector, is still favoured by analysts because of what they see as a well-positioned business mix.
Lloyds is expected to weigh in with over 2.4 billion stg in pre-tax profit and dividend per share of as much as 13p, accompanied by the highest return on equity in the sector at around 32 percent. In 1995, Lloyds TSB made 1.65 billion stg.
The bank's new chief executive Peter Ellwood will give voice to his plans for the group as he takes over from Brian Pitman.  
But with Pitman still at the bank as chairman, analysts are not concerned there will be a radical change of strategy.
David Poutney, banking analyst at Panmure Gordon, says he expects Lloyds TSB to make a pretax profit of 2.45 billion stg and pay a dividend of 12.6p per share. "The key thing is to see how the cost-cutting is coming through," Pountney said.
He estimates that savings from the 1995 merger between Lloyds and TSB will only have been between 75 and 100 million stg in 1996 but these will rise to 350 million stg in 1998 and the bank will be saving a further 50 million stg a year from its buyout of the minority of Lloyds Abbey Life.  
These transactions have taken Lloyds TSB's tier one capital ratio down to an expected six percent or just over and analysts say there will be little scope for the group to return capital until the second half of this year.
Even then, the bank seems to favour returning value through more generous dividends than through share repurchases, said John Leonard, banking analyst at Salomon Brothers.
Leonard expects a pretax profit of 2.456 million stg and a dividend payment of 12.6p per share, and he sees strong earnings growth at least for the next three years.  
Strategically in its core UK retail financial services business, Lloyds TSB wants to expand its life assurance presence, analysts said, and may do this by acquisition.
The current bidding battle for mutually-owned Scottish Amicable will give a pointer as to the price that Lloyds might have to pay for such an expansion.
Increasing its life assurance business would mean that Lloyds TSB continues to follow the strategy of building up the low-risk element of its earnings and an income stream that is both stable and high quality.  
In the figures for the second half of 1996, analysts expect to see evidence of continued growth in consumer lending and a bigger market share in mortgages, although the group is thought to have been less aggressive on the latter front in the second six months. -- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864.
A bumper crop of results from the six major British banks which start their reporting season next week should take aggregate pre-tax profit comfortably above 12 billion stg for 1996 from just over 10.8 billion stg in 1995.
Analysts also expect some of them to return surplus capital to shareholders, either in the form of share buybacks or generous dividend payments.
Leading the way on February 14 will be Lloyds TSB Group which, despite trading at a big premium to the sector, is still favoured by analysts because of its business mix.  
The bank's new chief executive Peter Ellwood is expected to give voice to his plans for the group as he takes over from Sir Brian Pitman.
Lloyds is expected to weigh in with over 2.4 billion stg in pretax profit and dividend per share of about 13p, accompanied by the highest return on equity at around 32 percent.
Next on the agenda will be Barclays on February 18, when many analysts are expecting another chapter in its series of share buybacks. The bank has already spent over 1.0 billion stg on these in the last 18 months.  
Profits are expected to rise to a consensus expectation of around 2.39 billion stg compared to 2.08 billion in 1995.
Barclays is expected to show strong growth in businesses like Barclaycard and consumer lending but its investment banking unit BZW, which has had a year of upheavals, could disappoint.
Barclays will be followed by the very different Standard Chartered, the London-based bank with a strong Far East franchise.
Some analysts have cut their earnings estimates slightly but StanChart's pretax profit is still seen rising to around 870 million stg from 661 million last time.  
Growth in consumer banking in Asia will be tempered by the decline in the dollar, a possible small upturn in costs and the sale of its profitable private banking unit last year.
A dividend of 14 or 15p per share is seen after 11p in 1995.
HSBC Holdings, the other London-based bank with huge Far East interests and the most profitable bank in the group, reports on March 3.
HSBC, which brings together Britain's Midland Bank, Hongkong Bank, Hang Seng Bank, and Marine Midland in the U.S., is expected to post pretax profits of some 4.6 billion stg after 3.67 billion in 1995.  
Dividend per share is seen rising to around 40p from 32p the previous year.
HSBC is also expected to have been affected by the recent strength of sterling but will show profit gains in all its regions and units, with analysts bullish for the potential still to be unlocked in Asia.
National Westminster Bank, unlike HSBC, has a much stronger focus on investment banking and has spent a lot of money building up its NatWest Markets unit with several acquisitions and other investment.  
This has led to nervousness among investors and the shares underperformed the rest of the sector last year.
NatWest reports on February 25 and is expected to post pretax profits of 1.1 to 1.2 billion stg -- after disposal losses and exceptional asset write-downs -- and a full year dividend of 29p.
Many analysts also expect a further repurchase of shares.  
Finally, Abbey National, in the news currently because of its bid for mutual life assurance firm Scottish Amicable, reports on February 27 and is expected to show pretax profits of around 1.15 to 1.16 billion stg (after 1.03 billion in 1995) and a dividend of around 26p compared to 21.75p.
The Abbey's capital position has led to talk of a share buyback but the management is against this because of the large number of small shareholders on the register.
A special dividend could be on the cards but most analysts expect the Abbey to continue its relatively generous ordinary dividend policy.  
The figures are likely to have been helped by some growth in the mortgage market and by a good rise in consumer lending. -- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864.
