As Czech leaders finally get around to discuss a worrying surge in the trade deficit, analysts suggest a mixed bag of macro and micro-economic fixes, but most say devaluing the crown should be avoided.
Some say the deficit is a necessary product of economic reform and will turn around next year, while the gap between growth in imports, up a nominal 15.2 percent in January-August year-on-year, and exports, up 6.4 percent, will close.
Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus, who for months said there was nothing to worry about as the deficit soared, finally bowed to pressure and called a meeting for Tuesday to confront the gap.
But the meeting was abruptly postponed on Monday with cabinet officials citing the rising pressure of October's parliament session as a reason. A new date for the meeting has yet to be set, but officials say it will be "soon".
The trade deficit grew to a record 100 billion crowns ($3.68 billion) from January-August, the same as for the whole of 1995, and the markets are anxiously awaiting to see what, if anything, might be done.
Forecasts say that the current account deficit will also grow to around six percent of gross domestic product in 1996 from four percent last year.
When Klaus and three cabinet members, plus central bank Governor Josef Tosovsky and Czech Statistical Bureau chairman Edvard Outrata, finally discuss possible fixes for the rapidly expanding gap, they will have heard plenty of advice.
Many analysts say capital inflows can finance the deficit in the short term and urge moves, other than devaluation, that would gradually improve the competitiveness of Czech exporters.
Others suggest measures that could bring immediate relief, including import charges and fiscal adjustment.
GOVERNMENT SHOULD AIM FOR BUDGET SURPLUS NEXT YEAR
"The reaction should come immediately, before the deficit becomes unmanageable," said Vladimir Kreidl, economist at Prague's Patria Finance.
Klaus's government should not only pass its fifth straight balanced budget, but fight for a 1997 surplus of one or two percent of GDP. Other fiscal restrictions could be imposed to help cut domestic demand for imports, he said.
"Fiscal restriction is the most effective tool for reducing the deficit," Kreidl said, adding that the government should back private savings and a fully-funded pension system.
STRUCTURAL REFORMS NEEDED TO BOOST COMPETITIVENESS
Kreidl said more attention was needed to improve the capital markets which would strengthen currency inflow. Speeding up privatisation by sell-offs to strategic foreign investors would also boost competitiveness, he said.
"Czech exporters must become more cost competitive," said Jiri Huebner, Czech and Slovak team director for the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).
"There is a need for substantial investments in new plant and technology...to improve productivity."
The government has contended that many of the imports which are fuelling the deficit are modernising Czech industry, which should eventually produce higher export output, but Huebner said more targeted policies were necessary.
He advocated an acceleration of depreciation on new capital expenditures and relaxing tax write-offs of bad debts to spark The government must separate investment funds from bank management to ensure shareholders' interests are a priority, not the credit activity of the parent bank, he said. "The government should prohibit bankers from the credits side of the business (from sitting) on company boards," he said.
IMPORT CURBS MAY HELP AS WESTERN ECONOMIES STAGNATE
Josef Poeschl, Czech specialist at the Vienna Institute for Comparative Economic Studies (WIIW) said that the immediate problem was the poor economic performance of West European economies.
"It is an economic law that if a stagnating economy is trading with a growing one, the latter will be faced with a deterioration of the trade balance," he said.
Poeschl suggested imposing temporary import surcharges and higher taxation on some commodities which are mostly imported.
"But if the Czech deficit does not shrink, a devaluation (of the Czech crown) will remain the only way out."
WORRIES ARE EXAGGERATED, EXPORTS WILL GROW NEXT YEAR
Some economists said the government should not panic.
"The increase of the trade deficit will stop in 1997 at 150 to 160 billion crowns," said Kamil Janacek, chief economist at Prague's Komercni Banka.
In 1997, the first effects of an investment wave will be felt, boosted by reviving demand on EU markets, especially the acceleration of economic growth in Germany, he said.
The Czechs will also benefit from a partial re-orientation of exporters toward neighbouring post-communist countries and the former Soviet Union.
Janacek said there will be a market-based weakening of the crown, from currently above parity with the central bank mark/dollar basket to below parity in the first half of 1997.
"This will help to accelerate exports, and to slow down imports," he said.
DEVALUATION WOULD DO MORE HARM THAN GOOD
"We think the country's trade deficit will likely stabilise in 1997...so, as you can guess, we have plenty to say about what the government shouldn't do," said Boris Gomez, analyst at ING Barings in Prague.
He pointed to a positive, yet gradual shift of exports from commodities to sophisticated finished goods, and development of eastern export markets with higher economic growth potential.
A crown devaluation "is not a painless cure and would do more damage than good to the small and open Czech economy that is heavily dependent on imports at this stage".
It would "generate a wage-price spiral" and hurt credibility, Gomez said. Import surcharges would also sap the economy of needed modernisation.
Gomez concludes that the government must remain committed to faster corporate restructuring, increased labour productivity growth and competitiveness, lower inflation, and continued fiscal discipline. ($1=27.18 Czech Crown)
The Czech engineering company CKD Holding a.s. said on Thursday that it had won two contracts totalling roughly $200 million to supply trams to the city of Manila in the Philipines.
The order by Manila's MRTC for trams to be used in its massive new mass transit project -- and to be produced at the CKD Tatra plant in Prague -- is welcome news to Czech industry which has been reeling from a rapidly expanding trade deficit.
"The object of the contracts is the supply of large-capacity trams to Manila," CKD spokesman Vaclav Brom told Reuters adding the order was for more than 70 large tram units.
The Czech Foreign Ministry said in a statement issued concurrently that the CKD contract was part of a "package of contracts" with Japan's Sumitomo Corp and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries as general suppliers for the project.
CKD said one contract was for the supply of trams totalling $104 million, the assembly of which would begin in the second half of 1997 with supply scheduled for sometime in 1998.
The second contract was a joint 10-year contract in which CKD would be responsible for maintenance and technical assistance for the trams along with training of the drivers, while Sumitomo would maintain the tracks and the depots.
The maintenance contract is worth $95 million to the Czech side alone, CKD said.
The Czech foreign ministry said the contracts were signed last week with the owner of the Manila project, MRTC.
"(The contracts' signing), in cooperation with the Japanese partners, open for Czech suppliers of tram units the possibility to penetrate into other Asia markets as well," the Czech foreign ministry said in a statement.
It said that Indonesia and the Peoples' Republic of China, were strong prospects for CKD trams, "especially since Mitsubishi does not produce trams, and with success in Manila, is prepared to coooperate with CKD."
The Czech merchandise trade deficit grew to a record eight-month total of 100 billion (corrects from million) crowns from January to August, the same as for the whole of 1996.
Many analysts see the Czech electric rail industry, which supplied trams for decades to the countries of the former Soviet Bloc, as a potential area where the country can narrow its yawning trade gap.
A senior U.S. Defence Department official on Tuesday dismissed Czech army detections of chemical agents released in the early days of the Gulf War, saying the incidents were not verifiable by American equipment.
Amid growing criticism that the Pentagon fumbled reports of U.S. troops' exposure to nerve gas agents in 1991, U.S. Assistant Secretary of Defence Theodore Prociv said the Pentagon still viewed the Czech findings as false alarms.
"What we agree to is what we can verify," Prociv, who is in charge of the Pentagon division on chemical weapons use, told reporters during a visit to the Czech Defense Ministry.
"Every now and then (during the Gulf War) we would get an alarm and we couldn't verify it. So our position is that without the verification, it's not a true detection."
Thousands of troops based in northern Saudi Arabia during the Gulf War -- mostly Americans and Britons -- have reported respiratory ailments, skin rashes and muscle pain which they believe resulted from exposure to low-level chemical agents released during several U.S. bombings of Iraqi weapons caches.
The conditions, which have been dubbed the "Gulf War Syndrome", have been linked by veterans groups to several detections of chemical fallout from the bombings, including several detections by the Czech unit.
On Saturday, the New York Times newspaper quoted Czech soldiers and combat logs as saying that U.S. commanders ignored the warnings of chemical detections made by the Czech unit in January 1991 at the beginning of the war.
Prociv, specifically speaking about the Czech detections, said U.S. equipment could not verify these warnings. He did not discuss other incidents.
"We have looked at the Czech equipment as excellent, our verification system is excellent. The Czech detections were part of problem we were experiencing with some of the other detections," said Prociv, whose visit was officially to discuss U.S.-Czech cooperation to develop better chemical detection.
The Gulf issue exploded recently when Pentagon officials admitted that more than 15,000 American troops may have been exposed to nerve gas when American combat engineers blew up an Iraqi munition depot in March 1991.
In a heated hearing of the Senate Intelligence and Veterans Affiars committee in late September, several senior senators blasted the Pentagon for dragging its heels on the issue.
Alabama Senator Richard Shelby accused the Pentagon of "a shameful campaign of obstruction" in answering veterans claims, adding: "I found that Czech chemical units...accurately reported" the presence of chemical agents at various locations.
But the Pentagon's recent admission focused on the destruction of a chemical munitions cache near the southern Iraqi town of Kamisiyah in March 1991, a few days after the end of the war, not the Czech detections.
The Pentagon on Tuesday in Washington announced that it was notifying about 20,000 U.S. Gulf War troops that they may have been exposed to chemical weapons in the Marhc 1991 incident.
The Czech army experts serving in the allied forces against Iraq detected category "G" agents such as Sarin on January 19, 1991 in a 30 square km (19 sq mile) area near the town of Khafr al-Batn, in northern Saudi Arabia near the border with Iraq.
The Czech unit said it also detected incidents of a type of mustard gas between January 20 and 24, in an area 10 km (six miles) from the King Khaled military city which housed thousands of Saudi soldiers.
The Czech merchandise trade deficit jumped 16.4 billion crowns in July, the largest monthly increase in the country's history, but forecast tourism revenue and the structure of imports tempered analysts' concerns.
The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) said on Monday that the July increase put the seven-month trade deficit at 85.3 billion crowns, after a 14 billion crown shortfall in June drove the half-year deficit to 68.87 billion crowns.
"This shows that the trade gap is still widening, this is the bad news," said Radek Maly, economist at Citibank Prague.
"But when you look at the actual composition of the deficit... a large part of this is stemming from the investment needs of Czech industry."
Imports between January to July grew 15.9 percent over the same seven-month period last year, while exports, hampered especially by lower demand in Germany, were up only 7.2 percent, the CSU said.
"Exports are lagging behind our expected growth rate," said Patria Finance economist Martin Kupka. "But the services balance will help improve the account."
Machinery and transport equipment accounted for 52.5 billion crowns of the total seven-month deficit, while the balance for consumer goods actually showed an 857 million crown surplus, despite a sharp increase in domestic demand.
Comments by the Czech National Bank Governor Josef Tosovsky on Friday ruling out a devaluation of the crown to boost exports convinced analysts that the central bank was not overly concerned with the overall Czech balance of payments picture.
"There really isn't a strong convincing reason why (the crown) should be devalued at this point of development," Kupka said, adding that the country's capital account surplus still should comfortably cover the current account deficit.
The services balance will be especially helped by the expected expansion of income from tourism, as strong first half revenues raised forecasts for total income from tourism in 1996 to $3.2 billion to $3.5 billion after $2.6 billion in 1995.
"The overall balance of invisibles (services including toursim) for this year should be around $1.8 to $1.9 billion, which will decrease the current account deficit," Maly said.
Economists are forecasting the 1996 current account deficit at between five to six percent of gross domestic product, compared with about four percent last year.
The overall number of tourist visits in the country was up 9.3 percent in the first half, year-on-year, and airport arrivals were up 48.4 percent.
Czech National Bank balance of payment figures for the first half of the year -- which will give clearer picture of the balance of services -- are expected to be released in the early weeks of September.
The tourism component of the first quarter balance of payments showed a net income of $261 million, on total tourism revenue of $581 million.
The overall current account however, posted a $505 million deficit in the first quarter.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
The Czech National Bank (CNB) has proposed merging savings bank Ceska Sporitelna, with foreign trade bank Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka a.s.(CSOB), and then privatising the new megabank which would be the largest in post-Communist Eastern Europe.
CNB spokesman Martin Svehla told Reuters that the proposal was part of a wide-ranging plan to privatise major stakes in the "Big Four" Czech banks, which had been submitted to the cabinet to prepare the banks for stiffer foreign competition.
"Continuing with the privatisation of these banks has the aim of increasing the competitiveness of banks, to fit them more towards (entry into) the European Union and to increase their performance," Svehla said.
The CNB however proposed holding off on privatisation of the new combined Sporitelna and SOB for three to five years until the effects of the merger were analysed.
Analysts said the new bank, based on 1995 results, would have combined assets of roughly 540 billion crowns ($20 billion), making it by far the largest bank in Eastern Europe and over twice the size of the next largest bank, Komercni Banka.
It is not clear when the cabinet will debate the CNB proposals, but a senior central bank official said it might be on the agenda of next Wednesday's government meeting.
Jack Schrantz, equities analyst at Creditanstalt Prague, said the merger would bring economies of scale from necessary cuts in Sporitelna's and CSOB's bloated workforces.
"There's got to be a lot of overlap. In many of these departments you would see big staffing cuts," he said.
The CNB plan calls first for quick privatisation of the state's 31.5 percent in Investicni a Postovni Banka (IPB), a suggestion endorsed by the Finance Ministry earlier this month.
Nomura and Dutch ING NV are widely seen as potential partners for IPB, although top officials have declined comment on their possible interest in IPB.
The CNB plan proposes privatising shares in Komercni Banka -- seen as the plum of the Big Four in which the state holds a 49 percent stake -- only as a final step.
Svehla said the plan was written from the perspective of the CNB as a regulator, aiming to consolidate the strengths in the core of the the Czech banking system.
Whether it has the support of the full cabinet is still unclear. Privatisation of the Big Four has been a delicate political issue despite the country's reputation as the most aggressive post-Communist reformer.
Svehla said however that there was broad agreement in the CNB and the government on the need to go forward with privatisating remaining state stakes in the Big Four, which control more than 70 percent of the country's banking activity.
Ceska Sporitelna, in which the state still holds a 45 percent stake after the government's stock-for-citizens privatisation programme, is the largest state savings bank, where most Czechs kept their money during the communist era.
It still holds a majority of Czech retail deposits.
CSOB, born as a foreign trade bank in the former communist state system, is owned by a variety of Czech and Slovak state institutions including both central banks and the Czech National Property Fund, with small stakes privately held.
"I think it will take a lot of time to agree on the merger price (with Slovak institutions)," Schrantz warned. Slovak state institutions hold nearly 26 percent of CSOB shares
The daily Hospodarske Noviny quoted CNB governor Josef Tosovsky on Wednesday as saying large banks needed strong foreign partners which could cover share purchase from their own funds.
The market value of state stakes in the Big Four is about 55 billion crowns, according to the CNB, while the total value of Big Four shares is estimated at 111 billion crowns.
Such well-funded investors do not exist domestically, and the CNB wants to find them abroad through tenders.
Finance Minister Ivan Kocarnik said earlier this month that he also wanted the state's stake in IPB to be the first to be privatised, and that a strategic foreign partner taking the stake would be the most likely option. ($ = 26.87 Czech Crowns)
Czech President Vaclav Havel on Thursday said he was deeply disturbed by a Chinese court's 11-year prison sentence on dissident Wang Dan who was accused of plotting to overthrow the government.
Havel, himself a former dissident against a Communist government, said in a statement that after the 14-year sentence last December against Wei Jingsheng, a leader of China's small democracy movement, Wang's sentence was "unacceptable".
Wang, 27, was sentenced to 11 years in prison on Wednesday after a brief hearing. Wei was sentenced to 14 years in jail last December on a similar charge.
Havel said in the statement issued by his spokesman, that Wang's sentence "was another example of the unacceptable understanding of the position of the citizen in society."
The statement added that Havel expressed his "deep dissatisfaction" over the decision.
It said Havel "considers it his obligation to express his solidarity with those who anywhere around the world express, in a non-violent way, their free-mindedness and desire for justice and elementary human rights."
Havel, once a dissident playwright imprisoned several times by a Communist government before its fall in 1989, has been a frequent diplomatic thorn in China's side.
The Czech president said earlier this year he regretted that Taiwan, which Bejing regards as a renegade province, is not a U.N. member. However, the Czechs officially still recognise only China as a sovereign state and not Taiwan.
Havel angered China last year with a highly publicised meeting with Taiwan's Premier Lien Chan, forcing a hurried re-statement of the Czechs' official "One-China Policy".
Earlier on Thusday, the Czech foreign ministry asked China's chief diplomat in Prague, charge' d'affaires Wang Zizhen, to the ministry where a statement of protest was read.
"The Czech Republic expresses its dissatisfaction over the conduct of the trial and the judgment carried out," said a text of the statement issued by the foreign ministry.
It said that although there were differences in traditions of understanding questions of human rights in different regions, "there exist certain universal principles of maintaining human rights which are necessary to respect".
Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Shen Guofang said in Beijing that the jailing was not a human rights issue but an ordinary legal matter.
The Czech ministry statement said criminalisation of freedom of speech was "a violation of elementary human rights".
Italy, seeking a larger role in helping to fold former East Bloc countries into NATO, believes it is better to integrate, and not isolate, fringe candidates like Slovakia and Romania, a senior Italian diplomat said.
During an official visit to Prague, Undersecretary for Foreign Affairs Piero Fassino said in an interview that Italy, as part of its new focus he called "Italian Ostpolitik", saw four countries as primary candidates for NATO's expansion.
"The position of Italy...is that the group of countries which definitely belong to NATO is Hungary, the Czech Republic, Poland and Slovenia," he said, but added "There's also a possiblity that Slovakia and Romania belong to that group."
He said it was important for Slovakia and Romania to execute agreements with Hungary aimed mainly at protecting the rights of ethnic Hungarians living in both countries.
Fassio said that before the West says "no" to Slovakia and Romania it was necessary to carefully determine whether they meet NATO's standards of democracy, but he added:
"If a country is integrated then we also have the right to require it to meet standards of the organisation it has joined."
"If it's isolated we can't demand anything," he said in the interveiw conducted late on Wednesday.
He gave an example of Turkey with which the EU has blocked establishing a free trade area because of concerns over Ankara's treatment of the country's Kurdish minority -- a move which, he said, has shown no results in solving the problem .
Both the EU and the United States have repeatedly lambasted Slovakia's government for slow democratic reforms and adopting laws threating to political opponents and ethnic minorities saying they might delay membership into "western structures".
Two such warnings came last week on the same day U.S. President Bill Clinton, without naming countries, set 1999 as his target for integrating the first wave of former Soviet bloc countries into NATO.
Fassio said it would be more useful to put fringe countries like Slovakia into the fold where more pressure can be applied.
"It is true that Slovakia is having problems fulfilling democratic principles, but the question is, 'do we isolate Slovakia or integrate Slovakia?'. I believe it is more useful to integrate it," he said.
He also stressed Slovakia's geographical position between the Czech Republic and the frontier of the former Soviet Union.
"I believe it is necessary to consider very carefully the position of Slovakia because Slovakia is in a geographically strategic place," he said.
Fassio said central and eastern Europe was now a priority of our Italy's foreign policy.
"Central Europe is a place which is key to the security of Europe, in this Italy has a direct interest in its political dynamics," he said. "And we have an interest to intenify our presence to support Italian economic considerations."
He said while Italy would "intensively" pursue stronger ties to the group of countries most likely to join NATO and the European Union, it would also instensively seek to strengthen relations with other post Communist countries.
He said this was especially true for Italy's Balkan neighbours, such as Bulgaria, Croatia and Albania.
Czech President Vaclav Havel said on Thursday he was deeply disturbed by a Chinese court's 11-year prison sentence on dissident Wang Dan on charges of plotting to overthrow the government.
Havel, himself a former dissident against a Communist government, said in a statement that after last year's jailing of Wei Jingsheng, father of China's small democracy movement, on similar subversion charges, Wang's sentence was "unacceptable".
Wang, 27, was jailed for 11 years on Wednesday after a brief hearing.
Wei Jingsheng, freed in 1993 after serving all but six months of an earlier 15-year term for subversion, was rearrested the following year and formally sentenced in December 1996 to another 14-year term. He is now 47.
Havel's statement, issued by his spokesman, said that Wang's sentence "was another example of the unacceptable understanding of the position of the citizen in society."
The statement added that Havel expressed his "deep dissatisfaction" over the decision.
It said Havel "considers it his obligation to express his solidarity with those who anywhere around the world express, in a non-violent way, their free-mindedness and desire for justice and elementary human rights."
Havel, who as a dissident playwright was imprisoned several times by the Communist government before its fall in 1989, has been a frequent diplomatic thorn in China's side.
He angered China last year with a highly publicised meeting with Taiwan's Premier Lien Chan, forcing a hurried restatement of the Czechs' official "One-China Policy".
Earlier this year the Czech president said that he regretted that Chinese Nationalist-ruled Taiwan, which Bejing regards as a renegade province, is not a U.N. member. However, the Czechs officially still recognise only China as a sovereign state.
Earlier on Thursday, the Czech Foreign Ministry called in China's chief diplomat in Prague, charge d'affaires Wang Zizhen, to read him a statement of protest.
"The Czech Republic expresses its dissatisfaction over the conduct of the trial and the judgment carried out," said a text of the statement issued by the Foreign Ministry.
It said that, although there were differences in traditions of understanding questions of human rights in different regions, "there exist certain universal principles of maintaining human rights which are necessary to respect".
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang said in Beijing on Thursday that the jailing was not a human rights issue but an ordinary legal matter.
The Czech ministry statement said, however, that criminalisation of freedom of speech was "a violation of elementary human rights".
The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) on Friday cut its forecast for 1996 real gross domestic product (GDP) growth as lower export demand, especially from neighbouring Germany, fuels the trade deficit and eases Czech expansion.
The CSU cut its full-year 1996 GDP projection to 4.8 percent growth -- the same as the real result for 1995 -- from its 5.1 percent year-on-year prognosis made at the beginning of August.
Czech GDP grew a real 4.3 percent in the first half of this year, according to the latest results.
In its report on Friday, the CSU said it expected full year 1997 real GDP growth at between 5.1 to 5.6 percent.
The CSU revised its forecast for the full-year 1996 current account deficit to 6.9 percent of GDP from 5.7 percent as a ballooning merchandise trade deficit continues to bite.
It said the current account deficit would grow to between 6.8 to 7.4 percent of GDP in 1997.
The bureau said the merchandise trade deficit would grow to 163.3 billion crowns by end-1996 from the roughly 111 billion crown deficit posted for the first three quarters this year and compared with roughly 96 billion crowns for the whole of 1995.
But the bureau said export growth should accelerate in 1997 to between 10.0 to 11.4 percent from 6.2 percent this year, while import growth would be between 14 to 16.2 percent next year from 15.4 percent in 1996.
It forecast the 1997 merchandise trade deficit at 200 to 210 billion crowns.
"It is realistic to forecast, in view of the massive investment into the (Czech) economy in the past several years and expected growth of (EU) economies... that the development of the (current account deficit) at the turn of 1997-98 would switch toward (the deficit's) reduction," the CSU said.
The bureau blamed mainly a stagnation in the first three quarters in the German economy -- which accounts for just over a third of Czech export demand -- and in the whole EU for the revised trade figures and the lower GDP forecast.
"I think it's realistic to suggest that the (Czech trade situation) won't be much different next year," said Charles Robertson an independent East Europe analyst.
"But the big question will be whether there will be some improvement toward the end of next year. If this carries on into 1998 and 1999 there are going to be big worries."
He expected that, despite the poor trade results, the Czech crown should be able to stay within the central bank's band of plus/minus 7.5 percent from the mid-point of the mark/dollar basket to which it is fixed each day.
After the CSU announcement, the crown remained steady, trading in a tight range around the central bank's Friday fixing at 26.960 to the dollar and 17.739 to the mark, or 2.75 percent above parity with the basket.
The CSU slightly eased its forecast for full-year 1996 inflation to 8.9 percent from 9.0 percent in August, and said consumer prices would slow to between 7.5 percent to 8.0 percent for the whole of next year.
It said unemployment would remain at one of the lowest levels in Europe, but said it would edge up slightly to between 3.3 to 3.5 percent by the end of 1997 from 3.3 percent at the end of this year.
The slowdown of inflation -- to an average of 7.5 to 8.0 percent by the end of 1997 from 8.9 percent at the end of 1996 -- would be helped by a slowing in real wage growth to between 8.1 to 8.5 percent next year from 9.1 percent in 1996, the CSU said.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
Italy, seeking a larger role in helping to fold former East Bloc countries into NATO, believes it is better to integrate, and not isolate, fringe candidates like Slovakia and Romania, a senior Italian diplomat said.
During an official visit to Prague, Undersecretary for Foreign Affairs Piero Fassino told reporters late on Wednesday that Italy, as part of its new focus he called "Italian Ostpolitik", saw four countries as primary candidates for NATO's expansion.
"The position of Italy...is that the group of countries which definitely belong to NATO is Hungary, the Czech Republic, Poland and Slovenia," he said, but added: "There's also a possiblity that Slovakia and Romania belong to that group."
He said it was important for Slovakia and Romania to implement agreements with Hungary aimed mainly at protecting the rights of ethnic Hungarians living in both countries.
Fassio said that before the West says "no" to Slovakia and Romania it was necessary to determine carefully whether they meet NATO's standards of democracy, but he added:
"If a country is integrated then we also have the right to require it to meet standards of the organisation it has joined.
"If it's isolated we can't demand anything," he said.
Both the EU and the United States have repeatedly lambasted Slovakia's government for slow democratic reforms and adopting laws threating to political opponents and ethnic minorities saying they might delay membership into "Western structures".
Fassio said it would be more useful to put fringe countries like Slovakia into the fold where more pressure can be applied.
"It is true that Slovakia is having problems fulfilling democratic principles, but the question is, 'Do we isolate Slovakia or integrate Slovakia?'. I believe it is more useful to integrate it," he said. REUTER
The Czech consumer price index rose 0.5 percent in October putting year-on-year inflation at 8.7 percent, down from 8.9 percent in September, the Czech Statistical Bureau said on Friday.
The moving 12-month average of inflation remained unchanged at 8.7 percent in October. The figures were most influenced by a full percentage point rise in food, drinks and tobacco prices during the month and a 1.2 percent rise in clothing prices.
Analysts said the overall result was in line with expectations or even a bit lower, as the second consecutive month of slowing in the year-on-year figure convinced some that the year-end rate would end below nine percent.
"This (October's inflation result) is slightly better than expected, but not a big surprise," said Vladimir Kreidl, analyst at Patria Finance said.
"Our forecast in unchanged at nine percent for average inflation (at the end of 1996), but 8.8 percent seems to be achievable," he said.
Kreidl added that October's result was aided more by a strong Czech crown keeping import prices in check and relatively slow growth in industrial producer prices which have been rising at a roughly four percent annual rate.
Industry and Trade Minister Vladimir Dlouhy told a news conference the result was expectated and "for the whole year, I would like to see (average inflation) at below 8.7 percent."
The government had forecast average inflation to slow a full percentage point in 1996 to 8.0 percent, but a surge in domestic demand kept prices stubbornly over nine percent in the first half of the year.
The Czechs have been encouraged by the Organisation for Economic Coopoeration and Development (OECD), the group of the most industrialised countries to which the Czechs now have membership, to do more to stem inflation.
"From the perspective of an OECD member, our inflation is high ...our economic policy has to lead to a lowering inflation suggested by OECD and the Maastricht treaty," Dlouhy said.
The Czech National Bank (CNB) in June tightened monetary policy by raising its key interest rates and expanding minimum reserve requirements to dampen domestic demand.
The central bank said last week the moves served to pull its key M2 measure of money supply growth at the end of August to the low end of its 13-17 percent 1996 target at 13.2 percent, from over 20 percent earlier this year.
But Kreidl said the effects of the money supply tightening should not be evident until well into 1997, and he did not expect the CNB to ease credit rates at least until then.
-- John Mastrini, Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
Elections to the new Czech Senate over the next two weekends will only thicken the country's political fog, but an indecisive electorate has already been priced into the financial markets, analysts said on Monday.
Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus has been stuck in an uneasy political co-habitation since his centre-right coalition fell two seats short of a majority in the lower house on a strong second place showing by the Social Democrats in June.
Analysts say the Senate elections should not signal any clear shift in the political winds, and the markets will be stuck wondering if the three-party conservative government can hang on for its four-year term which runs through the year 2000.
They say only an unexpected clear victory for the opposition Social Democrats over Klaus's Civic Democratic Party (ODS) would hurt the Czech crown or capital markets.
"The markets will definitely turn down (on a Social Democrat victory), same as in the (lower house) elections," said Vladimir Jaros, research director at Prague investment house Wood &amp; Co.
But he added that market expectations "are for ODS to win".
Klaus and his team of economists and technocrats became standard-bearers for post-Communist reforms after taking power in 1992 with a 12-seat majority in the lower house.
The markets, pollsters and pundits were caught off guard when the Social Democrats -- who have been ambivalent to balanced budgets and privatisations -- did so well.
The crown fell a full percentage point on the June results, and the stock market lost more than four percent of its value before stabilising when a minority government was confirmed.
"I think investors (this time) have already included in their behaviour expectations of inconclusive results," said Zdenek Bakala, chairman of Prague-based Patria Finance.
ODS and the Social Democrats are running close in recent opinion polls at around 25 percent support each, after ODS won the June vote with 29.6 percent, with CSSD at 26.4 percent.
But since the Senate vote is a first-past-the-post poll in individual constituencies, forecasting victory is difficult when gauged only by available party preference surveys.
Local analysts see Klaus's ODS and its two coalition allies winning a majority of the Senate's 81 seats, but they do not expect a result giving the coalition or opposition a clear advantage to push for an early election in the lower house.
"I don't think we are going to be facing a risk of extraordinary (lower house) elections, and I doubt that ODS will be willing to take that risk," Jaros said.
The two-round Senate polls, beginning on Friday with runoffs the next weekend, are not likely alter the course of the country's legislative agenda.
The stock market and the Czech crown have had diverging fates since the June vote, for reasons beyond election fears.
The crown has remained strong, despite a growing trade gap, consistently trading in a tight range between 2.5 to 3.0 percent above the central bank's mark/dollar basket.
The crown got a boost in October when four Social Democrats crossed over to vote with the government in approving the first draft of the 1997 budget.
Meanwhile, the Prague Stock Exchange (PSE) has been rocked, not by the political situation, but by discontent from foreign investors unhappy with the country's opaque trading environment.
The PSE's official PX50 index has been on a steady slide since late summer, dipping below 500 last week, heading toward its historic record low of 387.
Few think the Senate elections will serve to revive the securities markets, as market reform is not a high priority.
The Czech government's tourism office on Wednesday forecast record income from foreign visits in 1996, as "Golden Prague" and its environs put a silver lining in otherwise dreary Czech trade figures.
Income from foreign visitors, crucial in stemming the Czech current account deficit, could surge to top $3.5 billion this year, up from a record $2.87 billion in 1995, said director Jiri Cech of the Economics Ministry's tourism division.
He said 1996 record revenue from tourism in the Czech Republic, which has soared since Communist rule there ended in 1989, would range "from $3.2 to $3.5 billion or more".
The Czech National Bank balance of payment figures for the first half of the year -- which will give clearer picture of the balance of services -- are expected to be released in the first half of September.
The tourism component of the first quarter balance of payments showed a net inflow of $261 million with total tourism receipts of $581 million, and analysts have forecast first half total tourism revenues at about $1.6 billion.
The overall current account however posted a $505 million deficit in the first quarter, mostly due to a ballooning merchandise trade deficit.
The trade deficit in goods has accelerated in recent months, and a record gap in July of 16.4 billion crowns ($627 million) raised the seven-month 1996 deficit to 85.3 billion crowns ($3.26 billion).
Economists are forecasting the 1996 current account deficit at between five to six percent of gross domestic product, compared with about four percent last year.
But just in the first half of the year, record tourist visits to the country, and especially to the historical centre of the capital Prague where tourists often outnumber residents in the high season, topped most expectations.
The overall number of tourist visits to the country was up 11.6 percent in the first half, year-on-year, to 44.7 million and airport arrivals were up 48.4 percent to 7.3 million, according to the Czech Statistical Bureau.
Czech foreign travel abroad rose 10.2 percent in the first half of the year to 4.3 million visits abroad for a country of 10.4 million residents. Czechs spent $320 million abroad in the first quarter.
Independent analysts are forecasting a surplus in the Czech balance of services, including tourism of $1.8 to $2.0 billion this year. ($1=26.17 Czech Crowns)
The head of the Czech Republic's largest bank is on a crusade to clean up the emerging post-communist banking sector from within and, he hopes, from a seat in the Senate.
Dr Richard Salzmann, the bow-tied president of Komercni Banka, says the Czech banking system is fundamentally sound and getting stronger despite a handful of recent failures among smaller institutions.
But, he says, the whole Czech economy needed a dose of "fairness and transparency" to clean up old habits of secrecy and ensure banks are not run as private fiefdoms.
He is standing for a seat in the newly-established Czech Senate at elections in November, saying he wants to help bring back "good manners" to the banking industry and restore the reputation of the Czech finance sector.
Better risk management is crucial, according to Salzmann.
He said that Komercni and the three other large banks -- which comprise about 80 percent of all Czech banking activity -- had bolstered their reserves to meet Western banking standards, and had developed more effective risk management techniques.
"As concerns "The Big Four', (the situation) is, for sure, very good, because all these big four banks in the last years have built up huge reserves," Salzmann said during a visit to the PGA Czech Open golf tournament here recently.
"It's true that we have an unusually high proportion of risky loans in our portfolios, which is partially inherited from the past. Other (bad loans) were made in this era of euphoria, after the (1989 revolution ending Communism)."
He said from branches to front office, Komercni has stepped up risk management techniques which have now been also adopted by Ceska Sporitelna,  Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, and Investicni a Postovni Banka -- the others in "The Big Four".
"Now we are in the final stage when we are building a central risk assessment department, which supervises all kinds of risks, not only from credit but also from the capital market operations and from the foreign operations."
FAILURES EXPOSE PROBLEMS
Salzmann said he believed the recent failure of Kreditni Banka a.s., a medium-sized bank which became the eighth to shut in the post-communist era, stemmed, like others before it, from greed and naivete.
"I would blame mostly the founders of the banks, because they provided for themselves various kinds of privileges. They were, in most cases in my opinion, those who did not come with the intention to rob the money and disappear or something like that, I don't say that," Salzmann contended.
"But many of them founded the bank with false ideas that (their) bank would be able to provide themselves with easier conditions and lower prices for money for their internal use."
Salzmann said these bad lending practices spiraled until the banks were forced to raise their rates and tighten lending conditions for regular customers.
"This snowballed from the naivete at the beginning," he said.
Kreditni suffered losses reportedly at more than 10 billion Czech crowns ($381.1 million) through a series of large loan defaults and on August 8 the central bank withdrew its banking licence.
The local press has been ripe with allegations of mismanagement and murky loan operations at many of the failed institutions, but criminal investigations have yet to produce any charges.
Officials from Kreditni Banka have refused to comment on reasons for its failure, but its controlling shareholder, the large insurer Ceska Pojistovna, chalked it up simply to bad decisions by bank management on loans and loan guarantees.
Salzmann, 67, said problems in the banking system were part of a bigger problem of honesty and fairness throughout the economy.
He said that if elected, he would push to expand the enforcement power of regulators to police dubious practices in banks, investment funds, and on the capital market, which is consistently hampered by charges of insider trading.
BANKER SEEKS POLITICAL PLATFORM
"My (candidacy), is to bring to this freshly-introduced capitalism more decency...a better field for good business," said Salzmann.
The erudite banker, who often recalls the days of thriving Czech capitalism between wars, said he would work in the Senate to establish an independent capital market watchdog like the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
Salzmann resigned as the chairman of the Prague Stock Exchange earlier this year -- a mostly honorary position -- to allow his friend and party colleague Tomas Jezek to take over as a full-time, hands-on leader of the bourse.
Both Jezek and Salzmann will run for the Senate in separate constituencies, and both support starting up a market-supported watchdog beefed up from the currently understaffed and underfunded Finance Ministry regulation department.
But Salzmann, who said he cannot by contract retire from the bank for at least one more year, rejects charges that his membership in the Senate while heading the country's largest banking group would constitute a conflict of interest. There is no legal requirement in the Czech Republic for legislators to suspend their business interests when they enter parliament.
Salzmann insists he would never use his Senate seat to gain advantages for his bank, but he makes no apologies about using his seat to try to improve the banking and business environment overall.
"I will support all such measures to bring more fairness, decency, good manners, transparency, all those principals which are, of course, favourable for the banks. So in that sense I will be perhaps in a conflict of interest," Salzmann said.
When asked if that meant he would support laws which would separate the banks and their investment arms, many of which control major chunks of the Czech economy -- like at Komercni Banka -- Salzmann answered:
"Yes, transparency, mandatory transparency." ($1=26.24 Czech Crown)
The head of the Czech Republic's largest bank is on a crusade to clean up the emerging post-communist banking sector from within and, he hopes, from a seat in the Senate.
Dr Richard Salzmann, the bow-tied president of Komercni Banka, says the Czech banking system is fundamentally sound and getting stronger despite a handful of recent failures among smaller institutions.
But, he says, the whole Czech economy needed a dose of "fairness and transparency" to clean up old habits of secrecy and ensure banks are not run as private fiefdoms.
He is standing for a seat in the newly-established Czech Senate at elections in November, saying he wants to help bring back "good manners" to the banking industry and restore the reputation of the Czech finance sector.
Better risk management is crucial, according to Salzmann.
He said that Komercni and the three other large banks -- which comprise about 80 percent of all Czech banking activity -- had bolstered their reserves to meet Western banking standards, and had developed more effective risk management techniques.
"As concerns 'The Big Four', (the situation) is, for sure, very good, because all these big four banks in the last years have built up huge reserves," Salzmann said during a visit to the PGA Czech Open golf tournament here recently.
"It's true that we have an unusually high proportion of risky loans in our portfolios, which is partially inherited from the past. Other (bad loans) were made in this era of euphoria, after the (1989 revolution ending Communism)."
He said from branches to front office, Komercni has stepped up risk management techniques which have now been also adopted by Ceska Sporitelna, Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, and Investicni a Postovni Banka -- the others in "The Big Four".
"Now we are in the final stage when we are building a central risk assessment department, which supervises all kinds of risks, not only from credit but also from the capital market operations and from the foreign operations."
FAILURES EXPOSE PROBLEMS
Salzmann said he believed the recent failure of Kreditni Banka a.s., a medium-sized bank which became the eighth to shut in the post-communist era, stemmed, like others before it, from greed and naivete.
"I would blame mostly the founders of the banks, because they provided for themselves various kinds of privileges. They were, in most cases in my opinion, those who did not come with the intention to rob the money and disappear or something like that, I don't say that," Salzmann contended.
"But many of them founded the bank with false ideas that (their) bank would be able to provide themselves with easier conditions and lower prices for money for their internal use."
Salzmann said these bad lending practices spiraled until the banks were forced to raise their rates and tighten lending conditions for regular customers.
"This snowballed from the naivete at the beginning," he said.
Kreditni suffered losses reportedly at more than 10 billion Czech crowns ($381.1 million) through a series of large loan defaults and on August 8 the central bank withdrew its banking licence.
The local press has been ripe with allegations of mismanagement and murky loan operations at many of the failed institutions, but criminal investigations have yet to produce any charges.
Officials from Kreditni Banka have refused to comment on reasons for its failure, but its controlling shareholder, the large insurer Ceska Pojistovna, chalked it up simply to bad decisions by bank management on loans and loan guarantees.
Salzmann, 67, said problems in the banking system were part of a bigger problem of honesty and fairness throughout the economy.
He said that if elected, he would push to expand the enforcement power of regulators to police dubious practices in banks, investment funds, and on the capital market, which is consistently hampered by charges of insider trading.
BANKER SEEKS POLITICAL PLATFORM
"My (candidacy), is to bring to this freshly-introduced capitalism more decency...a better field for good business," said Salzmann.
The erudite banker, who often recalls the days of thriving Czech capitalism between wars, said he would work in the Senate to establish an independent capital market watchdog like the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
Salzmann resigned as the chairman of the Prague Stock Exchange earlier this year -- a mostly honorary position -- to allow his friend and party colleague Tomas Jezek to take over as a full-time, hands-on leader of the bourse.
Both Jezek and Salzmann will run for the Senate in separate constituencies, and both support starting up a market-supported watchdog beefed up from the currently understaffed and underfunded Finance Ministry regulation department.
But Salzmann, who said he cannot by contract retire from the bank for at least one more year, rejects charges that his membership in the Senate while heading the country's largest banking group would constitute a conflict of interest. There is no legal requirement in the Czech Republic for legislators to suspend their business interests when they enter parliament.
Salzmann insists he would never use his Senate seat to gain advantages for his bank, but he makes no apologies about using his seat to try to improve the banking and business environment overall.
"I will support all such measures to bring more fairness, decency, good manners, transparency, all those principals which are, of course, favourable for the banks. So in that sense I will be perhaps in a conflict of interest," Salzmann said.
When asked if that meant he would support laws which would separate the banks and their investment arms, many of which control major chunks of the Czech economy -- like at Komercni Banka -- Salzmann answered:
"Yes, transparency, mandatory transparency."
($1=26.24 Czech Crown)
The Czech government's tourism office on Wednesday forecast record income from foreign visits in 1996, as "Golden Prague" and its environs put a silver lining in otherwise dreary Czech trade figures.
Income from foreign visitors, crucial in stemming the Czech current account deficit, could surge to top $3.5 billion this year, up from a record $2.87 billion in 1995, director Jiri Cech of the Economics Ministry's tourism division told Reuters.
He said 1996 record revenue from tourism in the Czech Republic, which has yet to see any slowing in the flood of tourists which burst in after the end of Communism in 1989, would range "from $3.2 to $3.5 billion or more".
The Czech National Bank balance of payment figures for the first half of the year -- which will give clearer picture of the balance of services -- are expected to be released in the first half of September.
The tourism component of the first quarter balance of payments showed a net inflow of $261 million with total tourism receipts of $581 million, and analysts have forecast first half total tourism revenues at about $1.6 billion.
The overall current account however posted a $505 million deficit in the first quarter, mostly due to a ballooning merchandise trade deficit.
The trade deficit in goods has accelerated in recent months, and a record gap in July of 16.4 billion crowns ($627 million) raised the seven-month 1996 deficit to 85.3 billion crowns ($3.26 billion).
Economists are forecasting the 1996 current account deficit at between five to six percent of gross domestic product, compared with about four percent last year.
But just in the first half of the year, record tourist visits to the country, and especially to the historical centre of the capital Prague where tourists often outnumber residents in the high season, topped most expectations.
The overall number of tourist visits in the country was up 11.6 percent in the first half, year-on-year, to 44.7 million and airport arrivals were up 48.4 percent to 7.3 million, according to the Czech Statistical Bureau.
Czech foreign travel abroad rose 10.2 percent in the first half of the year to 4.3 million visits abroad for a country of 10.4 million residents. Czechs spent $320 million abroad in the first quarter.
Independent analysts are forecasting a surplus in the Czech balance of services, including tourism of $1.8 to $2.0 billion this year. ($1=26.17 Czech Crowns)
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
Volkswagen AG Czech unit, Skoda Auto a.s., on Friday launched sales of its new sedan, the Octavia, hoping to kill off jokes about Communist-era quality, and pull the company into profit.
Officials said the new model, built on a common VW platform designed for the 1998 Audi A3 and upgraded Golf, would expand Skoda's market penetration by putting the company's first post-Communist mid-sized car in showrooms worldwide.
"Our strategic markets are in central and eastern Europe, western Europe, and we are present in some Asian markets. We expect to sell Octavias successfully in all of our 66 markets," marketing director Frank Farsky told Reuters.
The new sedan received a hero's welcome at showrooms around the capital Prague on Friday as crowds gathered to watch dealers mount the Octavia on viewing pedestals.
Exports of the front-grilled Octavia -- a major step away from the boxy sub-compacts which made the Communist-era Skoda the butt of automotive jokes worldwide -- to Europe and beyond later this year or in the first quarter next year.
The car will be available on the domestic market with a choice of three petrol and two diesel engines, with the top-of-the-line SLX automatic model priced at 497,900 crowns, and a base model priced at 335,700 crowns.
"In the Czech market its more or less toward a luxury- class car by the nature the purchasing power and the nature of the car market itself," Farsky said.
"In western Europe it is a medium sized car that will belong to the middle class market, and in Asian markets I think it will be toward the luxury class," he added.
Skoda will make 64,000 Octavias in 1997 at its new purpose-built plant in Mlada Boleslav north of Prague, and raise production to 90,000 in 1998.
Skoda Chairman Ludvik Kalma said earlier this year he expected 20,000 Octavias to be sold annually on the home market, with the rest exported to Europe and points East.
"I think customers who would be looking for a used car would look at a Skoda Octavia, I think that people who own a smaller car would look at Octavia," Farsky said.
The company lost 1.621 billion crowns last year due to heavy investments into the new factory, but Kalma said the firm should come close to breaking even this year.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
Czech National Bank (CNB) Governor Josef Tosovsky said that despite objections from some cabinet officials, it was too early to write off the central bank's plan to create post-Communist Europe's largest bank.
Tosovsky said he expected the full cabinet to consider "in a few weeks" the CNB's plan which includes the proposed merger of the savings bank Ceska Sporitelna a.s. with the foreign trade bank  Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka a.s. (CSOB).
"There are only some preliminary opinions of some official who saw our proposal. Because most of the members of the cabinet didn't see our proposal, so it's too early," he told Reuters Financial TV in an interview to be broadcast later.
"I don't know what will be the decision of the government."
The central bank has submitted a broad plan seeking to fully privatise state holdings in the "Big Four" largest banks, but Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus said last week the cabinet needed more concrete details.
The most controversial plan calls for Sporitelna and CSOB to merge to create a bank with over $20 billion in assets and then to privatise the state's stake in the newly-created bank several years later after the merger is analysed.
Klaus has reacted coolly to the merger plan, saying it was akin to fusing Prague's top two soccer teams Sparta and Slavia, something unthinkable for many Czechs.
The plan has also been criticised by a key Klaus adviser, Martin Kocourek, and by officials at both institutions who said they want to preserve the specific character of each bank.
But the central bank's plan, which Tosovsky said is from the point of view of a regulator to promote stability of the entire banking system, seeks to create a bank which would compete better against large western European institutions.
"We feel that it would be possible to find some closer ties between CSOB and (Sporitelna), and we see a merger could be made," Tosovsky said, but added that "it would require more professional analysis."
Tosovsky said that if the merger plan was not adopted then a strategic foreign partner "would be welcome in CSOB -- this means the fast privatisation with a foreign strategic partner, but this is only if the idea about the merger is not accepted."
A variety of Czech and Slovak state institutions, including the central banks, hold CSOB shares. Ceska Sporitelna has had some stakes privatised through the voucher-privatisation programme, but the state still holds a 45 percent stake.
The CNB and the Finance Ministry have both called for the fast privatisation of the state's roughly one-third stake in Investicni a Postovni Banka to a strategic foreign partner. Japan's Nomura and Dutch ING NV are widely seen as frontrunners seeking IPB shares.
Tosovsky said the roughly 49 percent stake in the largest commercial bank, Komercni Banka a.s. should be divided into smaller units and sold to a variety of investors, not a single foreign strategic partner.
"As concerns Komercni Banka, there is no rush as concerns the privatisation but no reason to delay as well," he said.
"(Komercni), in our opinion, doesn't need a foreign strategic partner, and there could be small stakes and more investors could be invited to enter into the this bank."
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
Volkswagen AG Czech unit, Skoda Auto a.s., on Friday launched sales of its new sedan, the Octavia, hoping to kill off jokes about Communist-era quality, and pull the company into profit.
Officials said the new model, built on a common VW platform designed for the 1998 Audi A3 and upgraded Golf, would expand Skoda's market penetration by putting the company's first post-Communist mid-sized car in showrooms worldwide.
"Our strategic markets are in central and eastern Europe, western Europe, and we are present in some Asian markets. We expect to sell Octavias successfully in all of our 66 markets," marketing director Frank Farsky told Reuters.
The new sedan received a heroe's welcome at showrooms around the capital Prague on Friday as crowds gathered to watch dealers mount the Octavia on viewing pedastals.
Exports of the front-grilled Octavia -- a major step away from the boxy sub-compacts which made the Communist-era Skoda the butt of automotive jokes worldwide --  to Europe and beyond later this year or in the first quarter next year.
The car will be available on the domestic market with a choice of three petrol and two diesel engines, with the top-of-the-line SLX automatic model priced at 497,900 crowns, and a base model priced at 335,700 crowns.
"In the Czech market its more or less toward a luxury- class car by the nature the purchasing power and the nature of the car market itself," Farsky said.
"In western europe it is a medium sized car that will belong to the middle class market, and in asian marekts I thinik it will be toward the luxury class," he added.
Skoda will make 64,000 Octavias in 1997 at its new purpose-built plant in Mlada Boleslav north of Prague, and raise production to 90,000 in 1998.
Skoda Chairman Ludvik Kalma said earlier this year he expected 20,000 Octavias to be sold annually on the home market, with the rest exported to Europe and points East.
"I think customers who would be looking for a used car would look at a Skoda Octavia, I think that people who own a smaller car would look at Octavia," Farsky said.
The company lost 1.621 billion crowns last year due to heavy investments into the new factory, but Kalma said the firm should come close to breaking even this year.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus kept his options open on whether the domination of his Civic Democratic Party (ODS) in this weekend's first round of Senate elections might encourage a quest for a larger mandate.
As results for the new upper house came in late on Saturday, Klaus reserved comment on possibly using his party's strength in the Senate races as a signal to seek new elections to the lower house in order to win back a majority government.
Klaus's ODS won 36.47 percent of the total vote on Saturday in the first test since his conservative three-party coalition lost its majority in June lower-house elections when the Social Democrats (CSSD) posted a surprising second place result.
This time the opposition CSSD won just 20.27 percent of the vote after falling about three percentage points short of the ODS's 29.6 percent in June. But voter turnout this time was very light making it difficult to draw broad conclusions.
Klaus, who like all ministers sits in the lower house, hedged his bets on possible early lower house elections.
"I've said many times this country does not need another election. It needs to function, work," Klaus said in a panel discussion on Czech Televisoin after the vote.
But he added: "If the Senate vote gives a chance to go forward, it'll be good for all of us."
The ODS put 76 candidates through to next weekend's runoff elections out of the 81 constituencies, and won three seats outright by taking more than 50 percent of the vote.
In 73 districts, ODS had the top candidate go into the runoff, while CSSD had 48 candidates in a runoff, but won no seats outright and had nobody on top in any constiuency.
Exactly seven years since the revolution which would end Communism began, only about one in three eligible Czechs voted, less than half the turnout for the previous three lower-house elections since the 1989 revolution.
Analysts said many Czechs felt that the upper house, which will have limited legislative powers and act more as an advisory body, was redundant.
Pre-election opinion polls showed many people did not did not know who was running in their district, and there was a wide misunderstanding of the two-round voting system.
But no one really knows how the dynamics will change in next weekend's runoffs or if turnout will improve.
"The situation is not as rosy as it may appear..." cautioned ODS party vice-chairman, Foreign Minister Josef Zieleniec even after the strong result for ODS was apparent.
Analysts said that it would be too soon to declare the first round vote an unmitigated success for ODS, as the second round will be much more polarised and the choices between two candidates instead of many will be distinct.
Czech analysts on Sunday said the domination of pro-market Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus's party in the weekend's first-round Senate elections would have a neutral to mildly positive effect on local financial markets on Monday.
But they said thin voter turnout made it hard for Klaus and his three-party coalition to conclude that the electorate had swung back to their clear favour after they lost their majority in June lower house elections.
"Nobody can jump to conclusions based on these figures, because if you take the total (voter) turnout, it's nothing," said Radek Maly, economist at Citibank Prague.
"We might see a mild strengthening of the crown, but we don't think any major movement," he added.
The currency has traded in a tight range recently at around 26.9 to the dollar and 17.8 to the mark or roughly 2.5 percent above parity with the central bank's mark/dollar basket.
But Maly stressed that the market was focused more on macroeconomic fundamentals and not political influences.
Klaus's rightwing ODS on Saturday won 36.47 percent nationwide compared with 20.47 percent for the second place centre-left opposition Social Democrats (CSSD), with the rest thinly split among coalition parties and the Communists.
That after ODS won by just three percentage points at 29.6 percent over CSSD in the June general elections, costing the coalition a 12-seat majority in the lower house.
The ODS won three seats of the total 81 Senate seats outright in the first round of the Senate vote by taking over 50 percent, and put 73 of their candidates in next weekend's runoff election as the top vote getter in their district.
But only 35 percent of a confused and uninspired Czech electorate voted in the poll for the newly-created Senate, after more than 70 percent voted in the June general elections.
Miroslav Nosal, equities analyst at Prague investment house Patria Finance, said that a premature general election was probably not on the cards, and said the stock market had other concerns than party politics.
"Poor regulation and transparency is already included in the share prices, but from a fundamental point of view many stocks are quite attractive," said Nosal,
He said some foreign investors might be tempted to play on Klaus's victory early on Monday, but any gain based on the political situation would be short lived.
Unless the runoffs build on ODS's success next weekend with much higher turnout, analysts said it was unlikely that Klaus would move for new lower house polls in an effort to win back the coalition's majority in the more powerful lower house.
"If ODS sees a sweeping victory next week...then they might feel tempted for a possible early election in a year or so, but I think they should be very careful about it," said Maly.
Klaus, who as with other ministers is a member of the lower house, late on Saturday was reserved on possible early general elections.
"I've said many times this country does not need another election. It needs to function, work," Klaus said in a panel discussion on Czech Television, adding, "If the Senate vote gives a chance to go forward, it'll be good for all of us."
A stronger showing by Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus's rightwing Civic Democratic Party in the first round of Senate elections may give a mild fillip to local financial markets, Czech analysts predicted.
But a thin turnout made it hard for the three-party coalition government, which lost its lower house majority in June, to claim it had recaptured voters' hearts, the analysts said.
"Nobody can jump to conclusions based on these figures, because if you take the total turnout, it's nothing," said Radek Maly, economist at Citibank Prague.
"We might see a mild strengthening of the crown, but we don't think any major movement," he added.
The currency has traded in a tight range recently at around 26.9 to the dollar and 17.8 to the mark or roughly 2.5 percent above parity with the central bank's mark/dollar basket.
But Maly stressed that the market was focused on macroeconomic fundamentals, not political influences.
Klaus's Civic Democratic Party won 36 percent of the nationwide vote on Saturday.
The centre-left opposition Social Democrats were second with 20 percent. The rest of the vote was thinly split among coalition parties and the Communists. Only 35 percent of the electorate voted.
Of the 81 Senate seats, Civic Democrats won three outright in the first round and 73 of their candidates go into next weekend's runoff as the top vote getter in their district.
The Civic Democrats took less that 30 percent of the vote in June's general elections, costing the coalition its majority in the lower house.
Miroslav Nosal, equities analyst at Prague investment house Patria Finance, said that a premature general election was probably not on the cards, and said the stock market had other concerns than party politics.
"Poor regulation and transparency is already included in the share prices, but from a fundamental point of view many stocks are quite attractive," said Nosal,
He said some foreign investors might be tempted to play on Klaus's victory early on Monday, but any gain based on the political situation would be short lived.
A stronger showing by Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus's centre-right Civic Democratic Party in the first round of Senate elections may give a mild fillip to local financial markets, Czech analysts predicted.
But a thin turnout made it hard for the three-party coalition government, which lost its lower house majority in June, to claim it had recaptured voters' hearts, the analysts said.
"Nobody can jump to conclusions based on these figures, because if you take the total turnout, it's nothing," said Radek Maly, economist at Citibank Prague.
"We might see a mild strengthening of the crown, but we don't think any major movement," he added.
The currency has traded in a tight range recently at around 26.9 to the dollar and 17.8 to the mark or roughly 2.5 percent above parity with the central bank's mark/dollar basket.
But Maly stressed that the market was focused on macroeconomic fundamentals, not political influences.
Klaus's Civic Democratic Party won 36 percent of the nationwide vote on Saturday.
The centre-left opposition Social Democrats were second with 20 percent. The rest of the vote was thinly split among coalition parties and the Communists. Only 35 percent of the electorate voted.
Of the 81 Senate seats, Civic Democrats won three outright in the first round and 73 of their candidates go into next weekend's runoff as the top vote getter in their district.
The Civic Democrats took less that 30 percent of the vote in June's general elections, costing the coalition its majority in the lower house.
Miroslav Nosal, equities analyst at Prague investment house Patria Finance, said that a premature general election was probably not on the cards, and said the stock market had other concerns than party politics.
"Poor regulation and transparency is already included in the share prices, but from a fundamental point of view many stocks are quite attractive," said Nosal,
He said some foreign investors might be tempted to play on Klaus's victory early on Monday, but any gain based on the political situation would be short lived.
-- Prague newsroom  (42 2) 24 23 0003
Czech Unipetrol a.s. on Wednesday announced a long-awaited plan to convert shares in Kaucuk a.s. and Chemopetrol a.s. into Unipetrol shares.
In a joint statement the boards of Chemopetrol, Kaucuk and Unipetrol, the country's new petrochemical holding company, said they agreed to swap one Chemopetrol share for between 1.05 to 1.20 Unipetrol shares, and one Kaucuk share for between 1.10 to 1.25 Unipetrol shares.
The plan, to complete the complex partial privatisation of the two largest Czech petrochemical concerns, was agreed at a meeting on Tuesday of the respective boards, but an exact ratio must still be approved by general shareholders meetings.
Kaucuk and Chemopetrol shares have traded virtually level for months as investors hoped for possible arbitrage trades if either firm's shares got an advantage in the swap.
Ahead of the news on Wednesday, Kaucuk shares were fixed 11 crowns above Tuesday's close on the Prague Stock Exchange (PSE) at 1,105, while Chemopetrol finished the PSE's Wednesday trading session 12 crowns higher at 1,106.
The Unipetrol statement said the ratio range was determined by "the current results of appraising the assets and liabilities of the involved companies."
Equities analysts said that because the announced range of the conversion still allowed for overlap in the final decision and did not give a clear advantage to one company's shares, immediate arbitrage possibilities were slim.
But they said that the fact that the boards were nearing a decision on a very complicated issue should give a mild boost to shares in Kaucuk and Chemopetrol.
"I don't see any arbitrage opportunity at this moment," said Patria Finance's Miroslav Nosal. "But now that the exchange ratio is being announced, I believe it will help the shares in both companies."
Tomas Michalek, at Raiffeisen Capital and Investment Prague, agreed that the movement toward a decision would be a plus to the shares.
"What is positive is that they agreed on a ratio (range). It's important so that both companies can finally be folded into Unipetrol and more foreign capital can come in," Michalek said.
Under a complicated privatisation of the Czech petrochemical industry, Kaucuk and Chemopetrol's refining operations were merged into a subsidiary of the newly-created Unipetrol last year called Ceska Rafinerska a.s..
Unipetrol, in which the government currently holds a 100 percent stake, has a 51 percent stake in Ceska Rafinerska,
The IOC consortium -- comprising U.S. Du Pont de Nemours unit Conoco, Royal Dutch/Shell, and Italy's Agip SpA -- acquired a 49 percent stake in Rafinerska under agreement with the government last year.
The share swap would complete the transfer of the rest of Kaucuk and Chemopetrol as subsidiaries under Unipetrol, which acts as a holding company, and would dilute the state's 100 percent stake in Unipetrol.' -- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
The Czech crown firmed from the central bank fixing on Thursday, building on gains after a strong showing of the senior coalition party in Senate elections last weekend and prospects for the second round vote.
Analysts said Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus's pro-business Civic Democratic Party (ODS) was expected to take a majority of the 81 seats in the newly-created Senate after runoff elections this weekend should keep the crown firm.
The crown was trading mid-afternoon on Thursday at 26.661 to the dollar and 17.757 to the mark, or 3.05 percent above the Czech National Bank's dollar/mark basket.
"Mostly the expectations are that the ODS will win a majority in the Senate which I think is fairly likely," Citibank economist Radek Maly said.
The ODS already won three seats outright last Saturday and has 76 candidates through to the runoff this Friday and Saturday in the 77 constituencies remaining to be contested.
The crown, despite a ballooning trade deficit, has remained above well above parity with the basket, and has this week strengthened from last Friday's level of +2.45 percent.
Maly said he saw the currency staying close to Thursday's levels, and possibly getting a further bump up on Monday.
"I would personally see this level until the vote... Perhaps Monday we will see a similar situation, a quick strengthening, a quick speculative reaction," he said.
Petr Korous, a dealer at Ceskovslovenska Obchodni Banka, said that despite voter turnout of only 35 percent in the first round of the elections, the market was still firming on the ODS showing.
"There will be some bias toward a stronger Czech crown," he said. "More or less the basic impulse for that is really because of the elections, and then the subsequent recovery of the capital markets."
The Senate has limited political power, but the vote would at least confirm that ODS had not suffered a further loss of confidence after the coaltion saw its majority in the more-powerful lower house evaporate in June general elections.
This week the Prague Stock Exchange has shown its first signs of life since the summer. 
Meanwhile fixed income and crown deposit investors are getting more confident that Klaus's tight fiscal and monetary policies will not be threatened.
"Those who want to play the interest rate differential (with foreign currencies) feel quite comfortable right now," Korous said.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
The Czech crown firmed from the central bank fixing on Thursday, building on gains after a strong showing by the senior coalition party in Senate elections last weekend and prospects for the second round vote.
Analysts said Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus's pro-business Civic Democratic Party (ODS) was expected to take a majority of the 81 seats in the newly-created Senate after runoff elections this weekend, and that should keep the crown firm.
The crown was trading in mid-afternoon on Thursday at 26.661 to the dollar and 17.757 to the mark, or 3.05 percent above the Czech National Bank's dollar/mark basket.
"Mostly the expectations are that the ODS will win a majority in the Senate, which I think is fairly likely," Citibank economist Radek Maly said.
The ODS won three seats outright last Saturday and has 76 candidates through to the runoff on Friday and Saturday in the 77 constituencies remaining to be contested.
The crown, despite a ballooning trade deficit, has remained well above parity with the basket and has continued to strengthen this week from last Friday's level of +2.45 percent.
Maly said he saw the currency staying close to Thursday's levels and then getting a possible further bump up on Monday.
"I would personally see this level until the vote...Perhaps Monday, we will see a similar situation -- a quick strengthening, a quick speculative reaction," he said.
Petr Korous, a dealer at Ceskovslovenska Obchodni Banka, said despite voter turnout of only 35 percent in the first round of the elections, the market was still firming on the ODS showing.
"There will be some bias toward a stronger Czech crown," he said. "More or less, the basic impulse for that is really because of the elections and then, the subsequent recovery of the capital markets."
The Senate has limited political power, but the vote would at least confirm that ODS had not suffered a further loss of confidence after the coaltion saw its majority in the more powerful lower house evaporate in June general elections.
This week, the Prague Stock Exchange has shown its first signs of life since the summer, while fixed income and crown deposit investors are getting more confident that Klaus's tight fiscal and monetary policies will not be threatened.
"Those who want to play the interest rate differential (with foreign currencies) feel quite comfortable right now," Korous said.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
The Czech Republic has its first Senate since before World War Two, but an electoral win by the governing coalition appeared to have smothered talk of early general elections.
The three centre-right coalition parties took 52 seats in the new upper house of parliament on Saturday, but voter turnout of only 30 percent confirmed surveys showing many believe the Senate, with limited powers, is unneccessary.
Still, the result marked something of a turnaround for the coalition, central Europe's last centre-right government, which lost its majority in the more powerful lower house, the Chamber of Deputies, six months ago.
The Senate, written into the new 1993 constitution when Czechoslovakia split into separate Czech and Slovak states but not given authority until this year, was designed to be the reincarnation of the body of elder statesmen who sat in Prague until the Nazi invasion in 1939.
Klaus's Civic Democratic Party (ODS) won 32 seats ahead of the strongest opposition party, the Social Democrats, with 25.
But Klaus dampened speculation that his conservative minority government might use the victory this weekend to seek an early vote to the lower house.
While leaving his party's headquarters late on Saturday, Klaus was asked if the results confirmed his opinion, given after last week's first-round Senate vote, that early elections to the lower house should not be necessary.
"I think they did," he told Reuters. He did not elaborate.
His three-party conservative coalition won 52 seats after this weekend's runoffs for the 81-seat Senate.
After last week's first-round Senate vote, which gave Klaus's Civic Democratic Party the potential to win up to 79 seats, Klaus told Czech Television: "This country does not need another (lower house) election. It needs to function, work."
The opposition Social Democrats won 25 Senate seats, while the junior coalition parties, the Christian Democrats (KDU-CSL) and Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA) won 13 and seven seats respectively.
Analysts once viewed the Senate elections as a gauge for whether the coalition or the opposition would be in a position to seek a majority in the lower house through an early poll.
But voter turnout of only 30 percent made it hard for anybody to draw conclusions on what might be the result if early elections to the more powerful lower house were called.
"Most importantly the Senate won't be one-coloured or two-coloured as was expected, but multi-coloured," said analyst Jiri Pehe of Prague's Open Media Research Institute.
The little-reformed Communists clinched two seats and two went to independents.
The Czech crown rose on Thursday to its highest level against its mark/dollar basket, buoyed by comments by Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus that devaluation was not needed despite a widening trade gap.
The crown rose to 4.5 percent above the cross rate of the two-currency basket late in the afternoon and dealers said that, barring any central bank intervention, the newly-liberalised currency could go still higher.
By mid-morning heavy buying had pushed the Czech currency to 4.3 percent above the basket from just under four percent at the opening.
The crown strengthened to 26.014 to the dollar and 17.591 to the mark by 1430 GMT from Thursday's central bank fixing of 26.039 and 17.638.
The central bank followed the market up at its midday fixing, setting the crown at 4.24 percent above parity with the basket, compared with 3.9 percent on Wednesday.
Traders saw the fixing as a signal that the bank was content with the crown's rise and the market responded.
"When the central bank followed the market, the banks realised it was still time to sell (foreign) currencies again and the central bank won't be taking any action," said trader Tomas Novak at Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka.
Traders said as long as the government kept talking up the crown, foreign investors would respond until the bank decided to jump in and buy foreign currency.
The catalyst for recent strength of the crown has been official comments dismissing any need to devalue the currency.
Although the trade balance showed a record monthly deficit in July of 16.4 billion crowns, the market responded to comments made by Klaus in Austria late on Wednesday.
"The first (reason for the crown's rise) is Klaus's comments in Austria," Tomas Becvar, trader at Komercni Banka, said. "Another reason of course is the following of the market by the central bank at the fixing."
At an economic conference, Klaus backed central bank Governor Josef Tosovsky's view that a stronger crown would be better for the economy in the long term.
"We think that a devaluation is not necessary and that it wouldn't be useful," Klaus told Reuters in Alpbach, Austria.
While some economists have recommended devaluing the crown to help the trade position, many said it was not fundamentally necessary as capital inflows remain strong and the balance of services, especially tourism, narrows the current account gap.
The Czech currency last dipped below the parity rate against the basket in mid-June, soon after elections stripped Klaus's conservative coalition of its majority in parliament and strengthened the hand of the opposition Social Democrats.
Klaus was finally able to form a minority government of his centre-right coalition while the centre-left Social Democrats have been conciliatory on economic issues, including a 9.3 billion crown cut in spending to balance this year's budget.
The crown has since been on a steady upward path, first hovering around three percent against the basket in recent weeks, then surging after comments by Tosovsky's on Friday.
Since February, the central bank has had the option of fixing the crown in a band of plus/minus 7.5 percent from parity with the basket instead of its previous tightly controlled plus/minus 0.5 percent band,
The move brought the crown more in line with supply and demand on the open market.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
Czech pundits once looked at mid-November Senate elections as a possible beacon to cut through the political fog created by indecisive June lower house elections.
What is clear after the two-round vote completed this past weekend is only that many Czechs do not care about the Senate.
Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus and his centre-right coalition spent most of Sunday proclaiming that the results, in which the three parties won 52 of 81 seats in the newly created Senate, provided a strong mandate for the minority cabinet.
Klaus panned a Sunday headline in the daily Mlada Fronta Dnes calling the results in thin turnout a political "draw".
"(A draw) would be if it happened that the opposition won also in the Senate," he said in a debate on Czech Television. "That draw has been avoided."
Klaus's conservative Civic Democratic Party alone won 32 seats despite having a potential of winning 79 seats going in to the run-offs. Only a stronger-than-expected showing by the two junior partners gave the coalition control of the Senate.
The opposition Social Democrats, led by lower-house chairman and Klaus arch-rival Milos Zeman, mustered only 25 Senate seats after their strong June second-place showing moved Czech politics from centre-right domination into cohabitation.
With voter turnout a paltry 30 percent, it would be hard to argue that the Senate vote did much to alter Czech politics. Nor did it give a signal that the coalition might have enough support to seek new lower house elections.
"The result does not mean any move toward early elections... They would probably end in a draw," said political analyst Jiri Pehe of Prague's Open Media Research Insitute.
Klaus said that the vote confirmed that what the country needed was a functioning government, not new elections.
What the results primarily mean is that Klaus and his allies simply gain control of the upper house, which will be mostly a talking shop with few legislative powers.
But they are two votes shy of having a majority in the more powerful lower house, and the opposition could scuttle the legislative agenda of the coalition which remains as post-Communist Europe's last centre-right government.
Charles Robinson, an eastern Europe analyst at the independent research house Hilfe, said investors would welcome the relatively meaningless result for not giving any more power to the more interventionist Social Democrats.
"With the win there wil be certainly no added complications in getting (Klaus's) legislation through, and that's good news for stability, and it does mean that elections can be delayed until 1998 perhaps," Robinson told Reuters.
He said however that the Senate result might cause Zeman to sharpen his tactics against the government to draw deeper distinctions before any new elections might be called.
The biggest loser might be President Vaclav Havel who fought to give the Senate life after it was built into the 1993 constitution adopted after the split of Czechoslovakia, despite early moves by Klaus and others to block its creation.
Before the second-round vote, the politically neutral Havel called on his countrymen to turn out in force after just 35 percent voted in last weekend's first round.
His pleas were ignored.
On Sunday, Havel told Czech radio from his weekend retreat that politicians waged an "anti-campaign" against the creation of the Senate, and let pre-election partisan bickering take the place of discussing the choice of intelligent individuals.
Havel argued that after a few more elections, Czechs would come to realise that the Senate was important as the house of last resort in case of a constitutional crisis.
"The Senate is not dispensable," he said on Sunday.
Czech President Vaclav Havel, former dissident playwright and leader of Prague's 1989 revolution against Communism, will undergo exploratory surgery on his lungs next week, the presidential office said on Tuesday.
In a statement, Havel's spokesman Ladislav Spacek said the president would have "a necessary operative procedure" on his lungs. A surgeon described the procedure as "medium-serious".
Havel, 60, was admitted to hospital on Monday more than a week after his office said he was suffering from pneumonia, causing him to cancel his official commitments for the rest of November and early December.
"X-ray findings cannot be specifed until a diagnostic operative measure is carried out," Spacek said. The symptoms or extent of Havel's illness have not been fully disclosed.
The Czech news agency CTK quoted the chief of staff at the Third Surgical Clinic in central Prague where Havel will be treated as saying the procedure was considered to be a "medium-serious operation as would be any lung surgery".
Havel is known to be a heavy smoker, but the illness has not been officially linked to his smoking.
The president cancelled a planned two-day state visit to Ukraine last week and on Monday called off plans to attend a summit of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) on December 2 and 3 in Lisbon.
Spacek said the president was in "good physical and psychological condition" and is in constant contact with his office, monitoring events in the country.
Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus visited Havel on Tuesday, Spacek said.
The illness comes just as a sensitive post-World War Two reconciliation treaty with Germany, on which Havel has spent much effort, nears completion.
The treaty is to address issues arising from the Nazi occupation of Bohemia and Moravia and subsequent expulsion of ethnic Germans after the Czech lands were liberated in 1945.
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl said recently he hoped the treaty could be signed before the end of the year, and Czech politicians have been quoted in local media saying they expected a signing in mid-December.
The president's office has not commented on how his illness might affect the treaty.
Havel has had various ailments, none considered serious, during his nearly seven years as president of Czechoslovakia and later of the independent Czech Republic, after a peaceful split with Slovakia at the beginning of 1993.
He had urgent surgery last February after a polyp in his mouth started bleeding, but that incident was not considered serious.
Last January the president lost his wife Olga, who died of complications from tumors.
The Czech crown firmed on Thursday to its highest level against its mark/dollar basket, buoyed by Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus' comments that devaluation was not needed despite a widening trade gap.
By mid-morning the crown moved to around 4.3 percent above its daily parity rate set by the Czech National Bank (CNB) against the dollar/mark basket from a four percent level in the morning.
The crown stood at 26.005 to the dollar and 17.600 to the mark at 1130 GMT.
The CNB followed the market up, fixing the crown 4.24 percent above parity with the basket after +3.9 percent on Wednesday.
Dealers said the crown could challenge 4.5 percent against parity before levelling off to end the week.
"Probably we will attack 4.5 percent (over parity)," Tomas Becvar, dealer at Prague's Komercni Banka, told Reuters.
Although the Czech trade balance earlier this week showed a record monthly deficit in July of 16.4 billion crowns, the market was encouraged by Klaus's comments.
"The first (reason for the crown's rise) is Klaus's comments in Austria," Becvar said. "Another reason of course is the following of the market by the central bank at the fixing."
At an economic conference in Austria, Klaus backed the CNB's Governor Josef Tosovsky view that a stronger crown would be better for the economy in the long-term.
"We think that a devaluation is not necessary and that it wouldn't be useful," Klaus told Reuters.
While some economists have recommended devaluing the crown to help the trade situation, many said it is not fundamentally necessary as capital inflows remain strong and the balance of services, especially toursim, softens the current account gap.
The Czech currency last dipped below the parity rate against the basket in mid-June, soon after elections stripped Klaus's conservative coalition of its majority in parliament and strenghthend the hand of the opposition Social Democrats.
But since then, the Czech currency has been on a steady march up, first hovering around three percent against the basket, then surging after Tosovsky's comments last Friday.
Klaus was finally able to form a minority government of his centre-right coalition while the centre-left Social Democrats have been concilliatory on economic issues, including a 9.3 billion crown cut in spending to balance this year's budget.
Dealers said positive preliminary results on Thursday for July's industrial production, showing a moderate recovery from disappointing June figures, also helped the crown.
Czech President Vaclav Havel, the only man who can smoke next to militant Hollywood anti-smoker Barbra Streisand, is facing a life without his beloved cigarettes after surgery revealed a cancerous lung.
Havel's heavy smoking is a fixture of his Bohemian intellectual image, but it is widely believed that it caused the malignant tumour which was radically removed on Monday.
It certainly startled some Czechs who awoke on Tuesday to a huge headline in the tabloid Blesk which simply bleated "CANCER" next to an archive picture of a happily-smoking Havel.
But just as Boris Yeltsin's multiple by-pass heart surgery will hardly dry up a Muscovite's taste for vodka, which many blamed for the Russian president's ills, Havel's surgery probably will not cause chain-smoking Czechs to kick the habit.
"Ooh, I should quit," said Hana Haskova, a 19-year-old student reacting to news of Havel's cancer. "Well, I probably won't, but I'll be forced to think about it when I smoke."
Doctors said the surgery, which cost the 60-year-old Havel half of his right lung, gave him good prospects for a full recovery, and he might return to work soon after the new year.
But his spokesman said that Havel, a multiple-pack-a-day man, will probably be limited to being a "holiday smoker lighting up once a week with afternoon coffee."
The world sees Havel like this -- the mustached but impish Bohemian philospher-playwright crumpled in a sweater, cigarette smoke pouring from his fingers as he mulls life's problems.
His dissident musings from a prison cell won the respect of the western world and helped spark Prague's non-violent 1989 "Velvet Revolution" over communism.
"Vaclav Havel is the only person who can smoke in my presence," said Barbra Streisand, one of America's prominent anti-smokers, at a Washington picnic last year in honour of the visiting Czech President.
The unlikely rise from prison to Prague Castle made Havel one of the most famous unabashed public smokers.
But news of Havel's cancer confirmed what many here feared when he entered hospital last week with an alleged case of pnuemonia -- his ubiquitous smoking caught up with him.
Czech surgeon Dr. Pavel Pafko said after performing the operation that it would be difficult to pinpoint smoking as the primary cause of Havel's cancer.
"The composition of this tumour is problematic in relation to smoking. You can't definitely tell," Pafko told reporters.
But to many Czechs, the cause was clear:
"It has to be the smoking," was the oft-repeated phrase of workers in central Prague, many of them smokers.
"Stopping now won't help anyway. I was smoking before you were born," said Karel, 43, a maintenence man puffing away over beer in one of the hundreds of Prague's smoke-blanketed pubs.
Dr. Pavko said Havel smoked one last pre-surgery cigarette with Jan Strasky, a chain smoker who happens also to be minister of health, whose warning on smoking's link to cancer is on every legally-sold pack of cigarettes in the country.
Havel, as many Czechs, came of age smoking heavy Communist cigarettes, and has moved to more expensive western brands.
A country of 10 million people smokes 23 billion cigarettes each year. Consumption has grown from five cigarettes per day to more than six averaged out for every man, woman, and child.
Amid an influx of western brands -- U.S. Philip Morris bought a controlling stake in the former monopoly state tobacco packager, and has made Marlboro a status symbol -- Havel vetoed measures to regulate public smoking and cigarette advertising.
The president once also was blamed for a nuclear alert by lighting up while touring a power plant, but an official re-enactment of the incident declared it was photographers' flashes, not Havel's smoke, which set off the alarm.
In May 1945, seven-year-old Madlenka Korbelova sat glued to a radio in London, listening with her exiled Czech diplomat father to news of the U.S. army's liberation of the western part of her native land.
They cheered when General George Patton's army forced Nazi soldiers out of the brewery town of Pilsen.
They cursed when Patton was forced to hold back his troops and let the Red Army take Prague according to the deal struck with the Soviet Union at Yalta months before.
"I remember the broadcasts as the Nazis were pushed back across Czechoslovakia, and I remember my parents cheering and wishing they had gone further," Madlenka, now known as Madeleine Albright, told hundreds of American and Czech veterans in Pilsen a half century later.
Weaned in London bomb shelters and reared on the Cold War, Albright has been nominated U.S. secretary of state -- the first woman to fill the post.
Albright, who returned to Prague after the Nazi occupation only to leave again after a Communist coup, was chosen by President Bill Clinton on Thursday to be the highest-ranking woman ever in the U.S. government.
Friends and diplomats who know her say Albright's life has consistently shown the influences of her father and her post-war childhood.
Her father, Josef Korbel, a close aide to Czechoslovak Foreign Minister Jan Masaryk in the World War Two government-in-exile in London, served as post-war ambassador to Belgrade and later a delegate to the United Nations.
During that period, family photos show his young daughter Marie -- Madlenka in the Czech dimunitive -- dressed in frilly traditional Czech costume to greet visiting dignitaries.
After the post-war government was deposed by communists in 1948, Korbel sent a cable from Belgrade saying he was leaving with his family on vacation.
Korbel received asylum with his family of five in America, and settled in Colorado. Madlenka started a new life at age 11.
Her father became a professor of European history and politics and eventually a dean at the University of Denver, and earned worldwide respect as an expert on 20th century Central and Eastern Europe. He died in 1977, aged 69.
Albright attended a Denver high school and then Wellesley College in Massachussetts. She earned a doctorate in political studies at Columbia University.
Albright, who married and was later divorced from newspaper heir Joseph Albright, made the Communist takeover of her homeland a frequent focus of lectures and papers.
She became a tough-talking diplomat and liked to speak of the effects of Europe's appeasement of Hitler in the 1938 Munich agreement which led to Germany's occupation of Czechoslovakia.
After the collapse of communism in Prague in 1989, playwright-turned-president Vaclav Havel asked her to advise his new democratic government.
On her first official visit to Prague as U.S. ambassador to the U.N. in 1994, she walked into the palacial Foreign Ministry and said: "I came here in 1945 when I was eight years old. This is an emotional and sentimental moment for me."
She has acted as Bill and Hillary Clinton's tour guide in her home town -- once joining Havel to hear the U.S. president play the saxophone in a jazz concert in a Prague club during a 1995 state visit.
Prague sees her as a strong advocate of Czech membership in NATO and the alliance's expansion to former Soviet satellites.
Havel, speaking recently on the prospects of Albright becoming Secretary of State, said: "She is, thanks to her origins, more sensitive to the issues which concern us."
In May 1945, seven-year-old Madlenka Korbelova sat glued to a radio in London, listening with her exiled Czech diplomat father to news of the U.S. army's liberation of the western part of her native land.
They cheered when General George Patton's army forced Nazi soldiers out of the famous brewery town of Pilsen.
They cursed when the general was forced to hold back his troops and let the Red Army take Prague according to the deal struck with the Soviets at Yalta many months before.
"I remember the broadcasts as the Nazis were pushed back across Czechoslovakia, and I remember my parents cheering and wishing they had gone further," she told hundreds American and Czech veterans in Pilsen a half century later.
Weaned in London bomb shelters and reared on the Cold War, the diplomat's daughter, now known as Madeleine Albright, is in line to be the first woman to serve as U.S. Secretary of State.
On Thursday, the ruddy-faced girl, who returned to Prague after Nazi occupation only to leave her homeland again after a Communist coup, was chosen by President Bill Clinton to be the highest-ranking woman ever in the U.S. government.
Senate confirmation of her appointment is still required.
By the accounts of friends and diplomats who know her, Albright's life has consistently shown the influences of her father and her post-war childhood.
"Her relations to this country is deep," Czech ambassador to Washington Michael Zantovsky told Reuters. "Her's is still the Czech of a native. This country has a big friend in her."
Her father, Josef Korbel, a close aide to Czechoslovak Foreign Minister Jan Masaryk during the World War Two government-in-exile in London, served as post-War ambassador to Belgrade and later a delegate to the new United Nations.
During that period, family photos show his young daughter Marie -- Madlenka in the Czech dimunitive -- dressed in frilly traditional Czech costume to greet visiting dignitaries.
After the post-War government was deposed by communists in 1948, Korbel sent a cable from Belgrade saying he was leaving with his family on vacation. The last entry from his Foreign Ministry file showed Korbel being "sent for holidays".
Korbel received asylum with his family of five in America, and settled in Colorado. Madlenka started a new life at age 11.
The father became a professor of European history and politics and eventually a dean at the University of Denver, and earned worldwide respect as an expert on 20th century Central and Eastern Europe. He died in 1977, aged 69.
Albright became fully "Americanised" attending a Denver high school and then Wellesley College in Massachusets, but she kept Prague close to her heart -- in her academic studies and later in her career as a diplomat.
After earning a doctorate in political studies at Columbia University, Albright -- who married newspaper heir Joseph Albright and later divorced -- made the Communist takeover of her homeland a frequent focus of her lectures and papers.
As a tough-nosed diplomat she repeatedly has spoken of the effects of Europe's appeasement of Adolph Hitler in 1938's Munich agreement which led to Germany's occupation of Czechoslovakia in 1939, causing her family to flee to London.
After Prague's 1989 fall of communism, the leader of the bloodless "Velvet Revloution", the playwright-turned-president Vaclav Havel asked her to advise his new democratic government.
On her first official visit to Prague as U.S. ambassador to the U.N. in 1994, she walked into the palacial Foreign Ministry and memories came flooding back.
"I came here in 1945 when I was eight-years-old. This is an emotional and sentimental moment for me," Albright said while gazing at the palace ceiling.
She has acted as Bill and Hillary Clinton's tour guide in her home town -- once joining Havel to hear the American president play saxaphone in a smoky jazz concert in a Prague club during a 1995 state visit.
Prague sees her as a strong advocate of Czech membership in NATO and the alliance's expansion to former Soviet satellites.
Havel, recently speaking on the prosepcts of Albright becoming Secretary of State said what "matters, is the fact that she is a lady with a good knowledge of the European situation, Central European situation."
"She is, thanks to her origins, more sensitive to the issues which concern us," Havel said.
Clinton has called for the first wave of NATO expansion by the year 2000, and diplomats widely believe that the Czechs are at the top of the list along with Poland and Hungary.
"I think that the problems of this area are well understood in the heart of the American government," Albright said during of one her visits to Prague as U.N ambassador.
The health of Czech President Vaclav Havel has improved considerably as he recuperates from lung cancer surgery last week, his spokesman said on Sunday.
Havel, 60, who had a small malignant tumour removed along with half of his right lung on December 2, required an emergency tracheostomy on Thursday to connect a respirator through his throat after he developed severe breathing problems.
"The worst is behind us," presidential spokesman Ladislav Spacek told Czech Radio on Sunday. "The tendency, the return to improvement (in Havel's health) is distinct, and we hope it will continue into the future."
Spacek took the place of Havel on the president's regular national Sunday radio programme.
The president had hoped to record at least a sentence for the show, but his condition on Sunday morning, when it was was recorded, kept him to the role of a listener, Czech radio said.
The president has been communicating by writing notes to doctors and his staff.
Czech Archbishop Miloslav Vlk led a national prayer mass for Havel on Sunday at St Vitus Cathedral in Prague Castle.
Dozens of friends and leaders around the world, including U.S. President Bill Clinton and Russian President Boris Yeltsin, have sent get-well wishes to the hero of Prague's non-violent 1989 revolution over communism.
Havel, a heavy smoker, entered the Third Surgical Clinic in central Prague on November 25 after his office said he had been suffering from pneumonia.
After the surgery, he developed pneumonia in the opposite lung and had been fighting a fever, but his spokesman said on Sunday that Havel's temperature had returned to normal.
Doctors say Havel will probably remain connected to the respirator another four to six days, and if his recovery goes well, he might be back to work as soon as mid-January.
The former dissident-playwright who helped lead Prague's so-called "Velvet Revoution" over communism has limited executive powers as president, and did not relinquish any of his duties during his surgery or his recovery.
Finance Minister Ivan Kocarnik on Monday, for the second week in a row, skipped a meeting with the Prague bourse's governing chamber, amid growing calls for his ministry to tackle problems in Czech securities trading.
"At two o'clock (Kocarnik) cancelled his participation in this afternoon's meeting," Prague Stock Exchange (PSE) spokesman Milan Vodicka told Reuters.
The bourse's Chamber, which has been seeking stronger ministry action to ease investors' concerns about market transparency, later declined Kocarnik's return invitation for a "future" meeting at his ministry.
The meetings had been scheduled to discuss taking tougher regulatory action to address concerns of transparency and insider trading on Czech capital markets.
Jiri Spicka, director of the Finance Ministry's banking division, told Reuters that Kocarnik was "too busy with the preparation of the state budget" and "it was impossible for him to leave the ministry".
The budget has been expected for weeks to go to the floor of parliament for its second reading in the session which begins on Tuesday.
Kocarnik then invited the 18-member Chamber to his ministry for a "future" meeting, Spicka said.
The Chamber later declined that invitation, an official at the office of Chamber Chairman Tomas Jezek told Reuters.
Jezek lambasted Kocarnik on Sunday for lax regulation of the capital markets during the annual national congress of the ruling Civic Democratic Party, of which both men are members.
Jezek told the party meeting that the reluctance of finance ministry officials to more strongly regulate the capital markets was "absurd" and investors' lack of confidence could eventually do major damage the country's balance of payments.
"The capital account of our payments balance is alreday unable to level with a growing deficit in our trade balance, and the capital market needs to gain back the lost confidence," Jezek was quoted by the daily Pravo as saying.
Jezek warned that poor capital market regulation might even force a devaluation of the crown if confidence is not restored.
Jezek is leading plans to set up an independent markets watchdog akin to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), funded by transaction fees, by the middle of next year.
The finance ministry has balked at the plan, but Jezek is widely believed to have the backing of the parliament's budget committee which he has said will probably submit legislation permitting a Czech SEC to be set up in the first half of 1997.
Kocarnik has rejected criticism that his ministry is failing in its responsibility to properly regulate the system, and says stronger regulations would be "anti-market".
Still, foreign and domestic investors have repeatedly called for steps to beef up the supervision of the Czech capital market, and the ministry has said it is considering its own plan to re-regulate securities trading.
Richard Salzmann, chairman of the largest Czech bank Komercni Banka a.s., told Pravo that "none of the more important groups want to trade on this capital market."
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
Germany and the Czech republic announced on Monday that a long-awaited declaration on post- World War Two reconciliation would be initialled this week but politicians on both sides withheld final approval of the text.
The two foreign ministries said Czech Foreign Minister Josef Zieleniec and Germany's Klaus Kinkel would sign the document in Prague on Friday, at a ceremony ending two years of talks.
The declaration, expressing regret at both Nazi atrocities during the war and the expulsion of ethnic Germans from former Czechoslovakia afterwards, then has to be signed by the two countries' presidents and confirmed by the two parliaments.
But Germany's Christian Social Union (CSU), political sponsor of the expelled Germans, said its support for the text was not guaranteed.
"I would speak of a conditional 'yes'," Finance Minister and CSU chairman Theo Waigel told reporters. He said last-minute changes to the text could not be ruled out.
Final approval from the CSU, a partner in the Bonn coalition, would depend on assurances that the Sudeten Germans, as they are known, would be "involved at an appropriate level" in a dialogue between Prague and Bonn, he said.
The Bavarian-based CSU has in the past hinted it could use its weight in the government to block the declaration or oppose the Czech Republic's application to join the European Union unless the Sudeten Germans were given better terms.
In the Czech parliament the mainstream parties have backed the declaration, but the extreme-right Republican Party and far-left Communists have ruled out voting for it in any form.
Members of the largest Czech opposition party, the Social Democrats, whose votes may be crucial for approval by parliament, said on Sunday that they still had concerns about vaguely-worded compensation for victims of Nazi aggression.
"(The party) has done all it can for the declaration to be accepted, but it still expects a bit more work (on the text)," a Social Democrat senator from the once German-annexed district of Upper Moravia, Petr Moravek, told Czech Television.
Stanislav Gross, the head of the Social Democrat caucus in the house, was quoted in the daily Pravo on Monday as saying he would not vote for the declaration in its present form.
The Czech foreign ministry said in a statement that Zieleniec and Kinkel would "sign a protocol on the completion of negotiations of the Czech-German Declaration of mutual relations and their future development".
The full declaration, leaked to news media last week, contains mutual expressions of regret for the Nazi occupation from 1938 to 1945 and for excessive brutality during the post-war expulsion of the Sudeten Germans.
The text angered groups representing families of the Sudeten Germans, who complained that it did not compensate those who had lost property during the expulsions.
The declaration sets up a Czech-German Future Fund with the German side paying in 140 million marks ($90 million), and the Czechs paying about one-seventh of that.
The text says the fund is to finance "projects of common interest" including joint environmental, historical, and scientific projects, youth meetings, and partnership projects.
But the text adds that: "The German side acknowledges its obligation of responsibility to all who became victims of National-Socialist violence. That is why the projects, wherever appropriate, should work mainly for the benefit of the victims of National-Socialist violence."
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl is expected to visit the Czech Republic, probably on January 21 and 22, to sign the text with Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus.
In early February Czech President Vaclav Havel and German President Roman Herzog are expected to address the parliaments of each other's countries in ceremonies giving final approval to the declaration.
Germany and the Czech republic will initial a long-awaited declaration on post-World War Two reconciliation between their two states on Friday in Prague, the Czech foreign ministry said on Monday.
A ceremony ending the two-year-long talks on the text will be held with Czech Foreign Minister Josef Zieleniec and Germany's Klaus Kinkel in the first part of a three-stage confirmation.
The ministry said in a statement that the two would "sign a protocol on the completion of negotiations of the Czech-German Declaration of mutual relations and their future development".
The full declaration, leaked to news media last week, contains mutual expressions of regret for the Nazi occupation from 1938 to 1945 and for excessive brutality during the post-war expulsion of ethnic Germans from former Czechoslovakia.
The text angered groups representing families of expelled Germans, known as Sudeten Germans, who complained that it did not compensate those who lost property during the expulsions.
But the Christian Social Union (CSU), the political sponsors of the Sudeten Germans, signalled on Monday it would no longer oppose the agreed text.
"By and large, the declaration will stand," Finance Minister and CSU chairman Theo Waigel told reporters.
The Bavarian-based CSU has in the past hinted it could use its weight in the government to block the declaration or oppose the Czech Republic's application to join the European Union unless the Sudeten Germans were given better terms.
But Waigel said it was a "great success" that Prague had gone as far as it had in apologising for the expulsions.
In the Czech parliament the mainstream parties have backed the declaration, but the extreme-right Republican Party and far-left Communists have ruled out voting for it in any form.
Members of the largest Czech opposition party, the Social Democrats, whose votes may be crucial for approval by parliament, said on Sunday that they still had concerns about vaguely-worded compensation for victims of Nazi aggression.
"(The party) has done all it can for the declaration to be accepted, but it still expects a bit more work (on the text)," a Social Democrat senator from the once German-annexed district of Upper Moravia, Petr Moravek, told Czech Television.
Stanislav Gross, the head of the Social Democrat caucus in the house, was quoted in the daily Pravo on Monday as saying he would not vote for the declaration in its present form.
The declaration sets up a Czech-German Future Fund with the German side paying in 140 million marks ($90 million), and the Czechs paying about one-seventh of that.
The text says the fund is to finance "projects of common interest" including joint environmental, historical, and scientific projects, youth meetings, and partnership projects.
But the text adds that: "The German side acknowledges its obligation of responsibility to all who became victims of National-Socialist violence. That is why the projects, wherever appropriate, should work mainly for the benefit of the victims of National-Socialist violence."
Diplomats said privately that the signing ceremony might take place somewhere outside Prague, but Czech officials said last week it would not take place in those areas which Germany annexed in 1938, known as the Sudetenland.
Prague is not part of the area Germany considered as the Sudetenland.
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl is expected to visit the Czech Republic, probably on January 21 and 22, to sign the text with Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus.
In early February Czech President Vaclav Havel and German President Roman Herzog are expected to address the parliaments of each other's countries in ceremonies giving final approval to the declaration.
Czech Justice Minister Jan Kalvoda, a deputy premier and leader of a junior partner in the ruling coalition, quit the government and parliament on Tuesday for falsely using an academic title, the CTK news agency said.
Kalvoda, aged 43, resigned for falsely claiming he was a doctor of law amid a growing row over the academic credentials of Czech politicians after deputies began questioning whether they were all genuine.
"Yes, (Kalvoda resigned) and he delivered his resignation to the president," Mariana Cerna of the parliament's press office told Reuters.
Another member of parliament from a party in the centre-right ruling coalition also quit the house for the same reason, while three other deputies admitted using false titles but did not step down, the news agency reported.
Officials of Kalvoda's party, the Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA), were not immediately available for comment, and it was not yet clear who would take Kalvoda's place in the cabinet or what his status would be within his party.
Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus, head of the senior Civic Democratic Party, said he would meet on Wednesday morning with Christian Democrat chairman Josef Lux and a designated member of Kalvoda's party to assess the situation in the three-party coalition.
"It's a political swerve, it's disquieting and unsettling, and the aim of all of us is that it would happen without any teetering," Klaus told reporters after Kalvoda's resignation.
ODA's press department said it would not comment until a meeting of its party leaders on Wednesday.
Kalvoda, who headed the most pro-business party in the coalition, often bumped heads with Klaus on issues such as speeding up the deregulation of heating prices and rents and lowering taxes.
Pavla Jurkova, a member of the Christian Democrats (KDU-CSL), resigned her seat in the 200-seat lower house -- where the centre-right coalition has 99 seats -- for falsely claiming a law doctorate, CTK said.
Two members of Klaus's party also admitted that their law doctorates, used in campaign material earlier this year, were false, CTK said, but Anna Roeschova and Ondrej Zemina had not resigned their seats.
Also staying put in parliament was a member of the opposition Social Democrats, Marie Noveska, after admitting she had not finished university but still used the title doctor of law.
Czech Justice Minister Jan Kalvoda, a deputy premier and leader of a junior partner in the ruling coalition, quit the government and parliament on Tuesday for falsely using an academic title, the CTK news agency said.
Another member of parliament from a coalition party also quit parliament for the same reason, while three other deputies admitted using false titles but did not step down.
Kalvoda, aged 43, resigned for falsely claiming he was a Doctor of Law amid a growing row over the academic credentials of Czech politicians after deputies began questioning whether they were all genuine.
"Yes, (Kalvoda resigned) and he delivered his resignation to the president," Mariana Cerna of the parliament's press office told Reuters.
Officials of Kalvoda's party, the Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA), were not immediately available for comment, and it was not yet clear who would take Kalvoda's place in the cabinet or what his status would be within his party.
He told the house however that there would be no changes in the party, CTK reported.
ODA's press department said it would not comment until a meeting of party leaders on Wednesday.
Kalvoda, who headed the most pro-business party in the coalition, often bumped heads with Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus on issues such as speeding up the deregulation of heating prices and rents and lowering taxes.
Earlier on Tuesday, Pavla Jurkova, a member of another coalition party, the Christian Democrats (KDU-CSL), resigned her seat in the 200-seat lower house -- where the centre-right coalition has 99 seats -- for falsely claiming a law doctorate.
Meanwhile two members of Vaclav Klaus's senior party in the three-member coalition, the Civic Democratic Party (ODS), also admitted today that their law doctorates, used in campaign material earlier this year, were false, CTK said.
However Anna Roeschova and Ondrej Zemina had not resigned their seats, CTK reported.
Also staying put in parliament was a member of the opposition Social Democrats, Marie Noveska, after admitting she had not finished university but still used the title doctor of law.
Volkswagen AG's Czech unit Skoda Automobilova a.s. launched its first up-market post-Communist model on Sunday, the "Octavia" sedan, with a street party in Prague's Old Town Square.
The new model, built on a common VW platform designed for the 1998 Audi A3 and upgraded Golf, burst through a wall onto a stage in the centre of Prague's old marketplace where thousands of Czechs and foreign tourists had gathered.
The Octavia will get its international test at the Paris International Auto Show in October and should be delivered to Czech dealers in November, followed by launches on European and other foreign markets, company officials said.
Skoda is hoping to build on the success of its Felicia economy five-door hatchback by offering an affordable middle-range sedan and take back chunks of its home market lost to Czechs seeking a more western-looking status symbol.
The front-grilled new Skoda is 4.51 metres long, 1.73 metres wide, and stands 1.43 metres high.
Continuing the break from the boxy Communist-era Skodas, the Octavia has more modern but conservative lines, somewhere between a Ford Mondeo and Audi's A-line.
As with the Felicia, Skoda's larger offering will try to find its niche at the low end of the price scale in its class.
The Czech daily Mlada Fronta Dnes quoted Skoda's general director Ludvik Kalma as saying that suggestions of a 350,000 Czech crowns ($13,460) price tag for the basic model of the Octavia on its home market -- with a 1.6 litre engine and two airbags -- would be "too expensive".
Skoda plans to produce some 5,000 Octavias before the end of this year, and between 70,000 and 80,000 in 1997 at its purpose-built modern plant at Mlada Boleslav, north of Prague.
After VW took 70 percent of Skoda under the Czech government's 1992 privatisation plan, it introduced the Felicia in late 1994 which has sold well and put to rest jokes about the former communist brand's poor quality.
Skoda plans to make a total of 251,000 cars -- including the Octavia -- this year after 208,279 Felicias in 1995.
The company lost 1.621 billion crown last year due to heavy investments into the new factory, but company officials have said the firm should come close to breaking even this year.
The Czech coalition government on Wednesday looked to recover from the resignation of Justice Minister Jan Kalvoda, a deputy premier who joined four other politicians in admitting they used phoney academic titles.
A cabinet aide said on Wednesday that Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus and key members of the tenous three-party coalition government were waiting for Kalvoda's party to meet later on Wednesday before serious talks on his replacement can begin.
Kalvoda, leader of the Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA) a junior coalition partner, resigned his cabinet and parliament seat on Tuesday, in a speech which caught everybody off guard.
He rose to tell the house that he "wasn't happy to be the next episode of a soap opera, but the title Juris Doctor does not belong to me". Then he quit.
Kalvoda joined four more members of parliament who have admitted to using "Doctor of Law" falsely, as accusations spilled on to the floor of the chamber in a country where academic titles are more often used than first names.
Leaders of ODA, a party with four seats in the 16-member government, were to meet on Wednesday evening to consider who to nominate in Kalvoda's place, a decision which rests with the party according to the agreement which set up the cabinet.
They are expected to discuss whether Kalvoda will remain as head of the strongly pro-business ODA, which he helped establish ahead of general elections in 1992.
A member of parliament from the coalition partner Christian Democrats, resigned for the same reason on Tuesday.
But two members of Klaus's senior Civic Democratic Party, and a member of the opposition Social Democrats have said they will not step down after similar confessions.
Political analysts said that Kalvoda's confession was damaging, but Klaus's tenous government -- which lost its parliamentary majority in June elections -- can survive in tact if the ODA can agree on who can lead the party in the cabinet.
However, two factions within the ODA -- one associated with Industry and Trade Minister Vladimir Dlouhy, and anothter with minister at large Pavel Bratinka -- are likely to fight for control of the party.
"If they (ODA) does not have a good candidate quickly, the government could do some reshuffling," Jiri Pehe, director of research at Prague Open Media Research Institute, told Reuters.
The danger to the government's stability would be if the coalition agreement, pounded out after a month of tense negotiations following the June elections, is reopened.
Klaus told journalists that Kalvoda's resignation was "a political swerve, it's disquieting and unsettling" but that the government would aim to take it in stride.
The foreign exchange market, wary of any instability within the tenous centre-right cabinet reacted sharply and the crown was volatile throughout morning trading.
The usually stable currency fell 50 basis points against the Czech National Bank's mark/dollar basket before recovering when the central bank fixed the crown at 2.32 percent above parity with the basket, down from +2.75 percent on Tuesday.
By mid-day it had recovered to +2.50 above the basket.
Kamil Janacek, chief economist at the largest Czech Bank Komercni Banka, said he did not think Kalvoda's resignation would damage the government.
"The stability of the government does not depend on Mr. Kalvoda. What happened has nothing to do with the ministry itself, it's a personal thing for Mr. Kalvoda," Janacek said.
Pehe said that more phoney-title confessions might still add to the growing drama in parliament.
"In this society it plays such a role -- whether or not you have (an advanced) degree -- I suspect that there may be a few more deputies or government officials in some positions who are claiming to have degrees which they in fact do not," he said.
The Czech Republic's tenuous coalition government sought on Wednesday to repair the damage caused by the shock departure of Justice Minister Jan Kalvoda, who quit after admitting using a phoney academic title.
A cabinet aide said Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus and key members of the three-party coalition government were waiting for Kalvoda's party to meet later in the day before serious talks on his replacement could begin.
President Vaclav Havel asked Kalvoda, leader of the Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA) a junior coalition partner, to reconsider his decision to quit.
Kalvoda, a deputy premier, resigned his cabinet posts and parliamentary seat on Tuesday in a speech which caught everybody off guard.
He quit after telling parliament that he "wasn't happy to be the next episode of a soap opera, but the title Juris Doctor does not belong to me."
He later explained his decision to Havel, who is recuperating in a Prague clinic from lung surgery on a cancerous tumour.
"The president, not being bound constitutionally by any deadline, called on Jan Kalvoda to think about his intended step for several more days," said a statement issued by the president's office after the meeting.
It said Klaus gave the president a request for Kalvoda's dismissal, as protokol requires, and added that Havel would consider it further. Kalvoda was not available for comment.
As accusations spilled across the floor of parliament, four other members had previously admitted to using "Doctor of Law" falsely in a country where academic titles are more often used than first names.
Leaders of the ODA, which has four ministers in the 16-member cabinet, were to meet later to consider who to nominate in Kalvoda's place, a decision which rests with the party according to an agreement which set up the government.
They were also expected to discuss whether Kalvoda should remain as chairman of the strongly pro-business party, which he helped to set up ahead of general elections in 1992.
Political analysts said Kalvoda's confession was damaging but the government, which lost its parliamentary majority in June elections, could survive entact if the ODA agreed speedily on who should lead it in the cabinet.
Two factions within the ODA, one associated with Industry and Trade Minister Vladimir Dlouhy and the other with minister at large Pavel Bratinka, were likely to fight for control of the party.
"If the ODA does not have a good candidate quickly, the government could do some reshuffling," Jiri Pehe, director of research at Prague Open Media Research Institute, told Reuters.
The government's stability could be endangered if the coalition agreement, pounded out in a month of tense negotiations following the June elections, was reopened.
Klaus told reporters on Tuesday that Kalvoda's resignation was disquieting and unsettling and "a political swerve" but the government would aim to take it in its stride.
The foreign exchange market, wary of any instability, reacted sharply and the Czech crown was volatile throughout morning trading.
The usually stable currency fell 50 basis points against the Czech National Bank's mark/dollar basket before recovering when the central bank fixed it at 2.32 percent above parity and then returned to Tuesday's levels later in the day.
Czech economic growth should slow
in 1997, before accelerating again as an ailing foreign trade
balance improves, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD), said on Thursday.
Czech inflation, it said, should ease a bit in 1997 and
more decisively the following year.
In its twice-yearly report, the Paris-based organisation of
the world's most industrialised countries forecast gross
domestic product (GDP) growth to slow to 4.6 percent next year
from 4.8 percent in 1996 but then rise to 5.3 percent in 1998.
"Growth is projected to become better balanced with
investment expected to continue to grow at double digit rates
and household consumption playing a smaller role in GDP
growth," the report said.
The current account deficit as a percentage of GDP would
dip to 5.4 percent in 1997 from 5.8 percent this year, but then
ease to 4.9 percent of GDP in 1998, it said.
Export growth should accelerate to 7.5 percent year-on-year
in 1997 and 8.7 percent in 1998 from 5.5 percent this year,
while import growth should slow to 9.5 percent in the next two
years from 11.3 percent.
"The foreign (trade) balance is expected to improve since
import growth will weaken while exports should recover from the
recent slowdown in line with the projected economic recovery in
the main export markets," the OECD said.
The Czech National Bank however has warned that the
country's current account deficit could grow to as much as
seven percent of gross domestic product in 1996.
The OECD said annual inflation should slow to 8.5 percent
in 1997 and 7.5 percent in 1998 from 9.1 percent this year.
As consolidation continues in the economy, unemployment
should rise to 3.6 percent next year and 4.1 percent in 1998
from about three percent this year, still one of the lowest
rates in the industrialised world.
It said "higher labour productivity and projected wage
moderation will have a favourable effect on price dynamics, but
the inflation rate will still be higher than the OECD average
by the end of the projection period."
But the OECD, which the Czechs joined at the end of 1995,
warned of risks if real wage growth fails to moderate after
growing faster than productivity over the last three years.
"The consumption boom could continue and, despite the
announced fiscal prudence, the trade deficit could widen
further," it said.
- - - - - - - - - -  -
 CZECH REPUBLIC			 1995     1996    1997    1998
 private consumption (pct chg y/y) 6.4	6.0     5.0     4.5
 government consumption	     -4.3     -1.5    -2.0	 0
 gross fixed capital formation    16.1     16.0    13.5    12.5
  final domestic demand		7.2	7.9     6.8 6.7
  * stockbuilding			5.2	1.4	 0	 0
 TOTAL domestic demand		12.1	8.7     6.4     6.4
 exports of goods and services     7.9	5.5     7.5     8.7
 imports of goods and services    19.2     11.3     9.5     9.5
 GDP at market prices		  4.8	4.8     4.6     5.3
 GDP (implicit price deflator)    11.5     12.0    10.5     9.5
--------------------------------------------------------------
Memorandum items
 Private consumption deflator	9.1	9.1     8.5     7.8
 Industrial production		 9.2	8.5     7.5     8.5
 Unemployment rate		     3.0	3.0     3.6     4.1
 Gen. gov't financial bal (pct/gdp)0.3	  0	 0	 0
 Current account balance	    -4.1     -5.8    -5.4    -4.9
Note. All results and estimates are by the OECD and are
adjusted using 1992 prices as a base.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus said on Thursday his ruling Civic Democratic Party (ODS) would end the governing coalition if his partners backed opposition plans to lower the pension age and boost farm subsidies.
In a blistering statement aimed not only at the opposition Social Democrats, but also his party's centrist coalition partners, the Christian Democrats (KDU-CSL), Klaus warned of a potential collapse of Czech post-Communist reforms if the plans were adopted.
Klaus said that "laws were in play whose approval we would interpret as a basic threat to the very basics of the (post-Communist economic) transformation."
It said approval of Social Democrat plans would be "something in which we could not participate, and we would have to leave the government."
It also said that steps by KDU-CSL to push through their candidate as chairman in the new Senate, as well as KDU-CSL's voting with the opposition on the new pension proposal violated the agreement which formed the coalition minority government.
ODS also objected to a plan put forward by the Social Democrats, the largest of three opposition parties, to boost state intervention to help support agriculture.
Klaus's party, which lays claim to the blueprint for the fiscal prudence and currency stability which has given the country the best investment ratings in post-Communist Europe, warned that the proposals could have devastating effects.
"We consider the current political situation in our country to be very serious, and unprecedented in a certain sense," Klaus said in a preamble to the statement.
"If these laws are passed and the threatening development happens, it would mean an imbalance and burden for the budget, and demands on the taxpayers, which we consider to be absolutely impossible and unbearable," it said.
Before falling two seats short of a majority in the 200-seat lower house of parliament in June, Governments led by Klaus approved five consecutive balanced budgets, although the 1996 account expects to actually end with a roughly 1.2 billion crowns deficit, due to lagging tax collection.
The government was able to push through its 1997 balanced budget plan last week after two Social Democrats voted with the government, and then were sacked by their party for it.
The Czech agency CTK later quoted KDU-CSL chairman Josef Lux as saying that the ODS statement did not respond to reality and his party rejected such threats, but he added that he did not see it as a signal to end the coalition.
The lower house recently agreed to continue debate -- in the first of three required readings in parliament -- on a Social Democrat proposal which would lower the retirement age to 60 years for men and 53 to 57 for women.
The plan would replace a government programme to gradually raise the pension age.
Parliament last year had approved the plan of Klaus's then-majority coalition government to raise the retirement age as a way to head off an expected crisis in financing pensions in the long term.
The soonest any of the new controversial proposals could go to parliament for a second reading would be in its February session. They must still have two more readings in the lower house, and then be confirmed by the new upper house.
The government plan, effective at the beginning of this year, sets out a gradual raising of the pension age until the 2007 when the official age would be 62 for men and 60 across the board for women, unifying a system which once allowed women with children to take an earlier retirement.
It has begun to gradually change from the Communist-era schedule of 60 years for men and 54 to 57 for women.
Slower-than-expected third quarter economic growth might force the Czech National Bank (CNB) to make a modest interest rate cut early next year, but analysts said the priority would still be to fight inflation.
The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) said on Thursday that third quarter gross domestic product (GDP) grew by 3.6 percent year-on-year, putting GDP 4.0 percent higher for the first three quarters of 1996.
A Reuter survey of economists on Wednesday had predicted growth for the first three quarters of 1996 of about 4.2 percent, slowing from the official 4.3 percent for the first six months, and 4.8 percent for the whole of 1995.
Analysts said that the real figures, when combined with recent results showing a rapid slowing of money supply growth, proved that while the Czech National Bank's (CNB) mid-year tightening had been effective, it may have gone too far.
"This turned out to be somewhat worse than we hoped...we do expect a slight cut in rates early next year. I think we'll wait just to see the development of prices in January," said economist Radek Maly at Citibank Prague.
Inflation has been stubborn in 1996, with the annual rate hovering above nine percent until recent months. But by November, inflation had slowed to 8.6 percent, year-on-year.
Maly however added that he expected "the central bank still will be looking more after inflation than growth".
He said the government should consider ending incremental price deregulations on energy and rents and instead quickly lift the controls to allow inflation to settle to its core rate, and allow for longer-term investment planning.
The key measure of money supply growth, M2, slowed to 13.8 percent, year-on-year, by the end of September from over 20 percent earlier in the year.
That came after the CNB's hiked its discount rate a full percentage point to 10.5 percent in June and raised minimum reserve requirements to 11.5 percent from 8.5. The M2 rate then slowed to 11.4 percent by the end of October.
"The interest rates are really high, that's why the tight monetary policy is working and slowing the growth," said Petr Kukla, a foreign currency dealer at Girocredit Banka in Prague.
"We will have to wait probably for the beginning of the second half of the next year so that the GDP can improve together with a rate cut," he said.
Domestic demand remained strong but flat at 5.2 percent for the latest quarter, and 5.3 percent for the nine-month period, but well below 1995 levels.
A major harness on growth expansion has been relatively stagnant exports, stifled by the slowdown in demand in western Europe and especially neighbouring Germany.
"The most dynamic growth influence, as it was in the first half, was the development of trade," the CSU said in its statement.
In the third quarter, the CSU said, imports were 222.9 billion crowns, a year-on-year increase of some 21.8 percent.
Imports for the first three quarters totalled 618.0 billion crowns, an increase of 14.7 percent over the previous year.
Meanwhile, the CSU said third quarter exports grew by 6.1 percent, year-on-year, to 183.7 billion crowns, putting the three-quarter combined total at 529.9 billion crowns, or 5.1 percent.
"In the area of foreign trade, dynamic growth in the importing of goods and services was seen, with the yearly growth accelerating from 9.4 percent in the first quarter to 21.8 percent in the third quarter," the statement said.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
Germany and the Czech Republic on Friday concluded nearly two years of sensitive talks on a joint declaration aimed at finally healing the wounds of World War Two and the communist era that followed.
German Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel and his Czech counterpart Josef Zieleniec signed a protocol which sends forward a text expressing regret for injustices on both sides, and setting up a fund for joint projects.
The declaration expresses Bonn's sorrow for the 1938-45 Nazi occupation of the Czech lands and Prague's regret for Czech brutality in the post-war expulsion of ethnic Germans.
It marks Germany's final reconciliation with neighbours who fell under Nazi occupation.
"We Germans regret the suffering and injustice caused to the Czech people by National-Socialist (Nazi) crimes, and we are recognising our responsibility," Kinkel told diplomats and journalists after signing the protocol.
The text was approved by both governments earlier this week, and is to be signed by prime ministers in January, but politicians on both sides of the border are calling for changes before parliaments and presidents give it their final approval.
Both Kinkel and Zielenec insisted the text would not be reopened for negotiation.
Czech opponents of the text claim it fails to pay direct compensation to victims of Nazi agression, while German groups are furious that it avoids paying restitution for Prague's expropriation of property of the so-called Sudeten Germans.
The declaration sets up a Czech-German Future Fund with the German side paying in 140 million marks ($90 million), and the Czechs paying about one-seventh of that.
The text says the fund is to finance "projects of common interest" including joint environmental, historical, and scientific ones, adding that "the projects, wherever appropriate, should work mainly for the benefit of victims of (Nazi) violence."
"The declaration which we have agreed on means simply a clarification of understanding," Zieleniec said.
"This declaration is not a full stop after history. It only closes one sentence and one paragraph. It also is a semi-colon and starts a discussion on the topic of joint projects focused on the future," he added.
The main political critic in Germany is the Bavarian-based Christian Social Union (CSU) which acts as mentor to the Sudeten Germans, survivors and relatives of the 2.5 million ethnic Germans who were collectively blamed for the Nazi occupation and summarily driven out.
Leaders of Bavaria, where most Sudetens settled, had demanded changes in the text, but the Czech government has insisted it will negotiate only with Bonn.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl is due to sign the declaration with Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus in January and the presidents of the two countries will then address each other's parliaments to seal the matter.
A major German daily newspaper, the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, on Friday called the declaration a political sham.
"Perhaps one day there will be a German-Czech declaration which in its honesty and sincerity does provide a historic sign of reconciliation," the daily said in a commentary.
"The great majority of the Czech nation, above all the great majority of politicians, is convinced that the Czechoslovak state was not only politically clever but also morally and legally in the right when it got rid of the German minority." ($1=1.5570 Mark)
The ancient Czech capital has suffered invasions of dictators and demonstrators but nothing and no-one so extraordinary as Michael Jackson and his cohorts.
The controversial and self-styled "King of Pop" plays his first concert in two years when the "HiStory" world tour starts on Saturday on Prague's Letna Plain, where Communist leaders once reviewed troops and Pope John Paul II held mass.
On Tuesday, Jackson is expected to receive the kind of welcome usually reserved for heads of state when his jet lands at Prague's VIP terminal and he is wisked away in a Rolls Royce.
This tour is Jackson's first since he was cleared of child molestation charges by a U.S. court because of lack of evidence.
Like Britain's Queen Elizabeth in May, he will get a full police escort through the ancient Czech capital, but not even monarchs can compete with the huge fleet of luxury cars readied to carry the star's entourage.
Police have asked Czechs to stay away from the airport, but officials have encouraged well-wishers to come out and wave along the 15 km (10 mile) route into the city.
Jackson's Prague date has avoided the controversy at other stops on his three-month tour through Europe, Africa and Asia.
In South Korea, civic and religious groups reacted bitterly to a decision to let Jackson play two concerts in Seoul in October, saying it was unbelievable that the government agreed to to make an "amoral singer" the teenagers' idol.
A planned stop in Casablanca was cancelled by Moroccan authorities, without explanation. A concert organiser said the government did not want 100,000 youths all in the same place.
Jackson's Prague promoter, Serge Grimaux, said the normally reclusive Jackson wanted to arrive several days before the concert to mix with the thousands who throng the bridges and palaces of the Bohemian capital "like a normal tourist".
"He has a big interest in meeting people and doesn't want to be too incognito," Grimaux told reporters.
For those who don't see enough of Jackson, organisers are planning to erect a 10-metre (33 foot) water-filled statue of the singer on the same rock platform hovering above Prague where a monument to Soviet-leader Josef Stalin once stood.
Never before has the sprawling parade ground adjacent to Prague Castle prepared for a spectacle like the one planned for the expected 130,000 paying guests on Saturday.
Huge walls for two security perimeters -- to keep out those not paying the $21 for a ticket -- are being built on the Letna grounds which usually host ball fields, car parks, and a major east-west thoroughfare.
"I'm not building Alcatraz, I'm just building a perimeter for the people that have paid for their tickets to get what they deserve," Grimaux said.
Czech President Vaclav Havel has been moved out of intensive care three weeks after surgery to remove a malignant tumour from his lung, but he will have to spend Christmas in hospital, doctors said on Monday.
"Mr. President has ended his stay in the intensive care unit and has been moved to a standard-care room," the head of Havel's medical team, Dr. Pavel Pafko, told a news conference.
He said that there were no further complications and the 60-year-old Havel's health was improving, but doctors felt his recuperation would be handled better in hospital.
It was not yet clear how long it would be before Havel could go home.
Havel, who had been fighting complications from the surgery which removed half of his right lung, was taken off a respirator which had been installed through his throat late last week. He has been able to speak occasionally.
His team of doctors have said that the cancer was caught at an early stage, and that there was no sign of the disease spreading to other tissue.
Pneumonia developed in the other lung after the surgery and caused a high fever, but both the pneumonia and the fever have subsided.
Havel, the chain-smoking dissident playwright who helped lead Prague's 1989 bloodless revolution which overthrew communism, entered hospital on November 25, after his office said he had been fighting a case of pneumonia.
Presidential spokesman Ladislav Spacek said Havel would write his traditional New Year's address, but it would be shorter than speeches given in the past.
He said it would be determined next week whether or not Havel himself would give the speech.
Havel's New Year speeches usually take stock of the moral state of Czech society and the development of democracy in the country.
The president, a widower after his wife Olga died of cancer last January, has received get-well wishes from heads of state around the world, and thousands of letter from Czechs.
Spacek has publicly thanked Havel's companion, the Czech actress Dagmar Veskernova, for her support in helping the president through his recovery.
Havel, whose position is more ceremonial than executive, has relinquished none of his constitutional powers.
Czech fund manager Harvard Capital &amp; Consulting (HC&amp;C) said on Tuesday it paid a one million crown ($36,500) fine for illegal trading practices from 1993 to 1995, and was making amends.
In a statement HC&amp;C said that Viktor Kozeny, the young Czech-born entreprenuer who founded HC&amp;C, which is not connected to the U.S. college where he once studied, confirmed from his home in the Bahamas that the fine was paid in June.
"The discovered deficiencies from 1993 to 1995 have mostly been removed. We are working on correcting the others," HC&amp;C vice-president Boris Vostry said in the statement obtained from Harvard's Prague public relations agency.
The Finance Ministry on Monday said it had levied the maximum fine allowed by Czech law on HC&amp;C, which became one of the most visible symbols of renascent Czech capitalism during the country's privatisation wave of the early 1990s.
The firm was cited for several violations of the law on investment companies and funds and forced it to pay additional compensation, the ministry said, but did not elaborate.
Marie Jezkova, the head of the ministry's department of fund supervision, told Reuters that Harvard was cited primarily for the manipulation of assets of its publicly-held closed-end Harvard Guarantee &amp; Multiple Fund.
She said that the violations included "dealing with the assets of the fund with unprofessional care".
Jezkova said that Harvard conducted trades which "did not indicate that they were done with the aim to increase the value of the assets of the fund".
Vostry said one of the reasons for the fine was the frequent encroachment of the maximum limits for the purchase of shares in individual companies.
At the time, funds were limited to holding a maximum 20 percent stake in any one company.
Vostry did not list other infractions.
Jezkova was reacting to repeated inquiries concerning a story published last week in the U.S. magazine Fortune.
The magazine quoted a still unpublished ministry decision which it said was handed down in July, which required Harvard to pay a one million crown penalty and $6.8 million in compensation to its funds for various activities.
Jezkova declined comment on the total amount of compensation Harvard was required to pay, but she said that the ministry did impose the maximum fine allowable by law, and that Harvard did have to pay additional compensation.
She also declined to discuss any details of the decision, and said it was up others at the ministry to publish such information.
It is not clear why the decision had been kept secret.
Key ministry personnel have been unavailable during the holiday season.
The infractions described by Fortune concern Harvard's management of funds which were set up during the massive Czech voucher privatisation programme, which gave share vouchers to citizens for a nominal fee.
Kozeny, like many banks and private entrepreneurs, set up funds based on shares gained from citizens who transferred their vouchers to the funds. The citizens received shares in the funds for the vouchers.
($ = 27.34 Czech Crowns)
