Drug discovery specialist Chiroscience Group plc said on Monday it is testing two anti-cancer compounds before deciding which will go forward into human trials before the end of the year.
Both are MMP inhibitors, the same novel class of drug as British Biotech Plc's potential blockbuster Marimastat, which are believed to stop cancer cells from spreading.
In an interview, chief executive John Padfield said Chiroscience hoped to have its own competitor to Marimastat in early trials next year and Phase III trials in 1998.
Austin Reed Group Plc supplier of pinstriped suits to generations of British businessmen, said on Wednesday that a return to favour with women executives helped to boost its first-half profits and sales.
The group, which has around 50 stores in the UK and sells its classic-cut styles in Europe, Japan and the U.S., saw first half profits jump 64 percent to 2.3 million pounds ($3.6 million) while sales climbed 7.0 percent to 38.9 million pounds.
New chief executive Chris Thomson said in an interview that a turnaround in womens' clothing, which now accounts for around 20 percent of sales, was a key factor behind the gains.
He said the 1995 spring collection for women had been a "bit of disaster," when Austin Reed's ranges "didn't sell and we had to substantially discount to get rid of stock, so we are delighted by the way it's come back so successfully."
Austin Reed, which began life in 1900 as a gentlemen's outfitters in Fenchurch Street in the heart of the City, said there are encouraging signs of a rise in UK consumer activity.
"We are trading in a very competitive market," Thomson said, but he added that the group's autumn sales are ahead by around nine percent so far from a year ago.
The company plans to step up sales of its branded clothing through German, French and Italian retailers in particular.
"The Austin Reed brand is well known in Europe, being a quintessentially British brand, and I think there are tremendous opportunities to expand that," Thomson said.
It is also looking to expand its UK retail chain, with new outlets in the heart of London's financial district, a new shopping centre in Dartford and the upmarket Manchester dormitory town of Wilmslow all in its sights. ($1=.6401 Pound)
SkyePharma Plc, one of Britain's most unusual and fastest-growing drugs companies, said on Thursday 1998 would be "the magic year" for proving to investors that its unique growth strategy was paying off.
SkyePharma chairman and chief executive officer Ian Gowrie-Smith, the Australian entrepreneur behind the creation of Medeva Plc, promised that by then there would be "a lot of products filed" for approval, plus news on product launches and collaborations with drug giants.  
"1998 is the magic year. I can't wait for that, because it seems like a lifetime away," he said in a telephone interview.
Earlier SkyePharma, which has the distinction of being formed out of former tent hire company Black &amp; Edgington, announced a narrowing of pretax losses in the six months to July to 6.0 million stg from 10.0 million a year before.
The company is being built out of two key acquisitions, Krypton Ltd, which holds a portfolio of generic drugs to be launched in the U.S. as patents expire, and Jago Holdings AG of Switzerland, which specialises in controlled-release drug delivery.  
The U.S. generic drug market is expected to expand rapidly in the next few years, with new versions of tried and tested drugs much easier and cheaper to get on the market than entirely new products.
Gowrie-Smith said SkyePharma, which is 50 percent owned by its directors, has never been "an investment for short-term punters." The group's share price reached an all-time high of 96 pence in May and fell to a low for the year of 69 pence in July. It was trading at 73 1/2 pence, up 1 1/2, late afternoon.  
"There is a very mature base of investors," he said, adding he hoped to give them a near-term "steer" about the company with a flow of news about the progress of products. SkyePharma said it had two drugs in Phase III trials, with two more about to go in "in the near future." Clinical trials on a non-CFC asthma inhaler developed by Jago are due to start next year.
Gowrie-Smith said these developments were a "signpost", adding that current sales of drugs totalled $2.5 billion annually. The company is reformulating its drugs with Jago's Geomatrix technology which it believes makes them more effective and more easily absorbed by the body.  
The U.S. will dominate expansion plans over the next 18 months, with the workforce of SkyePharma's Brightstone marketing subsidiary gradually rising to 60 from 15. Brightstone is to target the U.S.'s rapidly-expanding managed healthcare sector.
SkyePharma had net cash of 24.3 million stg at the end of July, and Gowrie-Smith said it had no plans to return to the market for cash, unless it saw the opportunity of adding new technology to its existing portfolio.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
General Motors Corp's decision to invest 300 million stg in its U.K. operations reflected confidence in its Vauxhall Motors unit and international prospects for the Astra model, Vauxhall said on Tuesday.
Vauxhall said the three-year investment will be used to modernise its Ellesmere Port plant in north-west England, which makes Astra cars and vans.
The announcement, made at the British International Motor Show, guarantees the livelihoods of the 4,200 people employed at the plant and will create at least 200 new jobs.
Vauxhall Motors chairman and managing director Nick Reilly told Reuters in an interview that a decision on increasing the number of shifts worked at the plant to three from two to be taken over the next two years could create hundreds more jobs.
Any decision would depend on "what the market is then and the demand for the model is at the time."
The Astra model has been consistently one of Britain and Europe's top five sellers since its launch five years ago, with the development of an estate model boosting its position.
Reilly said the 300 million stg investment was won against intense competition within GM and reflected the transformation of Ellesmere Port from a domestically-oriented plant to "a very important source of manufacturing within General Motors."
He forecast strong growth for the Astra in Latin America and Asia Pacific.
Reilly said the British car market is currently "the most competitive in Europe", with a number of importers using huge U.K. fleet sales as a way of offloading cars that remain unsold in sluggish domestic markets. Europe remained "flat," he added.
Vauxhall hoped to keep its market share at around 14.5 percent in 1996, and Reilly said its profitablity is "going in the right direction" after a tough 1995.
Last year, a stagnant car market saw the GM unit's profits slump to three million stg from 79 million in 1994. ($1=.6317 Pound)
General Motor Corp's decision to invest 300 million pounds ($474.9 million) in Vauxhall Motors reflected confidence in its British operation and the international prospects for its Astra model, Vauxhall said on Tuesday.
The company said the three-year investment would be used to modernise its Ellesmere Port plant in north-west England, which makes Astra cars and vans.
The announcement, made at the British International Motor Show, guarantees the livelihoods of the 4,200 people employed at the plant and will create at least 200 new jobs.
Vauxhall Motors chairman and managing director Nick Reilly said in an interview that a possible decision on increasing the number of shifts at the plant to three from two could create hundreds more jobs.
Any decision, likely to be taken over the next two years, would depend on the market and demand for the model at that time.
The Astra model has been consistently one of Britain and Europe's top five sellers since its launch five years ago, with the development of an estate model boosting its position.
Reilly said the 300 million pound investment was won against intense competition within GM and reflected the transformation of Ellesmere Port from a domestically-oriented plant to "a very important source of manufacturing within General Motors."
He predicted strong growth for the Astra in Latin America and Asia Pacific.
Reilly said the British car market is currently "the most competitive in Europe," with a number of importers using huge U.K. fleet sales as a way of offloading cars which remain unsold in sluggish domestic markets. Europe remained "flat," he said.
He said Vauxhall hoped to keep its market share at around 14.5 percent in 1996, and said its profitablity was "going in the right direction" after a tough 1995.
Last year a stagnant car market saw the GM unit's profits slump to three million pounds from 79 million in 1994. ($1=.6317 Pound)
Daewoo Cars Ltd, the British motoring arm of Korean conglomerate Daewoo Corp, is considering transferring its unique UK marketing strategy to new markets.
In an interview with Reuters at this week's British International Motor Show in Birmingham, Daewoo UK Ltd managing director Tong Won Rhie said: "We are now reviewing the performance over the past two years, and the UK strategy has proved a good model."
He said adapting the policy of cutting out car dealerships by selling directly to customers, which has rapidly carved Daewoo a significant slice of Britain's highly competitive car market, "is a big possibility."
Daewoo already operates in 12 European countries and is preparing to launch its models, which are revamped versions of old General Motors Corp cars, in five more.
In its first nine months of operation in Britain last year Daewoo sold more than 13,000 cars. And by October 8 this year Rhie said it had already sold another 18,500 units.
"Our target when we launched was one percent market share in three years. We have already reached that," Rhie said.
Daewoo, which likes to advertise itself as breaking the mould of car supply in Britain, launched itself through cleverly targeted publicity, including surveys of customer likes and dislikes.
Rhie summed up customers' pet hates as "too much hassle" from salesmen and poor aftercare once the sale was complete.
"It is like a wedding, with the customer as the bride. Before, they say I love you, darling,' and all that, but after the marriage they forget," Rhie said.
Daewoo was the first company to offer three years' free servicing on all models and packed its cars with extras including airbags and mobile phones.
It has also led a revolution in all-inclusive pricing, a trend followed this week by GM unit Vauxhall Motors and by Porsche AG with its new Boxster sports car.
But Rhie said its U.K. strategy was not applicable to all markets, particularly those where the relationship between car producers and dealers is even more entrenched than in Britain.
"The UK market is more sophisticated than many other countries. The level of (consumer) awareness is higher."
Daewoo has encountered severe criticism from rivals, some of whom are alarmed at the speed with which it has penetrated the British market, where it has overtaken longer-established names like Saab, Mitsubishi and Hyundai.
Some question whether its pioneering servicing agreement with the Halfords superstore chain can provide the level of support for customers that it claims.
Daewoo's response to criticism that its current range of models is outmoded will be to launch three entirely new cars at the end of 1997. Rhie said one of these, known as the J Car, had been developed largely by its U.K. R&amp;D operation in the southern town of Worthing, which employs nearly 1,000 people.
Rhie declined to state Daewoo's next target for U.K. market share. "Quantity is very important but that is not the final goal," he said. "Our aim is a customer focus and how to continuously follow up customers' requirements."
Shares in perennial bid favourite Zeneca Group Plc spiralled higher once more on Thursday, but analysts said it was on the thinnest of pretexts.
The stock touched a new record of 17.25 pounds during the morning session, with the rise once more triggered by speculation about the intentions of Swiss drugs giant Roche Holding AG. -- hotly tipped by takeover theorists as the only company rich enough to buy Zeneca.
News that Roche had named Franz Humer as chief operating officer combined with talk in the press that Humer is keen to ensure Roche does "not play second fiddle" to his old employer Glaxo Wellcome fuelled the latest rise, traders said.
With few people willing to sell Zeneca stock in case they miss out on any takeover, which could be worth $30 billion, the stock is being continually squeezed higher.
Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull (SGST) analyst Peter Laing said Zeneca shares, which have gained 37 percent this year, are now at "eye-popping" levels. SGST believes that a hostile bid is implausible at current valuations, and, without this, the stock's current rating is increasingly hard to justify.
"Is it valid for a stock which is only two-thirds a drug stock and the rest agro-chemicals and specialty chemicals to be on the same premium as Pfizer?" said Laing, who argued that the current gains are a story of "supply and demand."
Cash-rich Roche is widely believed to want to make a large acquisition, both to reassert its position as number one in Switzerland and to counteract the shortfall in new drugs coming through the industry's pipeline.
But some analysts and industry executives believe that Zeneca would not necessarily be its chosen target.
One industry source said he believed Roche would be much more interested in the U.S. company Schering-Plough Corp, which had a similar market capitalization to Zeneca. He said Roche had eyed Schering Plough on a number of occasions.
Schering-Plough would offer Roche a much stronger footing in the key U.S. market than Zeneca, and it would plug gaps in Roche's existing infrastrucure, offering the Swiss group badly-needed muscle in the non-hospital and U.S. over-the-counter sectors.
However, analysts said Zeneca had a more attractive pipeline of new drugs than Schering-Plough. And as the world's second-biggest cancer drug company after Bristol Myers Squibb Co it would also boost Roche in a key therapeutic area.
"I am quite sure that at the right price several companies would like to acquire Zeneca," said Panmure Gordon analyst Robin Gilbert, adding that good quality medium-to-large businesses like Zeneca and Schering-Plough are few and far between.
But Gilbert said Zeneca, which is "firing on all cylinders" since its split from chemicals group ICI Plc in 1993, is determined to remain independent.
"They believe they have a future as an independent company, and obviously they don't agree with the size philosphy of people like Glaxo Wellcome," Gilbert said.
British household products group Reckitt &amp; Colman Plc pleased shareholders on Tuesday with a 152 million pound ($242 million) handout.
The group, known for brands ranging from Mr Sheen polish to Dettol disinfectant, announced a special Foreign Income Dividend (FID) of 35.65 pence per share, combined with plans to take one in every 20 of its shares out of circulation.
It said it hoped the novel scheme, which is funded from earnings made outside Britain, would avoid the tax problems which had hit other share buybacks recently.
News of the plan sent Reckitt shares soaring 18 1/2 pence to 735 by midmorning.
Reckitt said it was taking the opportunity of sharp falls in its debt to clean up its balance sheet.
The company splashed out $1 billion in 1994 to buy the U.S. household products group L&amp;F, maker of America's best-selling disinfectant, Lysol.
Since then sales of many of its non-core businesses, including the famous Colman's mustard brand, have brought in more than 430 million pounds.
"We have been looking for some time at ways to organise our balance sheet to enhance shareholder value," chief executive Vernon Sankey said in an interview.
Sankey said that the move was a clear signal to share markets that it had no major takeover target on the scale of L&amp;F in its sights.
But he added that it would not be embarrassed about going back to shareholders for cash if an opportunity came up to boost its ambition to become world number one in household products.
For the time being, Reckitt &amp; Colman is content to pursue its strategy of acquiring smaller business which fit in with its product range and extend its global reach.
These ambitions can be fulfilled from the group's strong cash generation of around 150 million pounds a year.
Sankey said the purchase of an insecticide business earlier this year with strength in China, the Middle East and Africa was a good example of this strategy and added that Reckitt had similar moves "up our sleeves." Asia, Latin America and "conceivably Africa" are favoured targets, he added.
Sankey said the choice of foreign income dividend, which is paid from the 92 percent of Reckitt's business now done outside Britain, was not influenced by Chancellor Kenneth Clarke's recent decision to restrict repayment of tax credits on special dividends which are linked to share consolidation.
"We have had to make no alterations because this is in line with the Chancellor's indications," Sankey said. "It doesn't use U.K. money, it uses money from outside the U.K." ($1=.6270 Pound)
Ethical Holdings Plc, the UK-based drug delivery company listed on the U.S. Nasdaq index, said on Wednesday it expected research and development spending to continue to rise sharply as it targets the key U.S. market. The company said earlier that a 32 percent rise in R&amp;D spending to 10.4 million stg helped to push it into the red in the year ended August 31.
Ethical, which specialises in controlled oral release and skin patch drugs, posted a pre-tax loss of 11.0 million stg after a profit of 3.4 million a year before.  
The results were also affected by a one-off payment of 7.9 million stg for the repurchase of product rights from Drug Royalty Corp Inc.
In a telephone interview with Reuters, chairman and chief executive Geoffrey Guy said the sharp rise in R&amp;D spending was likely to continue over the next couple of years, "and probably at a greater rate".
The company has decided to target the U.S, where it has had a relatively low profile despite its Nasdaq listing.  
This involves taking a number of products, including a once-daily morphine tablet used by cancer patients and a Hormone Replacement Therapy (HRT) skin patch, through late-stage trials.
"We took the view that to get the major markets and royalties of the U.S. we have to go back into an investment phase," Guy said.
Ethical, which is based near Ely in Cambridgeshire, southern England, has 16 products on the market. It focuses on four core areas -- hormone replacement therapy (HRT), cardiovascular disease, asthma and analgesia. Its technology is useful for producing generic versions of off-patent drugs.  
As well as targeting the U.S, Guy said the company had consolidated its position in Europe during the year, acquired a South American skin patch company and put a foot in the potentially lucrative Japanese market through agreements on its morphine and cardiovascular drugs.
Guy said Ethical had strong hopes for its once-daily pain-killing morphine tablet, which offers advantages over current drugs which have to be taken twice a day.
He said the Ethical product is about 18 months behind its main competitor and estimated the global market for morphine tablets at $250 to $350 million a year "and still growing".  
Ethical has also applied for a U.K. licence for an HRT skin patch which it claims will eliminate monthly bleeding caused by existing treatments in some women.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
New evidence about British Biotech Plc's anti-cancer treatment Marimastat next week will provide important clues about its potential as a blockbuster product, analysts said on Friday.
British Biotech is using a meeting of the European Society of Medical Oncologists (ESMO) in Vienna to make five presentations, including Marimastat's effects in ovarian, colo-rectal, pancreatic and gastric cancer.
It will issue a general update on Monday morning.  
The Oxford-based group has become the bellwether for the increasingly crowded biotech field in the U.K, with sentiment towards Marimastat having a disproportionate impact on the sector.
Millions of pounds of investors' money has been placed on the bet that Marimastat will turn out to be Europe's first big-selling biotech product, with forecasts for annual sales ranging from a few hundred million dollars to up to $4 billion.  
Monday's data comes from patients who continued to use the drug beyond the period necessary for completion of Phase II clinical trials. The company said this meant there would be a further six months of extra information.
Yamaichi International analyst Erling Refsum said he hoped to see the first hard evidence that patients were living longer as a result of taking Marimastat. Refsum said the surrogate marker data provided so far was like "the indicator board at the train station rather than the train actually coming."  
In a note on the trials Lehman Brothers analyst Ian Smith, who will attend the ESCO meeting, said it might be possible to glean indications of the effect of Marimastat on patient survival in ovarian and pancreatic cancer.
There will also be interest in Marimastat's impact on gastric cancer, where little information has so far been available. And analysts are keen to see how serious the side effects caused by the drug are. The main problem reported so far is joint pain.  
Yamaichi's Refsum said the results are "not definitive as  to whether it works or not, but it is another indication as to whether it will sell or won't sell, and that is the bottom line." Lehman's Smith added that the results "won't prove Marimastat's efficacy but will raise the probabilities."
British Biotech will announce late-stage data on another key product, pancreatitis drug Lexipafant, on November 27.
Smith said that favourable news on both drugs could lift the group's share price to 300 pence by the end of the month from 230 at Friday's close. But Refsum is more sceptical about the potential impact of Marimastat and said 150 pence is "reasonable value" for the shares.
A British Biotech spokeswoman said Phase III Marimastat trials are likely to take two years to complete, meaning that the first results would not be available until 1998 at the earliest. But she said British Biotech would probably make academic presentations at conferences like ESMO from time to time to keep the market up to date.
Late stage trials on pancreatic cancer started in June, and trials in small-cell lung cancer, ovarian cancer, gastric cancer and a form of brain cancer are being set up, she added.
New evidence about British Biotech Plc's anti-cancer treatment Marimastat next week will provide important clues about its potential as a blockbuster product, analysts said on Friday.
British Biotech is using a meeting of the European Society of Medical Oncologists (ESMO) in Vienna to make five presentations, including Marimastat's effects in ovarian, colo-rectal, pancreatic and gastric cancer. It will issue a general update on Monday morning.
The Oxford-based group has become the bellwether for the increasingly crowded biotech field in the U.K, with sentiment towards Marimastat having a disproportionate impact on the sector.
Millions of pounds of investors' money has been placed on the bet that Marimastat will turn out to be Europe's first big-selling biotech product, with forecasts for annual sales ranging from a few hundred million dollars to up to $4 billion.
Monday's data comes from patients who continued to use the drug beyond the period necessary for completion of Phase II clinical trials. The company said this meant there would be a further six months of extra information.
Yamaichi International analyst Erling Refsum said he hoped to see the first hard evidence that patients were living longer as a result of taking Marimastat. Refsum said the surrogate marker data provided so far "is like the indicator board at the train station rather than the train actually coming."
In a note on the trials Lehman Brothers analyst Ian Smith, who will attend the ESCO meeting, said it might be possible to glean indications of the effect of Marimastat on patient survival in ovarian and pancreatic cancer.
There will also be interest in Marimastat's impact on gastric cancer, where little information has so far been available. And analysts are keen to see how serious the side effects caused by the drug are. The main problem reported so far is joint pain.
Yamaichi's Refsum said the results are "not definitive as to whether it works or not, but it is another indication as to whether it will sell or won't sell, and that is the bottom line." Lehman's Smith added that the results "won't prove Marimastat's efficacy but will raise the probabilities."
British Biotech will announce late-stage data on another key product, pancreatitis drug Lexipafant, on November 27.
Smith said that favourable news on both drugs could lift the group's share price to 300 pence by the end of the month from 230 at Friday's close. But Refsum is more sceptical about the potential impact of Marimastat and said 150 pence is "reasonable value" for the shares.
A British Biotech spokeswoman said Phase III Marimastat trials are likely to take two years to complete, meaning that the first results would not be available until 1998 at the earliest. But she said British Biotech would probably make academic presentations at conferences like ESMO from time to time to keep the market up to date.
Late stage trials on pancreatic cancer started in June, and trials in small-cell lung cancer, ovarian cancer, gastric cancer and a form of brain cancer are being set up, she added.
Biotechnology star British Biotech Plc published fresh evidence on Monday that its cancer drug Marimastat worked, but analysts said there was still a long way to go before its potential could be confirmed.
British Biotech's shares ended the day 19 pence lower at 210 after its keenly-awaited announcement appeared to provide comfort for both bulls and bears on Marimastat.
Some predicted that Marimastat, a new class of cancer drug, could one day have sales of $4 billion a year and project British Biotech into the blue chip FT-SE 100 index.
Some analysts said presentations on the drug's effectiveness in gastric, colo-rectal, ovarian and pancreatic cancer to a science conference in Vienna were a rehash of data published in May, which sent the share price soaring to record levels.
"Those who were sceptical in May will remain sceptical and those who were bullish in May will remain bullish," said one.
Finance director James Noble told Reuters the company had been deliberately cautious about its statement on Monday, because it was "extremely concerned not to raise patients' hopes of the drug."
But he said there was "significant" evidence that Marimastat increased the chances of survival in cancer patients and added "in many ways I think it is the most impressive data since the company was founded."
The studies, based on 381 cancer patients who continued taking the drug after the 28-day period required for Phase II trials, confirmed Marimastat's ability to reduce the rate of rise of cancer antigens, one measure of how much cancer is present in the body.
"Those patients who continued to take it for more than 28 days lived ... significantly longer" than those who stopped taking it, Noble said.
One of the supporters of the drug, Greig Middleton analyst John Savin, agreed, saying that "on this information today we can say that ... 37 percent (of patients) had a real overall response which improved their survival chance significantly."
However, others expressed disappointment that British Biotech failed to provide more detailed analysis of side-effects caused by Marimastat. The Oxford-based group confirmed that it caused joint pain, mainly in the arm and shoulder, with around 30 percent of patients affected after three to five months.
Yamaichi International analyst Erling Refsum said the side effect profile would be crucial to Marimastat's potential.
"Drugs become top sellers because of their side effect profile rather than because of their efficacy profile," he said.
Noble played down concerns about side effects, saying "they are not a serious problem. They are reversible."
Patients who suffered badly could interrupt their treatment from time to time without adverse impact.
Analysts said credible estimates of exactly how big Marimastat will turn out to be would be impossible until final, Phase III trials were completed.
This means investors will have to wait until 1998 at the earliest for hard evidence about whether their optimism about Marimastat and British Biotech is well founded.
British Biotech Plc published further evidence on Monday that its cancer drug Marimastat works, but analysts said there was still a long way to go before its potential as a blockbuster can be confirmed.
British Biotech's shares ended the day 19 pence lower at 210 after its keenly-awaited announcement appeared to provide comfort for both bulls and bears.
Some forecast that Marimastat, a new class of cancer drug, could one day have sales of $4 billion a year and make British Biotech a FT-SE 100 company.
But some analysts said presentations on the drug's effectiveness in gastric, colo-rectal, ovarian and pancreatic cancer to a science conference in Vienna were just a rehash of data published in May, which sent the share price soaring to record levels.
"Those who were sceptical in May will remain sceptical and those who were bullish in May will remain bullish," said one.
Finance director James Noble told Reuters the company had been deliberately cautious about its statement on Monday, because it was "extremely concerned not to raise patients' hopes of the drug."
But he said there was "significant" evidence that Marimastat increased the chances of survival in cancer patients and added "in many ways I think it is the most impressive data since the company was founded."
The studies, based on 381 cancer patients who continued taking the drug after the 28-day period required for Phase II trials, confirmed Marimastat's ability to reduce the rate of rise of cancer antigens, one measure of how much cancer is present in the body.
"Those patients who continued to take it for more than 28 days lived...significantly longer" than those who stopped taking it, Noble said.
One of the bulls of the drug, Greig Middleton analyst John Savin, agreed, saying that "on this information today we can say that...37 percent (of patients) had a real overall response which improved their survival chance significantly."
But others expressed disappointment that British Biotech failed to provide more detailed analysis of side effects caused by Marimastat. The Oxford-based group confirmed it caused joint pain, mainly in the arm and shoulder, with around 30 percent of patients affected after three to five months.
Yamaichi International analyst Erling Refsum said the side effect profile will be crucial to Marimastat's potential.
"Drugs become top sellers because of their side effect profile rather than because of their efficacy profile," he said.
Noble played down concerns about side effects, saying: "They are not a serious problem. They are reversible."
He said patients who suffered badly could interrupt their treatment from time to time without adverse impact.
Analysts said credible estimates of exactly how big Marimastat will turn out to be would be impossible until final, Phase III trials were completed.
This means investors will have to wait until 1998 at the very earliest for hard evidence that their optimism about Marimastat and British Biotech is well founded.
-- London Newsroom +44 71 542 7717
British Biotech Plc published further evidence on Monday that its cancer drug Marimastat worked, but analysts said there was still a long way to go before its potential as a blockbuster product can be confirmed.
Shares in the company slipped back after its keenly-awaited announcement appeared to provide comfort for both bulls and bears on Marimastat, a new class of cancer drug which some predict could one day have sales of $4 billion a year.
The stock was down 14 1/2 pence at 217 pence in early afternoon trading. But analysts noted that it rose sharply last week ahead of publication, while the decision by Morgan Grenfell to sell a sizeable chunk of its holding on October 29 had mopped up much of the buying interest in advance.
Oxford-based British Biotech used a cancer conference in Vienna to make a number of presentations on trials of the drug in gastric, colo-rectal, ovarian and pancreatic cancer.
It said the studies, based on cancer patients who continued taking the drug after the 28-day period needed for Phase II trials, confirmed Marimastat's ability to reduce the rate of rise of cancer antigens, one measure of how much cancer is present in the body. It also provided evidence of succcess in gastric cancer, where a large scale trial is now underway.
Some analysts said there was little new in the statement, which was largely a confirmation of Phase II, or intermediate stage, data published in May.
"Those who were sceptical in May will remain sceptical and those who were bullish in May will remain bullish," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
Finance director James Noble said the company had been deliberately cautious in its comments to avoid raising false hopes among cancer sufferers. Nevertheless he told Reuters that "In many ways I think this is the most impressive data since the company was floated.
One of the bulls, Greig Middleton analyst John Savin, said the real news was hidden in presentations made by doctors at the Vienna conference. He said that despite the "mishmash" of data from the trials, which covered 381 patients, there was "very compelling" evidence that Marimastat had improved chances of survival.
"On this information today we can say that...37 percent (of patients) had a real overall response which improved their survival chance significantly," Savin said.
However, others expressed disappointment that British Biotech failed to provide more detailed analysis of side effects caused by Marimastat. British Bitoech confirmed that it caused joint pain, mainly in the arm and shoulder, with around 30 percent of patients affected after three to five months.
Yamaichi International analyst Erling Refsum said the side effect profile will be crucial to Marimastat's potential. "Drugs become top sellers because of their side effect profile rather than because of their efficacy profile," he said.
Noble played down concerns about side effects, saying "they are not a serious problem. They are reversible." He said patients who suffer badly will be able to interrupt their treatment from time to time without any adverse impact.
Analysts pointed out that no real estimate of just how big Marimastat will be could be made until Phase III trials were completed. This means investors will have to wait until 1998 at the very earliest for hard evidence that their optimism about Marimastat and British Biotech is well founded.
-- London Newsroom +44 71 542 7717
British Petroleum Co Plc (BP) extolled the virtues of "self help" on Tuesday as it reported its best-ever third quarter earnings despite pressure on profit margins in some key businesses.
Third-quarter net earnings jumped by 22 percent to 650 million pounds ($1.07 billion), towards the top end of forecasts, while in the first nine months of the year they were up 28 percent to a record 1.93 billion pounds.
BP said strong oil prices, which have recently been at their highest levels since the 1991 Gulf War at around $22 a barrel, boosted earnings by between $400 million-$500 million in the third quarter.
But it added that the gains were more than offset by weaker profit margins in refining, marketing and chemicals, which accounted for about 27 percent of group net earnings.
Group chief executive John Browne said BP was enjoying the benefits of a raft of cost-cutting and efficiency drives, which were adding $150 million to profit every quarter.
"What we see here has not come about as a result of high oil prices, it has come about as a result of self help," he said.
The market took the results calmly, with BP shares adding two pence to close at 640.5 pence after touching a high of 647p. However, trading in BP shares on the options market was active.
"People are still speculating on a fairly sharp rise in BP shares," one options specialist said.
"In a sense BP have spoilt us," said Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull analyst Irene Himona.
"We've got used to them coming out with a good set of numbers at the top of the range, and unfortunately with (rival) Shell it is the other way around."
BP's results contrasted with disappointment last week at third-quarter figures from rival Royal Dutch/Shell Group, where profits fell on the back of low refining margins and a weak chemicals market.
BP also emphasised the relative stability in its earnings, partly as a result of the vigorous cost-cutting at its exploration and production activities.
"They are very much on the ball and very focused. They have achieved a lot of efficiency improvements and delivered a lot of savings," said Himona.
BP was upbeat about near term propsects, with oil demand expected to remain strong into 1997. But it said its long-term view that the oil price would settle back into a range of $16 to $18 a barrel had not changed. "The question is how we get from here to there," said Browne.
Morgan Stanley analyst Chris Buckley said the oil price was always the greatest uncertainty, but added that lower prices tended to mean margins could improve in downstream activities like chemicals and refining.
($1=.6051 Pound)
British Petroleum Co Plc (BP) extolled the virtues of "self help" on Tuesday as it reported its best-ever third quarter earnings despite pressure on profit margins in some key businesses.
Third-quarter net earnings jumped by 22 percent to 650 million pounds ($1.07 billion), towards the top end of forecasts, while in the first nine months of the year they were up 28 percent to a record 1.93 billion pounds.
BP said strong oil prices, which have recently been at their highest levels since the 1991 Gulf War at around $22 a barrell, boosted earnings by between $400 million-$500 million in the third quarter.
But it added that the gains were more than offset by weaker profit margins in refining, marketing and chemicals, which accounted for about 27 percent of group net earnings.
Group chief executive John Browne said BP was enjoying the benefits of a raft of cost-cutting and efficiency drives, which were adding $150 million to profit every quarter.
"What we see here has not come about as a result of high oil prices, it has come about as a result of self help," he said.
The market took the results calmly, with BP shares adding two pence to close at 640.5 pence after touching a high of 647p. However, trading in BP shares on the options market was active.
"People are still speculating on a fairly sharp rise in BP shares," one options specialist said.
"In a sense BP have spoilt us," said Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull analyst Irene Himona.
"We've got used to them coming out with a good set of numbers at the top of the range, and unfortunately with (rival) Shell it is the other way around."
BP's results contrasted with disappointment last week at third-quarter figures from rival Royal Dutch/Shell Group, where profits fell on the back of low refining margins and a weak chemicals market.
BP also emphasised the relative stability in its earnings, partly as a result of the vigorous cost-cutting at its exploration and production activities.
"They are very much on the ball and very focused. They have achieved a lot of efficiency improvements and delivered a lot of savings," said Himona.
BP was upbeat about near term propsects, with oil demand expected to remain strong into 1997. But it said its long-term view that the oil price would settle back into arange of $16 to $18 a barrell had not changed. "The question is how we get from here to there," said Browne.
Morgan Stanley analyst Chris Buckley said the oil price was always the greatest uncertainty, but added that lower prices tended to mean margins could improve in downstream activities like chemicals and refining.
Dominion Resources Inc of the United States ended a day of rampant speculation on Wednesday by declaring it was interested in bidding for British power supply company East Midlands Electricity Plc.
But the U.S. group, which owns power generator and distributor Virginia Power, made clear it would walk away from making a bid if East Midlands' share price continued to rocket on Thursday.
East Midlands' share price leaped 70 1/2 pence to close at 608 pence on Wednesday, lifting the Nottingham-based group's value to more than 1.2 billion pounds, as rumour swirled around it.
In a statement published after the close of London trading, Dominion said it did not intend to make an offer at a price "much in excess" of East Midlands' closing price
Sources close to the company said that if the price "runs away tomorrow then Dominion will run away".
The sources said East Midlands had already cut costs "to the bone", adding that "the comapny needs investment to grow again".
East Midlands declined to comment on the Dominion statement.
Rumours that another bid was about to claim one of the few remaining independent regional electricity companies (RECs) in England and Wales had sent shares in the sector soaring on Wednesday.
Besides East Midlands, Yorkshire Electricity Group Plc's shares rose 15.5 pence to 754, while Southern Electric Plc jumped 21.5 pence to 669, and London Electricity Plc gained 12 1/2 to 618.
However the name of any likely bidder remained a mystery.
Dominion Resources Inc is a medium-sized player in the U.S., with a market capitalisation of around $6.6 billion and annual sales of around $4.7 billion.
As well as Virginia Power, its main subsidiary, Dominion has a number of joint generation ventures in the U.S. and internationally, notably in South America. It also has an interest in gas and real estate.
If Dominion's board does decide to go ahead with a bid it will be the latest in a line of U.S. utilities to buy into the privatised British power supply business.
Last week a unit of U.S.-based CalEnergy launched a hostile 650 million pound ($1.07 billion) bid for Northern Electric Plc.
Northern Electric, which is due to release sparkling half year results early in an attempt to attract a higher bid, saw its shares rise 1 1/2 pence to 634 pence on Thursday, adding to recent sharp gains.
Out of the 12 privatised cash-rich RECS, seven have already changed ownership -- four of them to U.S. companies.
U.S. power utility Dominion Resources Inc will have to reconsider the price it is prepared to pay for East Midlands Electricity Plc if it is realistic about acquiring it, analysts said on Thursday.
On Wednesday Dominion's interest in East Midlands was flushed out by U.K. stock exchange regulators after East Midland's share price jumped by 13 percent.
But Dominion said it would not go much above Wednesday's closing price of 608 pence, valuing East Midlands at just over 1.2 billion stg ($1.97 billion), and industry sources said it would "run away" if the market drove the price up further.
Investors seemed to take Dominion at its word on Thursday, and with no bid on the table East Midlands' share price slipped back 21 pence to 587 in midafternoon trading.
But analysts said an offer would be most unlikely to succeed at 610 pence, valuing East Midlands less highly than Northern Electric Plc, which is subject of a 659 million stg bid from U.S. energy group CE Electric.
SG Strauss Turnbull analyst Marshall Whiting said Dominion was being "very cheeky."
Dominion's declaration of interest follows hard on the heels of CalEnergy Co Inc unit CE Electric's 630 pence offer for Northern last week.
Using median forecast figures gathered by Edinburgh Financial Publishing, CE Electric's offer represents a P/E ratio of 9.3 against Northern's prospective year through March 1997 earnings and 8.6 times year through March 1998 earnings.
Dominion Resources Inc. ended a day of speculation Wednesday by declaring it might bid for British regional utility East Midlands Electricity Plc in a deal that could be worth about $2 billion.
The bid would mark the lastest in a a line of U.S. utilities companies seeking to buy into the privatised British power supply business.
But in a statement published after the close of London trading, Richmond, Va.-based Dominion, which owns electric utility Virginia Power, said it would not make an offer at a price "much in excess" of East Midlands' closing price.
Sources close to the situation said that if the price "runs away tomorrow, then Dominion will run away."
East Midlands' share price leaped 70.5 British pence to close at 608 pence ($9.97) on Wednesday, lifting the Nottingham, England-based group's value to more than 1.2 billion pounds ($1.97 billion), as rumour swirled around it.
Dominion stock gained 75 cents to $39.75 on the New York Stock Exchage.
The sources said East Midlands had already cut costs "to the bone," adding that "the comapny needs investment to grow again."
East Midlands declined to comment on the Dominion statement.
Rumours that another bid was about to claim one of the few remaining independent regional electricity companies in England and Wales sent their shares soaring.
Besides East Midlands, Yorkshire Electricity Group Plc.'s shares rose 15.5 pence to 754 ($12.37), while Southern Electric Plc. jumped 21.5 pence to 669 pence ($10.97), and London Electricity Plc. gained 12.5 to 618 pence ($10.14).
The names of any likely bidders remained a mystery.
Dominion Resources is a medium-sized company in the United States, with a market capitalisation of around $6.6 billion and annual sales of around $4.7 billion.
In addition to Virginia Power, its main subsidiary, Dominion has a number of joint generation ventures in the United States and internationally, notably in South America. It also has an interest in gas and real estate.
If Dominion's board proceeds, the bid would be the latest in a series of U.S. companies that has turned up recently in the privatised British power supply business. Last week, a unit of U.S.-based CalEnergy launched a hostile 650 million pound ($1.07 billion) bid for Northern Electric Plc.
Northern Electric, which is due to release strong half-year results early in an attempt to attract a higher bid, saw its shares rise 1.5 pence to 634 pence ($10.40) on Thursday, adding to recent sharp gains.
Out of the 12 privatised cash-rich regional electric companies, seven have already changed ownership -- four of them to U.S. companies.
British health and industrial gases giant BOC Group Plc reported its best-ever set of full-year profits on Tuesday, dispelling some of the gloom which has settled over its share price in recent months.
BOC, one of the world's biggest suppliers of specialist gases, saw profits surge 11 percent to 444.9 million pounds ($745 million) despite problems caused by a stronger pound and a deterioration in the performance of its health-care business.
Sales climbed seven percent to just over 4.0 billion pounds.
The outcome was at the top-end of analysts' forecasts, which had been pared down after BOC issued cautious noises about its two non-core operations, health and industrial vacuums, along with third-quarter results on August 13.
Shares in the group, which have fallen from more than 940 pence since mid-June and touched 12-month lows on Monday ahead of the results, climbd 29 pence to 865 in early afternoon trading.
Industrial gases, which are used in industries as varied as foods, chemicals, metallurgy and water purification, saw operating profits rise nine percent to 408.3 million pounds on sales up 6.8 percent to 2.8 billion pounds.
In an interview with Reuters, chief executive Danny Rosenkranz said he expected profit margins in gases to improve by about two percentage points over the "next three to four years" from the 14.5 percent achieved in the year ended in September.
He said a major factor behind the improvement would be the huge increase in the number of 15-year supply contracts BOC has won in the U.S, which entail building gas-making plants next to customers such as steel works in return for guaranteed sales.
The Ohmeda health division, hit by continued falls in the price of BOC's once top-selling anaesthetic gas Forane and weak U.S. demand for anaesthetic machinery, was the only BOC unit to see operating profits fall, dropping 11 percent to 53.1 million pounds.
Rosenkranz said Ohmeda would continue to have a difficult time in the six months to March 1997 but should turn in a flat performance for the year as a whole, and "...starting next year this thing ought to start climbing.
The market had also been braced for a poor performance at Edwards Vacuum Products, whose machinery creates super-clean environments for industry, because of a downturn in the overcrowded semi-conductor market.
In the event the loose alliance of business known as vacuum and distribution posted a 28 percent gain in full-year operating profit to 90.3 million pounds, although the gain in the fourth-quarter had slowed to just eight percent as the impact of a fall-off in semi-conductor orders started to bite.
Rosenkranz pointed to tentative signs of a pick-up in the computer industry, such as a rise in the October U.S. industry book-to-bill ratio. Nevertheless he said the vacuum business "will see a decline in profits this year", but did not predict its extent.
Uncertainty also remains over the impact of sterling, whose newfound strength ate into the gain in fourth-quarter profits, trimming their advance by three percentage points to around nine-percent.
Rosenkranz warned that stronger sterling "is bound to hit profits" if it continues. ($1=.5970 Pound)
Yorkshire-based chemicals group Allied Colloids Plc said on Tuesday that its strategy of growing organically remained unchanged, despite the $390 million acquisition of CPS Chemical Co Inc of the U.S.
Chief executive David Farrar said Allied Colloids "has not been acquisitive" by tradition.
"We saw this as an opportunity that does not come along very often," Farrar said in a telephone interview with Reuters following the announcement of the purchase and interim results.  
"This is a good strategic fit for us. CPS are in the same business as us, the chemistry is similar. We have had a long association with them and have been major customers of theirs for eight years."
The move will substantially increase Allied Colloids' sales in the U.S, which already accounts for more than 30 percent of its annual turnover. CPS, which has plants in Arkansas and New Jersey, had sales of $157 million last year, some 75 percent of which were in the domestic market.  
Farrar said Allied, which provides chemicals for a wide range of industries including paper-making, minerals, textiles, oil and pharmaceuticals, remained committed to expansion in other key marekts, notably Europe and the Far East. But this would be achieved "by organic growth."
Allied Colloids believes the acquisition of CPS, which is partly being financed by a two-for-seven rights issue to raise 173 million stg, will be earnings enhancing in its first full financial yuear. It said it also expected to benefit from substantial U.S. tax credits.  
Farrar said the combined group would have a workforce of around 3,500 following the addition of CPS' 360 employees. He said CPS, which makes chemical intermediates and finished polymers for industry, will complement Allied in a number of areas, notably in coatings, paper and pollution control.
It will also add to Allied's technological base and provide new products to market through its existing 400-strong salesforce.
The rights issue and acquisition were accompanied by an upbeat statement on prospects, with Allied Colloids predicting a continued improvement in second-half sales and profits.  
First-half pretax profits rose 3.8 percent to 21.1 million stg on sales up 9 percent at 207.6 million stg.
Farrar said sharp falls in raw material costs earlier this year started to feed into second-quarter results, but their full impact would be felt in the second half. He predicted that gross profit margins would increase by 1 percentage point in the second half from the 37.5 percent seen in the first half and the 36.2 achieved in the 12 months to March.
Allied is also predicting a further pick-up in sales growth in the second half of the year, implying full-year sales of more than 430 million stg compared with 393 million a year earlier.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
Health and industrial gases specialist BOC Group Plc said on Tuesday that its troubled healthcare business is likely to turn in a flat performance in the current year to Sept 1997 before recovering.
In a telephone interview with Reuters following publication of the group's best-ever full-year profit figures, chief executive Danny Rosenkranz said the Ohmeda health business faced another challenging 12 months in tough U.S. markets.  
The anaesthetic gas and machinery supplier will be "flat this year, but starting next year this thing ought to start climbing," said Rosenkranz.
The health division, hit by continued falls in the price of BOC's once top-selling anaesthetic gas Forane and weak U.S. demand for anaesthetic machinery, was the only BOC unit to see operating profits fall, dropping 11 percent to 53.1 million stg.
Solid gains in the rest of BOC's business saw full-year pre-tax profits rise by 10.6 percent to 444.9 million stg, right at the top of analysts' forecasts, while sales climbed 6.7 percent to just over 4.0 billion stg.  
The strong pound cut the advance in fourth-quarter pre-tax profits by three percentage points to around nine-percent, and Rosenkranz warned that stronger sterling "is bound to hit profits" if it continues.
Despite its laggardly performance, the fall in profits at healthcare was less steep than many analysts had feared after a warning from BOC at the end of the third quarter, which led to a rash of earnings downgrades.
Rosenkranz said the division, which accounted for less than 13 percent of BOC's 4.0 billion stg of sales, had performed "much better" in the fourth quarter.  
"You can go from being a bum to a hero very fast," he said.
The market had also been braced for a poor performance at Edwards Vaccum Products, whose machinery creates super-clean environments for industry, because of a downturn in the overcrowded semi-conductor market.
In the event the loose alliance of business known as vaccuum and distribution posted a 28 percent gain in full-year operating profit to 90.3 million stg, although the gain in the fourth-quarter had slowed to just eight percent as the impact of a fall-off in semi-conductor orders started to bite.  
Rosenkranz pointed to tentative signs of a pick up in the computer industry, such as a rise in the October U.S. industry book-to-bill ratio. But he said the vacuum business "will see a decline in profits this year", but did not predict its extent.
In the core industrial gases business, where operating profits rose 9 percent to 408.3 million stg on sales up 6.8 percent to 2.8 billion stg, Rosenkranz said he expected profit margins to rise by about 2 percentage points over the "next three to four years."
Margins edged up to 14.5 percent of sales in the year ended in September from 14.2 percent.  
A major factor behind the improvement will be the huge increase in the number of 15-year supply contracts BOC has won in the U.S. These entail BOC building gas-making plants next to customers such as steel works, in return for guaranteed sales.
The up-front costs involved in these contracts helped to push BOC's capital spending up to 708 million stg in the year just ended, and Rosenkranz said "I think it will be higher this year."
Outside the U.S, BOC is targeting investment in the Pacific region, notably in Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia. Rosenkranz said BOC is also "looking pretty hard at India" where it could invest several hundred million pounds over the next few years.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
Rumours Swiss drugs group Roche Holding has designs on Anglo-American group SmithKline Beecham Plc need to be treated with intense caution, analysts said on Wednesday.
Shares in SmithKline Beecham Plc rose sharply in late trading, closing up 30 1/2 pence at 788, while in Zurich shares in Roche dropped 140 Swiss francs to 9,830 francs.
Analysts said rumours that Roche was trying to put together a funding package of up to 50 billion Swiss Francs had fueled the late buying of SmithKline.  
But one analyst with a European bank who asked not to be named said rumours about Roche, which has most commonly been cited as a suitor for another British company, Zeneca Group Plc, have become a regular feature of the market.
Both Roche and SmithKline declined to comment on the speculation.
SmithKline had a market capitalization of around 21.3 billion stg at the close of trading on Wednesday and analysts said a hostile bid would probably lead to a 30 to 40 percent premium on top of this.  
Roche, which is worth 95.1 billion Swiss francs, already has a cash pile of around six billion Swiss francs to fund any ambitions it might have.
Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull's director of equity research Paul Diggle said: "Don't hold your breath, but it isn't that stupid." But Diggle said an agreed merger between the two companies was more feasible than a takeover. He noted that Roche and SmithKline, which are both in the world's top 10 in terms of sales, have made no secret of their desire to be bigger in a rapidly consolidating drugs market and a merger could "satisfy the ambition of both companies."  
A merger would give Roche and SmithKline Beecham a combined world market share of over five percent, putting them on a par with current world leader Glaxo Wellcome Plc.
SmithKline would also offer Roche a much firmer footing in the key U.S. market, where it lacks critical mass. Roche's vitamin business, which is the biggest in the world, would provide a useful fit with SmithKline' consumer healthcare and over-the-counter drugs operations.
In terms of drugs, both companies have strong portfolios of central nervous sytem drugs and antibiotics.
However, a UK brokerage analysts, who also declined to be identified, said that, beyond size, a merger with SmithKline would offer little in the way of attractions for Roche.
"If I was the finance director of Roche I would look at SmithKline and see there was a lot of stuff I didn't want," he said. SmithKline's involvement in the U.S. pharmacy benefit management business would offer few attractions to Roche, whose drugs are targeted largely at hospitals, he added.
A revolution in the treatment of HIV and AIDS is proving a godsend not just for patients but for drug companies which have poured millions of pounds into fighting the epidemic.
Cocktails of new and old drugs are resulting in dramatic improvements in both quality of life and life expectancy, with some patient groups forecasting that death rates from AIDS in Europe next year could fall by 50 percent.
And as patients live longer and more people seek treatment at earlier stages of illness, drug companies like Britain's Glaxo Wellcome Plc are looking forward to a quantum leap in sales, with global turnover of AIDS and HIV products forecast to treble by the end of the century.
Analysts at Lehman Brothers expect sales of AIDS drugs at Glaxo Wellcome, which by a mixture of luck and good judgement holds two of the cornerstone drugs for combination therapy, to soar to around $2 billion by the end of the century from just $300 million in 1995.
Keith Alcorn, who writes for the influential British newsletter AIDS Treatment Update, used by both patients and doctors, said: "This year has been the most exceptional year in AIDS treatment yet, and the effects are very, very tangible. People are going back to work after being very ill and that in itself is quite unexpected."
ADVANCES REVIVE AZT
Advances have led to an extraordinary revival in the fortunes of Glaxo Wellcome's Retrovir. The drug, also known as AZT, was launched with a great fanfare in 1987, but its erratic performance disappointed patients and shareholders alike.
Doctors have found that using Retrovir, which stops the HIV virus from replicating, in combination with other treatments such as Bristol Myers Squibb Co's Didanosine, Hoffmann-La Roche's Zalcitabine and above all a new Glaxo Wellcome drug called Epivir can radically cut levels of HIV in the blood.
And preliminary evidence suggests the addition of a whole new class of drug, known as protease inhibitors, to the cocktail can produce even more sensational results, with the virus brought below detectable levels.
Lehman Brothers analyst Ian Smith said: "Use of Retrovir alone had a relatively minimal and transient effect on CD4 cell levels (key cells which HIV destroys, undermining the immune system) and viral load. But in combination the impact on viral load and CD4 was nothing short of stunning compared to what we saw a few years ago."
The progress has electrified an industry that just two years ago was mired in gloom over prospects for a breakthrough in treating AIDS. Anita Kidgell, Glaxo Wellcome's antivirals product communication manager, said that when scientists, activists and drug companies met at the 11th International Conference on AIDS in Vancouver, Canada, in July the atmosphere had been transformed.
"We were seeing that one could reduce the levels of the virus in patients' blood to undetectable levels," Kidgell said.
For the moment Glaxo Wellcome seems to have cornered the AIDS drug market, with Lehman predicting sales of Retrovir will double to $600 million by 1998 and that sales of Epivir, which Glaxo shrewdly licensed from Canada's BioChem Pharma Inc in 1990, will hit $750 million by 2000 from just $12 million in 1995.
But other companies are ahead of the British giant in developing protease inhibitors, the third element in the cocktail, which block an enzyme crucial to the spread of the HIV virus within the body.
Some 20 protease inhibitors are being developed, and Merck &amp; Co, Abbott Laboratories Inc and Roche Holdings AG have all rushed versions on to the market this year. The three companies are cautious about giving sales figures, but anecdotal evidence from patient groups together with U.S. sales data suggests that Merck's Crixivan is far outselling its rivals. Sales of this class of drug are likely to reach around $300 million this year.
NOTE OF CAUTION
But while there is understandable euphoria over the progress made to date, Robin Gorna, director of health promotion at Britain's leading AIDS charity the Terrence Higgins Trust, said: "We must be very cautious about saying everything is OK, we have got a cure." She said the mix of drugs taken by AIDS patients carry a raft of side effects and enforce a strict and life-changing dietary regime and timetable.
The explosion in effective treatment also has serious consequences for overstetched health and insurance budgets.
The Terrence Higgins Trust estimates that costs to the British taxpayer in the year to March 1998 of treatment with Retrovir alone would be 10.3 million pounds ($17.29 million). Treatment with a combination of three drugs would bump this up to around 50 million. And if, as expected, more people are encouraged to come forward and seek treatment before they develop AIDS, this could rise to around 74 million pounds.
Gorna said stories already abounded of patients being unable to get the drugs they need, either though lack of funds or ignorance on the part of doctors. AIDS support groups and companies, who cooperate increasingly, say they have to persuade governments that extended treatment with drugs is much cheaper than costly hospital care and dealing with the multiple complications of AIDS.
"We are all very hopeful," said Gorna. "It is looking good, but it really isn't over yet and we need drugs that are effective in the long term."
Chemicals group Courtaulds Plc is targeting sales growth of at least 10 percent a year up to the end of the century at its key coatings business as it reaps the fruits of a major modernisation drive and Far Eastern expansion.
Speaking to journalists at a recent presentation, Courtaulds European Coatings finance director Bob Wheeler said the group's multi-million pound restructuring of its European and U.S coating operations launched in 1994 was starting to pay off.
"The profits coming through now are...partly because of our Far East expansion, but also because of the restructuring programmes we have got in place in Europe and the U.S," he said.
Courtaulds will have spent around 75 million pounds ($125 million) on reorganising and updating its European manufacturing base -- centred in Britain, France, Germany, Sweden and Spain -- by the end of 1998.
Wheeler said a similar amount was being spent in the United States.
The coatings and sealants division supplies specialist paint and protective products to the marine and aerospace sectors as well as powder coatings for a wide range of products including cars, buildings and washing machines.
In the six months through September 30, sales at the division rose 4.6 percent to 501 million pounds. This represented around 47 percent of the group's total.
But Wheeler said the group had much greater ambitions.
"I think we would be disappointed if we weren't growing the business by 10 percent per annum through organic growth ... up to the end of the century," Wheeler said.
He said the division was also benefiting from Courtauld's decision in the early 1990s to get out of low margin businesses such as general industrial coatings and household paints and to exploit its long-standing presence in fast-growing Asia.
Courtaulds has built on its presence in Hong Kong, where it has been represented since the 1950s, to the point where it is involved in every major market in the region.
Asian growth was a major factor behind the rise in the division's first-half sales.
Courtauld's Coatings had chosen its marine and yacht coatings site at Felling in northeast England as one of six prototype factories for improvements in quality, productivity and safety which it planned to roll out across the division's 70-plus sites around the world, Wheeler said.
Using U.S. chemicals giant EI Du Pont de Nemours as its benchmark for safety standards and Nippon Paint for best practise in working methods, Courtaulds said it had already transformed the operation at Felling.
Wheeler said investment at the site, which is expected to total around 10 million pounds, had resulted in output doubling to 400 litres of paint per man hour in just two years, while wastage had more than halved.
Last month the site won an award sponsored by corporate advisers KPMG for most improved British factory in competition with more than 200 other British plants.
Wheeler said the transformation of the site, which Courtaulds had operated for more than 100 years, "was about people, training and the equipment we use." He said Felling was now "a genuinely world class site."
($1=.5995 Pound)
British chemicals group Albright &amp; Wilson Plc said on Monday that a keenly-awaited drop in raw materials prices had failed to emerge.
In an interview with Reuters, Albright &amp; Wilson chief executive Robin Paul said although costs had stabilised after sharp gains last year "there has still been a small net increase, which has meant that any improvement in our performance has had to come from our own efforts, whereas we had been hoping for some reduction."  
Cost increases have affected the performance of the whole industry, and added an extra 40 million stg to Albright &amp; Wilson's bills in 1995. The Birmingham-based group is the world's biggest and lowest-cost producer of wet phosphoric acid, used in a wide range of processes from putting the tang into fizzy drinks to making soap powders. Rises in phosphorous prices, especially in China and the rest of Asia, partly eroded gains from strong demand for phosphates in the first half.  
Paul, who steered Albright &amp; Wilson back onto the stock market last year after 17 years as a subsidiary of U.S. giant Tenneco Inc, said another threat on the horizon was the continued strength of sterling, which could raise the cost of exports from the UK and reduce foreign earnings.
"Where this isn't expected to have a substantial effect on 1996 results, because most of the contracts are in place, it is causing us to look very hard at the 1997 budget because of inevitable pressures on translation and transaction," Paul said.  
He added it was difficult to quantify the impact of the pound continuing at current high levels, although he said strength against the dollar would act as a "net hedge" by lowering raw material costs.
Although phosphorous-derived products have driven profits since its foundation in 1851, Albright &amp; Wilson also produces specialty chemicals, including flame-retardants for protective clothing and furniture, and surfactants, foaming and wetting agents used in detergents and soaps.  
Paul said in some ways the company's relaunch had come at a difficult time, with its first set of interim results as a newly independent company in 1995 heralding a worldwide downturn in the chemical industry as higher costs ate into profits.
The group's share price has clawed its way back from a low of 152 pence last November to stand at 177 pence early Tuesday afternoon after touching a peak of 207 1/2 pence in September. But Paul warned that shareholders and analysts should not expect "one-year spectaculars," especially in terms of a share buyback.  
News at the start of the year that the group had sought authority for a share buyback caused some excitement, particularly given its low gearing, which stood at just 14 percent at the end of June. "The directors got permission to buy back shares, but without plans to do so," Paul said. "People read rather more into it than was justified."
Nor will cash be used for acquisitions, unless they "tidy up" shareholdings in associates or offer technological benefits. Paul said growth would be organic, with a reinvigorated research and development program producing a range of new products, including improved water treatment and flame-retardant chemicals and a breakthrough to stop paints from flaking.
"We are not looking for one-year spectaculars at Albright &amp; Wilson. We have been around for 145 years and and even Tenneco's ownership (from 1978) could be seen in retrospect as a phase in the history of the company,"said Paul. "Our aim is to build up a solid performance year-on-year-on-year."
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
Investors in the fast-growing British biotechnology sector can look forward to another roller-coaster ride in 1997, with serious profits still there to be made by investors who pick their stocks carefully.
Although sharp falls in the value of the sector since its peak last May have underlined the riskiness of biotechs as an investment, analysts said 1997 should be the year when a host of companies publish data which will start to prove that the underlying technology can produce drugs that really work.
It should also see a number of businesses step out of the long shadow cast by British Biotech Plc, which continues to ride high on hopes that its cancer treatment Marimastat will be the sector's first wonderdrug.
Among those most keenly tipped for success next year are Biocompatibles International Plc, Celltech Group Plc, Chiroscience Group Plc, Cortecs International Ltd and Scotia Holdings Plc.
And there are growing signs that other countries, notably France and Germany, will start to challenge Britain's domination of the European biotech industry. Britain currently has more biotech companies than the rest of Europe combined.
STOCKS STILL AHEAD DESPITE 1996 SETBACK
Analysts at Lehman Brothers said the end of a 14-month long run of gains by Britain's biotech stocks in May, since when prices have dropped by around 40 percent, jolted investors, leading many to question the real value of biotechs.
But the Lehman Brothers UK/Europe Biotechnology Index also shows that even after this setback, biotech stocks are still showing an overall gain of around 150 percent compared with the start of their bull run in February 1995.
And in a note on the sector, Lehman said investors could buy into drug discovery and development in biotechs at a fraction of the cost of buying into the pipelines of mature companies like Glaxo Wellcome Plc and Zeneca Group Plc.
Nomura Equity Research analyst Nick Woolf also disputed another claim of recent months, that UK biotech stocks are vastly overvalued compared with the much larger U.S. sector.
Woolf said a ratio of market capitalisation to five years of spending on research and development showed U.S. biotechs are valued at four to five times accumulated spending and British companies at between four and six times.
"We are not overvalued compared to the U.S," he said. "When people say the U.K. is overvalued they are looking at British Biotech, but second place companies like Chiroscience, Celltech and Cortecs are all looking very good value."
Woolf and Yamaichi International analyst Erling Refsum said investors had become much more choosy about which stocks to buy, but there was now a danger that people were being too cautious. Where a year ago people would put money into almost any biotech that could type out a prospectus, in recent months a number of small flotations and fundings have been scaled down or dropped.
Even British Biotech was forced to turn to underwriters to rescue its 143 million pounds ($236.5 million) cash call in July.
Refsum said the market was focusing too much on the 50 percent chance that a drug in Phase II trials would fail to get to market rather than the equal chance it would succeed. Woolf added "I think it is the wrong way of looking at it. You should evaluate risk, but across a portfolio of companies where you are spreading the risk."
ISSUES TO WATCH IN 1997
Among key stocks to watch in 1997 will again be British Biotech, where clinical trials of Marimastat are entering the final phase. Although trials will not be completed until 1998 at the earliest, the company plans detailed updates on the drug, probably in May and November. Bad news is still expected to have a disproportionate effect on the whole of the sector.
Celltech is singled out by Nomura, Yamaichi and Lehman. Nomura said Celltech is "very good value," and Lehman have a target valuation of 10 pounds per share for the company by the end of this year compared with a price of 485 pence on Friday afternoon. Optimism about a septic shock drug, being developed with Germany's Bayer AG, and progress on a therapy for Acute Myeloid Leukaemia are seen as key drivers.
Cambridge-based Chiroscience, which Lehman values at 600 pence per share compared with last Friday afternoon's price of 312, is also favoured, amid hopes that a new local anesthetic will provide a flow of cash for an ambitious pipeline of novel drugs including cancer and arthritis treatments.
UK-Australian group Cortecs is strongly tipped by Yamaichi's Refsum, who believes oral osteoporosis and insulin drugs could turn out to be $1 billion-sellers, while he also favours Scotia, which is in the unusual position of having three drugs nearing the market. Tiny Scottish group Shield Diagnostics Plc could be sitting on a product worth around $200 million a year if data due to be published in the first half of 1997 prove its diagnostic kit is an accurate forecaster of heart attacks.
And Lehmans said contact lens and medical devices company Biocampatibles had "enormous upside potential". It said the stock could be worth 16 pounds by the end of 1997 compared with 693 pence on Friday.
($1=.6047 Pound)
Expertise ranging from snack packaging design to nuclear waste disposal and the destruction of chemical weapons was put up for sale Monday as the UK government embarked on what may be its last privatisation venture, the sale of AEA Technology Plc.
Trade and industry secretary Ian Lang will be hoping to swell Treasury coffers by around 200 million pounds ($312.7 million) through the disposal of 100 per cent of the Oxfordshire-based group, which is a spin-off from the Atomic Energy Authority, at the end of September.
With a general election looming the sale immediately ran into a political row over the government's decision to keep its "golden share" in AEA Technology, allowing it to veto an unwelcome takeover attempt, for just three years.
The opposition Labour Party cited "security implications" over AEA Technology's role in monitoring UK nuclear submarine safety, and sources told Reuters that Labour will consider extending the veto if it wins power.
At a distinctly low-tech launch for the pathfinder prospectus, AEA Technology chief executive Peter Watson shrugged off the embarrassment of a malfunctioning slide projector to explain that the group "is all about taking technology to market and converting science to profit."
Watson could easily have a sign on his desk reading "no job is too big or too small" for AEA Technology, whose interests have spread far beyond the state-owned nuclear industry which spawned it in the 1940s.
Work such as decommissioning nuclear plants and offering safety expertise worldwide, including at the site of the 1986 Chernobyl disaster in the Ukraine, accounted for just over half its 253.3 million stg of sales in the year to March.
But Watson is keen to stress success in using the group's 3,500 employees to solve a plethora of scientific conundrums, including doubling the life of batteries for Sony Corp mobile phones, helping Subaru win the World Rally Championship  and assisting the U.S. with the destruction of chemical weapons.
"And we are helping a client to research an improved crisp (potato chip) packet," Watson added.
AEA Technology hopes to persuade would-be investors, expected to be institutions rather than the army of small investors which bought into the likes of British Gas Plc and British Telecom Plc, that sales growth is about to take off after three static years, which it attributes to a drop in reliance on government contracts.
With most cost-cutting behind it, Watson told Reuters he wants to lift foreign sales to one-third of the total from just over one-fifth and take advantage of a growing trend for major companies like SmithKline Beecham Plc to outsource research to help drive pretax profit up from the 15.8 million pounds seen in the year to March. ($1=.6396 Pound)
Expertise ranging from crisp packet design to nuclear waste and the destruction of chemical weapons was put up for sale Monday as the UK government embarked on what may be its last privatisation venture, the sale of AEA Technology Plc.
Trade and industry secretary Ian Lang will be hoping to swell Treasury coffers by around 200 million stg through the disposal of 100 per cent of the Oxfordshire-based group, which is a spin-off from the Atomic Energy Authority, at the end of September.  
With a general election looming the sale immediately ran into a political row over the government's decision to keep its "golden share" in AEA Technology, allowing it to veto an unwelcome takeover attempt, for just three years.
The opposition Labour Party cited "security implications" over AEA Technology's role in monitoring UK nuclear submarine safety, and sources told Reuters Labour will consider extending the veto if it wins power.  
At a distinctly low-tech launch for the pathfinder prospectus, AEA Technology chief executive Peter Watson shrugged off the embarrassment of a malfunctioning slide projector to explain that the group "is all about taking technology to market and converting science to profit."
Watson could easily have a sign on his desk reading "no job is too big or too small" for AEA Technology, whose interests have spread far beyond the state-owned nuclear industry which spawned it in the 1940s.  
Work such as decommissioning nuclear plants and offering safety expertise worldwide, including at the site of the 1986 Chernobyl disaster in the Ukraine, accounted for just over half its 253.3 million stg of sales in the year to March.
But Watson is keen to stress success in using the group's 3,500 employees to solve a plethora of scientific conundrums, including doubling the life of batteries for Sony Corp mobile phones, helping Subaru win the World Rally Championship and assisting the U.S. with the destruction of chemical weapons.
"And we are helping a client to research an improved crisp packet," Watson added.  
AEA Technology hopes to persuade would-be investors, expected to be institutions rather than the army of small investors which bought into the likes of British Gas Plc and British Telecom Plc, that sales growth is about to take off after three static years, which it attributes to a drop in reliance on government contracts.
With most cost-cutting behind it, Watson told Reuters he wants to lift foreign sales to one-third of the total from just over one-fifth and take advantage of a growing trend for major companies like SmithKline Beecham Plc to outsource research to help drive pretax profit up from the 15.8 million pounds seen in the year to March.
-- Jonathan Birt London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
British building materials group Blue Circle Industries Plc produced the first tentative signs of a turnaround at its troubled European heating operations on Tuesday and set out ambitious plans for a ten-fold increase in operating profits at the division over the next three years.
The recovery in the heating sector, together with continued strong performance in the highly profitable Chile and Malaysia markets and the USA, helped lift Blue Circle's interim pretax profit by 11.7 percent to 116.3 million pounds ($181.5 million), at the top end of analysts' forecasts, with the interim dividend rising by 6 percent to 4.25 pence.
The heating operations, which are undergoing a major restructuring focused on France, Germany and the Britain, posted operating profits of nine million pounds in the six months to June, up from just 100,000 pounds a year before.
However, Britain's biggest cement producer also warned that it sees "no significant signs of recovery" in the key British cement market, and against a backdrop of a weak stock market Blue Circle shares slipped 5.5 pence to 373.5 pence by 1105 GMT.
Blue Circle chief executive Keith Orrell-Jones told Reuters the group's aim of achieving annual cost savings of 25 million pounds from restructuring heating is "well up to programme," with nine million pounds coming through this year and the full benefit seen in 1997.
Orrell-Jones said he is confident the group can achieve a 15 percent return on its 600 million pound investment in the struggling division, or some 90 million pound, within three years, despite sluggish economic performance in Germany and France.
"We are disappointed with the performance of the economies of both those countries, and we think it is not likely to ease very rapidly," said Orrell-Jones, adding "that is why we set a three-year time horizon" for recovery.
Blue Circle blamed a 24 percent drop in operating profit at the British cement operations on low infrastructure investment and "weak new housing starts." Orrell-Jones said the full-year outcome will be better than the first half, but he does not expect any real upturn until next spring.
With gearing a miniscule 1.5 percent at the end of June, Orrell-Jones confirmed Blue Circle is actively looking for opportunities to expand.
"We'd like to grow our cement business: it depends on where the opportunities crop up. In the U.S. it's a question of waiting for the right opportunity and the right time in the cycle," he said.
Blue Circle is "actively looking in South-East Asia, and we are taking a very careful look at India," he said, adding that it is also interested in expanding its south American operations beyond the fast-growing Chile market.
($1=.6406 Pound)
Healthcare group Smith &amp; Nephew Plc reassured analysts on Monday that it was set to report a solid performance for 1996, despite continuing tough market conditions and the impact of a strong pound.
The company, which is due to announce full-year results on March 4, told an analysts' meeting that little had changed from its last update in October, when it reported that operating conditions and price pressures in the key U.S. market remained difficult.
Analysts who attended Monday's meeting said Smith &amp; Nephew, which reported a 7.4 percent rise in first-half sales to 540 million stg, was likely to report an increase in full-year sales of between six and seven percent from the 1.03 billion stg achieved in 1995.
They said there were also signs that profit margins could have turned out better in the second half of the year than the first.
Another positive aspect of the meeting was a signal that sales in the highly competitive U.S. market, which accounts for around 40 percent of turnover, had seen a two percent improvement in the second half of the year after gaining just one percent in the first half.
Prices in the U.S. for Smith &amp; Nephew's products in areas including orthopaedic implants and wound management are being forced down by increasingly powerful health providers.
Shares in the company, which had been trading close to their 12-month lows of 174 3/4, rose 4 3/4 pence to 182 3/4 in early afternoon trading. The stock had reached record highs of 217 1/2 pence in June amid hopes for a novel skin replacement product, Dermagraft, currently being developed with Advanced Tissue Sciences Inc of the U.S.
BZW analyst Steve Plag said the shares had taken a "phenomenal pounding" in recent months as over-optimistic predictions for Dermagraft had been reined back, and had taken some support on Monday from the absence of bad news.
"There are signs that the second-half revenue performance was a bit stronger, which is encouraging, and there was some reassurance on Dermagraft, but the full picture (on Dermagraft) won't be available until April."
Another analyst, who asked not to be identified, said Smith &amp; Nephew had been "very upbeat" about the the skin replacement product, which would initially be targeted at foot ulcers.
"I think Dermagraft is potentially a very significant product for the company," he added.
Analysts said the technology, which enables cells derived from babies' foreskins to grow on a naturally-absorbable scaffold across wounds, could add up to 20 pence per share to Smith &amp; Nephew's value if it succeeded.
SocGen analyst Alyson Coates said she was happy with the current value of the shares, which reflected a balance between limited growth prospects in the next 12 to 18 months and "the promise of the pipeline," including Dermagraft.
SocGen believes that in addition to Dermagraft and similar high-tech products, Smith &amp; Nephew will use its financial strength for acquisitions to help lift growth above the "pedestrian" in the medium term.
Coates said she might shave 1 million stg off her full-year pre-tax profit forecast of 185 million stg to take account of the impact of sterling's strength on the group in the last three months of 1996.
BZW's Plag said full-year pre-tax profit forecasts in the range of 183 to 186 million stg "would be sensible."
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
British building materials group Blue Circle Industries Plc produced tentative signs of a turnaround at its troubled European heating operations on Tuesday, and promised a ten-fold increase in heating profits over the next three years.
The company also launched a blistering attack on the government, blaming "disgracefully low" infrastructure spending for a slide in its British cement sales.
The recovery in heating, together with continued strong performances in the highly profitable Chile and Malaysia markets and the USA, helped lift Blue Circle's interim pretax profit by 11.7 percent to 116.3 million pounds ($181.5 million), at the top end of analysts' forecasts, with the interim dividend rising by 6 percent to 4.25 pence.
Against a background of a weak stock market Blue Circle shares closed down 5 pence at 372 pence.
The heating operations, which are undergoing a major restructuring focused on France, Germany and Britain, posted operating profits of nine million pounds in the six months to June, up from just 100,000 pounds a year before.
But Britain's biggest cement producer also warned that it saw "no significant signs of recovery" in the key British cement market, and said it expected 1996 sales to be down four percent from 1995's depressed performance.
Ian McKenzie, chief executive of the group's British cement business Blue Circle Cement, blamed poor housing starts and low government infrastructure spending, warning that if the underspend continued "the damage done to the competitiveness of British industry would be very great indeed."
Worries about cement were offset by strength overseas and signs of early progress in turning around heating, which encouraged analysts to maintain full-year profit forecasts.
Chief executive Keith Orrell-Jones told Reuters the group's aim of achieving annual cost savings of 25 million pounds at the division is "well up to programme," with nine million pounds coming through this year and the full benefit seen in 1997.
Orrell-Jones said he was confident Blue Circle could achieve a 15 percent return on its 600 million pound investment in the struggling division, or some 90 million pounds, within three years, despite sluggishness in Germany and France.
"We are disappointed with the performance of the economies of both those countries, and we think it is not likely to ease very rapidly," said Orrell-Jones, adding "that is why we set a three-year time horizon" for recovery.
With gearing a miniscule 1.5 percent at the end of June, Orrell-Jones said Blue Circle was actively looking for opportunities to expand.
"We'd like to grow our cement business: it depends on where the opportunities crop up. In the U.S. it's a question of waiting for the right opportunity and the right time in the cycle," he said.
Blue Circle is "actively looking in South-East Asia, and we are taking a very careful look at India," he said, adding that it was also interested in expanding its south American operations beyond Chile and into Argentina.
($1=.6406 Pound)
A bullish Zeneca Group Plc set out its declaration of independence on Wednesday, predicting years of strong profit growth on the back of robust sales of new drugs and agro-chemicals.
Chief executive David Barnes, in his last interview before the group announces 1996 results on March 11, told Reuters he was confident Zeneca would meet his "inspirational target" of effectively doubling profit by the end of the century.
All three key businesses, pharmaceuticals, agro-chemicals and speciality chemicals, would contribute to the improvement.
Zeneca's share price has jumped by more than 50 percent in the past 18 months, closing at 1631 pence on Wednesday, as takeover rumours swirled around it. Speculation has linked Zeneca with a dizzying number of partners, including Switzerland's Roche Holdings AG, Germany's Bayer AG and France's Sanofi.
While Barnes said a takeover bid was "most unlikely," he added that shareholders would have to compare any offer with the average annual growth of 15 percent in earnings per share promised by Zeneca between 1996 and 2000.
Despite its debt-free balance sheet, Barnes said the company had little interest in getting on the acquisition trail itself, preferring to buy in new products and technologies on a case-by-case basis.
"I am not against acquisitions per se but they have to offer value and quality, and most of the opportunites that have come up have failed on one or both criteria," Barnes said.
The company's main focus is the roll-out of a raft of new products, including the asthma drug Accolate and the new agro-chemical fungicide Amistar, which Barnes described as "the biggest single product we've got in the Zeneca portfolio".
On Wednesday the company announced that it was expanding its drug sales force in the United States by more than 20 percent to cope with the rush of new products, including the potential launch later this year of a ground-breaking schizophrenia drug, Seroquel, and a new migraine drug, Zomig.
Barnes forecast significant sales for Accolate and for Seroquel, squashing fears from some analysts that either drug might turn out to be a disappointment.
"Our benchmark for a substantial product is one that has sales of $400 million plus, and both of those have that potential," he said.
A lot of hopes are riding on Accolate, the first of a new generation of asthma drugs in which tablets take the place of steroid-based inhalers.
"The Holy Grail for the treatment of asthma has been simple tablet formulation," said Barnes. Since the drug's launch in the key U.S. market last October, Barnes said, sales had been "fully up to our expectations" with a lot of interest shown by doctors."
Another new drug, the prostate cancer treatment Casodex, is also making rapid progress in the United States, accounting for more than 50 percent of all new prescriptions.
But Barnes said he was aware that in line with the rest of British industry, Zeneca would have to work harder for its profits in 1997 as the strong pound bites into overseas earnings. He acknowledged that the exchange rate could wipe around 70 million pounds off Zeneca's 1997 profits, which are still expected to top 1.1 billion pounds.
"I don't think the level of sterling is such that our products will be uncompetitive," said Barnes, but he added: "I do think the pound is getting very fully priced now."
Zeneca Group Plc said on Wednesday that it expected "substantial" peak sales in excess of $400 million for its new asthma treatment Accolate and schizophrenia drug Seroquel.
In an interview with Reuters, chief executive David Barnes said: "Our benchmark for a substantial product is one that has sales of $400 million plus, and both of those have that potential."
Barnes also painted an upbeat picure of prospects for Zomig, the migraine treatment obtained last year by Zeneca from its newly-merged rival Glaxo Wellcome Plc.
Some analysts had questioned whether Seroquel and Accolate -- which represent treatment breakthroughs in their repsective categories but also face potentially stiff competition -- would prove to be major sellers.
Accolate is the first of a new generation of asthma drugs taken in tablet form which will aim to erode the market share of inhaled steroids. The drugs, known as leukotreine antagonists, are designed to prevent or reduce the severity of asthma attacks rather than relieve existing attacks.
"The Holy Grail for the treatment of asthma has been simple tablet formulation," said Barnes.
Accolate was launched in the U.S, where steroid-based inhaled asthma drugs have never been as accepted as in Europe, in October. Although he declined to give details of sales, Barnes said "experience has been encouraging," and added "sales are fully up to our expectations."
"One of the most gratifying things has been the level of physician interest generated by the launch of Accolate," said Barnes, adding that the company had received "a large number" of inquiries from U.S. doctors about Accolate.
Earlier today Zeneca announced a 21 percent expansion of its U.S. sales force to help it deal with a rush of product launches, including the possible launch of Seroquel and Zomig later this year.
"The migraine market is growing very fast indeed, it's a substantial market, and so far as one is able to judge from clinical data Zomig has faster onset of action and maybe more consistent results than the leading product , (Glaxo Wellcome's) Imigran. I think it has substantial potential."
Barnes said Zeneca's new prostate cancer drug Casodex continued "to make very exciting progress" in the second half of 1996, taking more than 50 percent of new prescriptions in the U.S. and was "ahead of our forecasts."
Some $35 million worth of Casodex was sold in the first six months of 1996. The drug, which is currently approved for combination therapy, is being tested for use as monotherapy and for use at earlier stages of the disease.
"We now know that Casodex will be a bigger product than we thought in 1993 (when Zeneca was demerged from Imperial Chemical Industries Plc ) and it will be a substantially bigger product than most analysts thought in 1993," said Barnes.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
Britain's chemical industry faces a period of steady growth in 1997, helped by improvements in European economic prospects and lower stock levels, the industry's trade body said.
In an interview with Reuters, Chemical Industries Association (CIA) director-general Elliot Finer said that after an erratic performance over the past 18 months, stock of chemicals "are fairly low...and as a result of that we see prospects for pretty steady growth over the next 12 months."
Speaking ahead of a two-day conference on the outlook for the industry next week, Finer said prospects in the rest of Europe, which takes more than a quarter of British output and half of all exports, "are better than one might have thought a few months ago."
Finer said he believed the disruption caused by German reunification was now easing, while problems linked to the struggle to meet Maastricht convergence criteria for a single currency was also nearing its climax.
"Those two large factors mean that there are some quite good times ahead," Finer said.
But he warned that concern about the recent sharp rise in the value of sterling was causing concern among chemical companies, describing the current level of around 2.67 Deutsche marks and $1.69 as "unpalatable."
"$1.50 was nice, $1.60 we could live with but $1.70 is too much," Finer said, but he added that sterling's strength should not undermine the "steady, warmish prospects for the coming year."
He said Britain's chemical industry, which is the third largest in Europe after Germany and France with annual sales of 40 billion stg, was in a strong position.
Access to North Sea oil feedstocks gives the UK an advantage in bulk chemicals, while British companies also produce a wide range of high-performance specialty chemicals in fast-growth areas like ink-jet colour printing.
But Finer said he was concerned about levels of research and development spending by parts of the industry. British chemical companies spend around three percent of turnover on R&amp;D compared with 21 percent for pharmaceuticals and an average of 5.3 percent in Europe's chemical business as a whole.
"I think there are some middle-ranking companies in the industry whose expenditure on R&amp;D is less than some...might consider sensible given the hotting up of international compeition," said Finer.
Finer said innovation would also be a key theme of next week's business outlook conference on January 15 and 16, and was vital if the industry was to meet the challenge of competition from southeast Asia, India and the United States.
"We are still a very inventive country," said Finer. "Despite all the moaning we are still pretty good at fundamental science, and in our industry we are pretty good at bridging the gap between fundamental science and products."
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
International specialty chemicals group BTP Plc said on Wednesday it expected profit margins at its key adhesive and textile coatings business to recover fully over the next 18 months.
Raw material price rises and intense competition pushed margins as low as three percent in the year to March. Divisional operating profit slumped 37 percent to 3.8 million stg.
But in a telephone interview with Reuters, finance director Rob Martin said, "There is no reason why over the next 12 to 18 months they can't be restored to six or seven percent."  
Weakness at adhesives and textile coatings and at the performance chemicals division helped hold BTP back in the year to March, with group pretax profit rising just 0.7 percent to 37.5 million stg.
The group is busy restructuring its adhesives manufacturing operations in France and Germany, and Martin said all group operations, which range from making preservative chemicals for cosmetics and toiletries to safety harnesses for people who work at heights, "are going quite well".
On a regional basis, Martin said, "The tougher markets are continental Europe, but there are signs of life even there."  
Sluggishness in France and Germany, which account for around 15 percent of group sales, continues to be a problem. "But things are getting better even there," Martin added.
BTP is a major supplier of agrochemical intermediates in the U.S., which accounts for about 30 percent of group sales, and Martin said there was no sign of a slowdown there.
The Manchester-based company underlined its committment to growth in the U.S. on Wednesday by announcing the acquisition of a small leather chenmical manufaturer from Henkel Corp for $7.5 million.  
With low gearing, which stood at just seven percent at the end of March, Martin said BTP could comfortably make an acquisition of up to 100 milllion stg.
"The general strategy is to add on to existing businesses. We are not going to leap into the dark in other arease," said Martin, who said any acquisitions must meet strict financial criteria. "They have got to fit and be earnings enhancing."
London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
Shareholders in tiny British healthcare group Enviromed Plc staged a bloodless coup on Friday, toppling the embattled company's board.
The gentlemanly storming of the barricades around Enviromed's Knightsbridge headquarters was led by Ron Zwanziger, chief executive officer of Enviromed's biggest shareholder, U.S. company Selfcare Inc.
Zwanziger has watched the value of Selfcare's 29 percent stake in Enviromed dwindle as the share price plummeted from around 112 pence per share in December 1994 to around 25 pence, in line with a collapse in the group's profitability.
Selfcare, which produces tests for pregnancy and infectious diseases, asked shareholders to back its plans to remove four members of the board, led by managing director Thomas Murphy, at an extraordinary meeting on Friday.
But after weeks of charge and counter charge by both sides, the expected showdown in the unlikely setting of Dean's Yard, next to Westminster Abbey, turned out to be a sedate rubber stamping exercise.
The board of Enviromed, which produces specialist enzymes and diagnostic equipment, spiked the guns of its opponents by conceding defeat after proxy votes showed 49 percent backing for Selfcare and just under 39 percent supporting the status quo.
A brief show of hands was sufficent to confirm the handover of power and the new board, with Selfcare's Zwanziger as non-executive chairman, was already holding its first meeting as individual shareholders continued to drift in.
This was Zwanziger's second attempt to get rid of the board, which he quit in April 1995 over differences involving a joint venture between Selfcare and Enviromed. Resolutions demanding the board step down were withdrawn just before the start of another extraordinary general meeting in February 1996.
Zwanziger accused Enviromed of eroding shareholder value through poor management and of holding firesales of assets, including the disposal of a dental distribution business and veterinary diagnostic operation, as it sought to cut debts.
In turn Enviromed accused Zwanziger of trying to gain control of the company "via the back door", and challenged him to launch a full takeover bid.
Enviromed's value began to plunge in December 1994, the month that Murphy was appointed, as a pretax profit of 2.2 million pounds ($3.68 million) in the year to September 1994 turned into a loss of 8.2 million a year later. The company's market capitalisation fell from around 28 million pounds to just over 6.0 million.
Murphy vehemently rejected blame for the collapse, saying he had inherited a pile of problems he and other board members had worked hard to resolve.
Peter Jones, who follows Enviromed for brokers Peel Hunt &amp; Co, said Murphy had been dealt a "bum hand," and criticism of him was "unreasonable."
Jones said the company was now at the point where its value should start to rise again, particularly through the group's "nicely profitable" enzyme business Biozyme. "There are some genuinely good products and a good business inside Enviromed which should be capable of providing serious returns for investors," he said.
($1=.5979 Pound)
Shareholders in tiny British healthcare group Enviromed Plc staged a bloodless coup on Friday, toppling the embattled company's board.
The gentlemanly storming of the barricades around Enviromed's Knightsbridge headquarters was led by Ron Zwanziger, chief executive officer of Enviromed's biggest shareholder, U.S. company Selfcare Inc.
Zwanziger has watched the value of Selfcare's 29 percent stake in Enviromed dwindle as the share price plummeted from around 112 pence per share in December 1994 to around 25 pence, in line with a collapse in the group's profitability.
Selfcare, which produces tests for pregnancy and infectious diseases, asked shareholders to back its plans to remove four members of the board, led by managing director Thomas Murphy, at an extraordinary meeting on Friday.
But after weeks of charge and counter-charge by both sides, the expected showdown in the unlikely setting of Dean's Yard, next to Westminster Abbey, turned out to be a sedate rubber-stamping exercise.
The board of Enviromed, which produces specialist enzymes and diagnostic equipment, spiked the guns of its opponents by conceding defeat after proxy votes showed 49 percent backing for Selfcare and just under 39 percent supporting the status quo.
A brief show of hands was sufficent to confirm the handover of power and the new board, with Selfcare's Zwanziger as non-executive chairman, was already holding its first meeting as individual shareholders continued to drift in.
This was Zwanziger's second attempt to get rid of the board, which he quit in April 1995 over differences involving a joint venture between Selfcare and Enviromed. Resolutions demanding the board step down were withdrawn just before the start of another extraordinary general meeting in February 1996.
Zwanziger accused Enviromed of eroding shareholder value through poor management and of holding firesales of assets, including the disposal of a dental distribution business and veterinary diagnostic operation, as it sought to cut debts.
In turn Enviromed accused Zwanziger of trying to gain control of the company "via the back door", and challenged him to launch a full takeover bid.
Enviromed's value began to plunge in December 1994, the month that Murphy was appointed, as a pretax profit of 2.2 million stg in the year to September 1994 turned into a loss of 8.2 million stg a year later. The company's market capitalization fell from around 28 million stg to just over 6.0 million.
Murphy vehemently rejected blame for the collapse, saying he had inherited a pile of problems he and other board members had worked hard to resolve.
One of the new board's first goals will be to appoint a finance director. In a letter to shareholders ahead of the extraordinary meeting Zwanziger said the new board would focus on the development of the enzyme buisness Biozyme which it said was already profitable.
Supermarket group Budgens Plc said on Monday that it expected to open 10 new wholly-owned stores in 1997, as well as continuing to build up its presence on petrol station forecourts.
In a telephone interview with Reuters after the company announced an 18 percent rise in first-half pretax profit to 5.04 million stg, chief executive John von Spreckelsen said the group continued to be "well-placed as a small operator in this niche where we are complementary to the superstores and the discounters."  
"The successful companies will continue to take market share from the less successful ones," he said.
Budgens saw sales rise by 8.1 percent to 183.0 million stg in the 28 weeks to November, while on a like-for-like basis they climbed 4.5 percent.
Spreckelsen said that sales growth in the run-up to Christmas slowed down as large stores pulled in trade, but had picked up again in January.
Shares in the group were virtually unchanged after the results, trading just 1/4 pence higher at 46 1/2 in early dealing on Monday.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
Biotechnology company Celltech Group Plc said late on Tuesday that it expected to post a pre-tax loss of around 10 million stg in the year to September 1997 before moving firmly into profit.
Finance director Peter Allen said in an interview with Reuters that a further 10 million stg receipt next December from the 1996 sale of the Biologics business to Alusuisse-Lonza Holding AG would push the group back into the black the following year. Analysts said around half of the payment would go to Celltech's bottom line.
And a successful launch of Celltech's septic shock treatment, being developed with Germany's Bayer AG, and leukaemia drug, with American Home Products Corp should see the Slough-based group post an operating profit in 1999.
"I think that 1997/1998 will be a better year. Providing both products launch when we expect them to launch we will start to get some contribution from the septic shock product in 1998," he said.
With the Biologics sale swelling cash in the bank to more than 46 million stg at the end of last September, Allen said Celltech would have no need to seek fresh funding for its day-to-day operations. A cash-call would only have to be made if there were problems with the two lead drugs or Celltech decided to make an acquisition.
Cash burn for the current year would be just under 10 million stg, Allen said, with spending on research and development rising by around a fifth to 21 million stg. He predicted that milestone payments would be at similar levels to last year, totalling 5.5 to 6.0 million stg.
Allen added that analysts' forecasts of 3.5 million stg of royalties from the Centocor/Eli Lilly product ReoPro were "fairly conservative."
Chief executive Peter Fellner told Reuters that Celltech remained committed to its strategy of collaborating with major drug companies, but was considering taking more products through to later stages of development itself. He said the group's psoriasis drug, currently in Phase II trials, would be a prime candidate for such a move.
"We can see that by doing it ourselves, at least in Europe, we can control the timetable better ... and probably get a larger slice of the cake," he said.
The chief executive also told Reuters that Celltech could be interested in making an acquisition in the right circumstances. He praised rival Chiroscience Group Plc's $120 million acquisition of U.S. gene technology company Darwin last November as "very creative."
"I think if we could identify a particular set or sets of technology, or alternatively one or two pipeline products, then potentially we would have an interest..but we wouldn't simply go and buy something with a view to making ourselves that bit bigger."
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
Shares in British-based drugs group Medeva Plc raced ahead on Thursday following encouraging results from tests of a potential new vaccine and treatment for hepatitis B.
Shares in Medeva, which have climbed steadily this week on the expectation of good news, jumped almost six percent to 296 pence before easing to 289-1/2 pence in early afternoon trading, up 10 pence on the day. The stock has risen more than 13 percent since the start of the year.
In an update of its product portfolio, Medeva also announced a tie-up with small drug discovery group Peptide Therapeutics Plc which could see painful injections against illnesses such as influenza, typhoid and tetanus replaced by nasal sprays or capsules.
The two are also investigating a vaccine against the E-coli bacteria, which has killed 17 people in a recent outbreak in Scotland. Medeva said it spent three million pounds ($4.90 million) taking a 2.5 percent stake in Peptide, whose shares soared nearly 20 percent to 289 pence.
But the market's main focus was on prospects for the hepatitis B vaccine, Hepagene, which many analysts see as a huge potential money-spinner. In an interview with Reuters, Medeva chief executive Bill Bogie said Hepagene could eventually sell "millions of doses" a year, and carry a three-figure price tag.
The vaccine is targeted at a significant group of people who do not respond to existing Hepatitis B vaccines, such as SmithKline Beecham Plc's Engerix-B.
Medeva sees a large market for it, especially among health workers and police who are routinely protected against the infection.
Still more exciting is the drug's potential to treat people who are already infected with Hepatitis B, which is 100 times more infectious than HIV and kills two million people a year around the world. Bogie said tests on people who do not respond to the current treatment, Interferon, showed a 38 percent response rate.
Medeva will decide later this year whether to expand production capacity for Hepagene at its plant in Speke in northwest England or to look elsewhere for extra output.
A major surprise was Medeva's declaration that it would seek regulatory approval for Hepagene in Europe and the United States in 1998, opening up the prospect of first sales in 1999. Bogie said this was a sign of confidence that Medeva would win outstanding battles over patents on both sides of the Atlantic.
It won a key judgement in Britain's House of Lords against U.S. rival Biogen Inc last year. Bogie said Medeva would not be seeking marketing partners for Hepagene beyond its existing agreement with Johnson &amp; Johnson to sell Hepagene in southeast Asia.
"We are not looking for a partner. That does not mean they won't happen but we are fairly confident we can do it ourselves," he said.
Medeva, whose executives spent Thursday morning with analysts, also announced plans to go ahead with development of a purified form of its most profitable product, the behaviour-controlling drug Methylphenidate.
Bogie said the new version of the drug being developed by Chiroscience Group Plc would give Medeva important patent advantages over rivals and cut down the number of times a day Methylphenidate is taken.
The drug is used to control attention deficit disorder in children and young adults. It is widely used in the United States but Bogie said it was starting to be more accepted in Britain and Europe. ($1=.6119 Pound)
Milumil babymilk powder, used by around 25,000 mothers in Britain and Ireland, was withdrawn from from stores and clinics on Friday after a scare over Salmonella poisoning.
Milupa, part of the Dutch specialist food producer Nutricia NV, said it was withdrawing its Milumil milk powder in Britain because of an unconfirmed link with 12 cases of a rare form of the Salmonella bug.
The company later followed suit in Ireland after consultations with the Irish government, despite saying that no incidents had been reported there.
The company was forced to launch a damage limitation exercise after it was contacted by Britain's Department of Health on Thursday afternoon.
Government scientists had identified 12 cases of Salmonella anatum infection, leading to gastro-enteritis, in children under 12 months old which followed consumption of the French-made milk, sold as "Milumil for Hungrier Bottle Fed Babies."
The Health Department said that only two of the children involved were admitted to hospital and all had since recovered. However it told parents and other carers to stop using the product immediately and ordered the withdrawal of all stocks.
"There is no direct, incontrovertible proof that (the cause) is Milumil. It is a statistical association but we have to take every precaution," a company spokeswoman told Reuters.
Shares in Nutricia were suspended for around an hour in Amsterdam after falling sharply. However they later recovered much of their losses, closing down 9.70 guilders at 267, above a low of 260.50 guilders.
Milupa said it would hold a thorough investigation at the French plant where the milk was made, and added that production of the product had been suspended.
Sales of Milumil milk powder total between six and seven million pounds a year, and the product has a market share of around five percent. Another Milumil product, Milumil Ready to Feed, is not affected.
Dutch-based Nutricia, which also owns the Cow &amp; Gate brand, is no stranger to controversy.
In June 1993, it withdrew all of its powdered baby food products in the United States because of possible Salmonella contamination.
And 140 million guilders were wiped off the value of the company in November of the same year after it recalled batches of its Olvarit baby food when excessive levels of disinfectant were found in some samples.
Milumil babymilk powder, used by around 25,000 mothers in Britain and Ireland, was withdrawn from British stores and clinics on Friday after a scare over Salmonella poisoning.
Milupa, part of the Dutch specialist food producer Nutricia NV, said it was withdrawing its Milumil milk powder because of an unconfirmed link with 12 cases of a rare form of the Salmonella bug.
Dennis Segal, managing director of Milupa UK, told reporters the company was also in talks with the Irish government, although no incidents had been reported there.
The company launched a damage limitation exercise after it was contacted by Britain's Department of Health on Thursday afternoon.
Government scientists had identified 12 cases of Salmonella anatum infection, leading to gastro-enteritis, in children under 12 months old which followed consumption of the French-made milk, sold as "Milumil for Hungrier Bottle Fed Babies."
The Department of Health said that only two of the children involved were admitted to hospital and all had since recovered. However it told parents and other carers to stop using the product immediately and ordered the withdrawal of all stocks.
"There is no direct, incontrovertible proof that (the cause) is Milumil. It is a statistical association but we have to take every precaution," a company spokeswoman told Reuters.
Shares in Nutricia were suspended for around an hour in Amsterdam after falling sharply. However they later recovered some of their losses, trading down 9.70 guilders at 267, above a low of 260.50 guilders.
Milupa said it would hold a thorough investigation at the French plant where the milk was made, and added that production of the product had been suspended.
Sales of Milumil milk powder total between six and seven million pounds a year, and the product has a market share of around five percent. Another Milumil product, Milumil Ready to Feed, is not affected.
Dutch-based Nutricia, which also owns the Cow &amp; Gate brand, is no stranger to controversy.
In June 1993, it withdrew all of its powdered baby food products in the United States because of possible Salmonella contamination.
And 140 million guilders were wiped off the value of the company in November of the same year after it recalled batches of its Olvarit baby food when excessive levels of disinfectant were found in some samples.
Shares in Britain's pharmaceutical industry were sharply higher across the board on Thursday, bouyed by sterling's weakness, continued takeover speculation, positive broker comment and upbeat news from Medeva Plc.
Shares in the "big three" of Glaxo Wellcome Plc, SmithKline Beecham Plc and Zeneca Group all rose.
Glaxo Wellcome added 3.3 percent or 31 pence to 955, SmithKline Beecham was up 4.4 percent or 37 pence at 880 1/2 and Zeneca rose 3.0 percent or 50 1/2 pence to 1,723.
Traders said sterling's sharp falls on the foreign exchanges overnight had been a major factor behind the gains, easing some of the anxiety over the effect of a strong pound on crucial overseas earnings.
Shares in the major companies fell earlier this month after analysts at NatWest Securities cut 1997 earnings estimates because of the currency impact.
"Currency is very important," said Panmure Gordon analyst Robin Gilbert. "There is a general view that the sector has lagged a bit because of currency, and we had something of a rebound."
Speculation that Roche Holding AG is preparing to announce a merger or takeover may also be buoying Zeneca and SmithKline Beecham, analysts said, although scepticism about such a move is widespread.
The two were further helped by Salomon Brothers' decision to place a buy stance on their stocks, with a hold on Glaxo Wellcome.
Shares in Medeva, which has long traded at a discount to other large drug stocks, rose 8 1/2 pence to 288 pence on the back of "positive" trial data from its hepatitis B vaccine Hepagene, which the company hopes will act both to stop people getting the disease and to help those already infected.
News that Medeva had formed a collaboration with Peptide Therapeutics Plc, one of the smallest stocks in the sector, made it the biggest gainer, jumping nearly 20 percent or 46 1/2 pence to 288.
The two companies hope to develop a range of non-injectable vaccines, and Medeva cemented the link by taking a 2 1/2 percent stake in Peptide for 3 million pounds.
Other strong biotech performers included the flagship British Biotech Plc, which was squeezed up 11 percent or 23 1/2 pence to 232 as several sell positions finally unwound.
Celltech Group Plc also continued to benefit from optimism about its two lead drugs, for septic shock and leukaemia, rising 17 1/2 pence to 637 1/2.
Two very different Cambridge biotechnology companies set out their plans to join the stock market on Monday.
Cambridge Antibody Technology Group Plc (CAT), which uses human antibodies to discover new drugs, and the Bioscience Innovation Centre, which aims to "incubate" new biotech businesses, both hope to raise millions of pounds to fund their work.
Sources close to CAT said its listing later this year should raise between 30 and 35 ($48-57 million) through a placing of its shares with institutional investors, valuing the company at around 85 million pounds.
Kleinwort Benson Ltd has been appointed as sponsor to the flotation, with Cazenove &amp; Co as broker.
CAT, which has been operating since 1990, is working to find drugs to tackle inflammation, fibrosis, cancer and obesity.
It said two drugs were expected to enter human clinical trials this year. CAT plans to develop drugs on its own up to intermediate stage clinical trials, and then find partners to help fund the costly business of late-stage trials, registration and marketing.
The strategy would enable the company to keep a higher percentage of profits from drug sales than if it introduced a partner early on, but will also increase its costs.
The Bioscience Innovation Centre (BIC) said it hoped to raise up to 6 million pounds through a share placing and open offer, and to list its shares on the Alternative Investment Market (AIM).
The money will go towards the construction of a 20,000 square foot building in Cambridge which will act as a "business incubator", offering technical and commercial skills to budding biotechs.
"In the U.S, sector-specific business incubators have been shown to have a positive and dramatic effect on the success rate and growth of start-up businesses," BIC said.
It added that the planned centre would give suitable companies access to "professionals in the fields of intellectual property, commercial management, licensing, marketing, regulatory affairs and finance."
Teather &amp; Greenwood have been appointed as advisers and brokers for BIC's flotation.
Cambridge is growing rapidly as a biotechnology centre. Companies already established in the city include Chiroscience Group Plc, Peptide Therapeutics Plc, Cantab Pharmaceuticals Plc and Celsis International Plc. ($1=.6161 Pound)
Home decorating giants ICI Paints and Black &amp; Decker hope their new product to be launched on Wednesday won't make a splash.
The two companies have invested two years and millions of pounds in developing the Black &amp; Decker Paintmate, a battery-operated roller system they claim will take the pain out of painting.
The Paintmate, which will be sold in DIY (do-it-yourself) stores across Britain from April for 39.99 pounds ($65), uses an air-filled bellow system to squeeze the contents of a two-litre refill bag of Dulux paint down a tube and onto a roller, with the flow controlled by a trigger.
The small, cylindrical Paintmate can be strapped on to the back to eliminate tiresome bending over. Black &amp; Decker spokesman Richard Sanderson told Reuters, "It is a long time since the DIY market saw a product of such significance."
Sanderson said the companies hoped to sell 500,000 of the British-designed, Chinese-made Paintmates in the first full year in Britain, together with a million bags of paint.
If all goes well in Britain, which Sanderson said was "quite a sophisticated DIY market", Paintmate will be rolled out across western Europe next year, after which attention would switch to the huge U.S. home improvement market.
ICI, which sells enough paint in the UK to decorate five million homes a year, hopes the product will revolutionise the way people decorate.
"It's quick, it's easy and I think people will find it fun," said ICI Decorative Paints international marketing director Chris Harris.
Harris said the whole system could be flushed out with water. "We think people would redecorate more regularly if the painting process was quicker and easier," he added.
The Paintmate's promoters hope to benefit from a surge in DIY sales, fuelled by an upswing in Britain's temperamental housing market.
The product's launch will be backed by a 10 million pound promotional campaign in Britain and Europe, with television adverstising starting in April. ($1=.6199 Pound)
Britain's Imperial Tobacco Group Plc took advantage of its new-found independence on Tuesday to buy the world's biggest maker of handrolling tobacco papers.
Imperial, which was demerged from conglomerate Hanson Plc last October, said it was paying 168 million pounds ($272.7 million) for Netherlands-based Rizla International BV, as well as acquiring 17 million pounds of Rizla's debt.
Chief executive Gareth Davis told Reuters that Rizla, which employs more than 700 people in France, Belgium and Wales, would enhance the group's international expansion.
"Imperial Tobacco is a relatively late entrant to international markets but is making some very fast strides in growth," Davis said.
Rizla has a large market share in seven or eight European countries, he said.
Shares in Imperial, which will finance the deal out of bank borrowings, rose 9.5 pence to 394 as traders greeted the news.
Founded in 1796, Rizla is the world's largest producer and seller of the thin papers used for handrolling cigarettes. It has around 66 percent of world market share in branded products.
Davis said the company was active in more than 60 countries, adding: "Obviously we are looking to extract the potential we see at Rizla for increased profitability and productivity."
Davis said Imperial had been able to take advantage of its new-found independence from Hanson.
"It is a company we have been interested in for many years," he said, adding that the acquisition was "very much in line with our strategy at demerger of focusing on tobacco and tobacco-related products."
No job losses are anticipated as a result of the acquisition. "We do see scope for productivity improvements but the plants are working at capacity," Davis said.
Imperial said Rizla, which is based in Breda, would continue to be run as a separate division, with the existing management remaining in place.
In 1996, Rizla posted a trading profit of 23 million pounds on sales of 74 million pounds, and had net tangible assets of around 17 million pounds.
($1=.6161 Pound)
Zeneca Group Plc set the scene for record profits on Tuesday, telling investors that its 1996 performance was expected to be in line with market expectations.
Analysts are forecasting a leap in pre-tax profit for the year to around 1.0 billion pounds ($1.62 billion) from 619 million pounds in 1995 when Zeneca unveils results on March 11.
With a strong set of results already factored into the share price, Zeneca stock settled back four pence to 1689-1/2 pence in early trading.
Bumper pharmaceutical sales will help to drive profits forward, with 1996 sales volumes likely to be ahead by around 14 percent year-on-year.
Sales of the group's biggest-selling product, cardiovascular drug Zestril, are tipped to rise at a similar rate to 1995's 12 percent growth, despite increased competition from rival Merck &amp; Co MRK.L 's Prinivil and Cozaar.
Established prostate cancer treatment Zoladex also "continued to grow strongly," Zeneca said, while a decline in sales of its ageing breast cancer product Nolvadex slowed.
In a quarterly trading statement, Zeneca highlighted the performance of new drugs, with sales of prostate treatment Casodex and Nolvadex back-up Arimidex beating expectations. The recent launch of a novel tablet asthma drug Accolate in the U.S. has "gone well," the group said.
Sales of agro-chemicals last year "were close" to the 14 percent rise reported at the nine-month stage, with record sales of herbicides and of the insecticide Karate.
Operating profits at the slimmed-down specialities business were likely to be above 1995 levels after "a particularly strong second-half performance," Zeneca said.
Full-year results will be affected by a 35 million reorganisation charge on speciality disposals, signalled at the half-year stage, while reorganisation of the seeds joint venture should cost Zeneca around 20 million pounds.
($1=.6161 Pound)
Drug group Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc said on Wednesday it was still keen to forge a cancer drug partnership in the U.S. as part of its goal of becoming a major oncology player over the next five years.
Setting out the U.S.-based group's growth strategy, RPR President Tim Rothwell said the company "aims to be in the top five, and ideally the top three" in cancer sales.
RPR ranked 15th in oncology sales in 1995. Rothwell said the improvement would be driven by breast and lung cancer drug Taxotere, which he predicted would achieve peak sales of at least $500 million over the next five years.
Sales this year are forecast to double in 1997 from around $90 million last year. Brain cancer treatment Gliadel, which Rothwell said should be approved in the U.S. in 1998, will also fuel the improvement.
"We continue to be interested in a partnership or alliance in the U.S. Others have two or three cancer products in a market dominated by Bristol-Myers Squibb, so it would make sense to ally ourselves," he said.
Rothwell cited RPR's link with Novo Nordisk on hormone replacement therapy as a model for other therapeutic alliances.
He again brushed aside recent speculation that RPR, which is 68 percent-owned by France's Rhone-Poulenc SA, could be a suitor for Sanofi, saying that the French company would not help achieve his aim of building up RPR's strength in the U.S. and Japan.
"The U.S. is still the largest and most profitable market in the world," Rothwell said, noting that only 24 percent of RPR's sales are in the United States compared to more than 40 percent for many of its rivals.
He said he wanted to raise U.S. sales to around 35 percent of the group's total, adding: "That will only come about through internal growth and perhaps from opportunistic product deals." In Japan RPR's strategy would be to continue with alliances and to build on the "eight or nine products in Phase II and Phase III trials."
"If the right kind of acquisition came along we would consider it, but the very good Japanese companies are the ones that can't be bought," he added.
In addition to cancer, RPR's growth strategy will centre on enhancing its position in key therapeutic areas, including thrombosis, asthma/allergy and anti-infectives.
It will also seek to swap non-core products with other companies and build up its base of early-stage products through links with universities and biotech companies.
In thrombosis, where RPR is number three in the world, the company expects sales of its best-selling drug Lovenox to double by the end of the century to more than $800 million.
In asthma and allergy, where RPR's position was enhanced by the acquisition of Britain's Fisons FISN.L, Rothwell said RPR was likely to remain in fourth place in five years' time, but predicted it would have overtaken Germany's Boehringer and would be challenging Sweden's Astra for third place.
Rothwell also hopes RPR will move up from 15th to be in the top five for anti-infective sales by the year 2005. He said new oral antibiotic Zagam and "other compounds under consideration" should boost its standing.
RPR is currently the 11th largest drug company in the world in terms of total sales. On Monday the company announced a 25 percent jump in 1996 net profits to $428.7 million.
British Biotech Plc said on Wednesday that a rethink on the way drug giants form alliances with fledgling biotechs was "desperately required".
British Biotech chief executive Keith McCullagh told the IIR's Pharma Summit conference that many product partnerships failed because small drug discoverers were forced to relinquish control of their projects too early.
He said a project that might be very important to a biotech was "one of many at an early stage of development" for a large company "and is usually not regarded with any great sense of uniqueness or urgency."
McCullagh said biotech projects often got clogged up in bureaucracy, rarely achieved the same priority as in-house discoveries and often fell victim to changes in management.
"The consequences of this are that the majority of biotech-pharma alliances fail, not as a consequence of product failure but as a result of a change of will on the part of the partner," he said.
British Biotech's deals over several years had been affected by changes in research and development management, complete R&amp;D reorganisation and changes in overall control of the partner through merger and acquisition, said McCullagh.
"Success is more likely to be achieved, as judged by product progress to market, if the originating company continues to play an important role in ongoing development," he said.
The chief executive said this could be achieved by the biotech company continuing to control development of a drug in-house with funding from its partner, or by establishing a joint venture "to progress the project with equal input into its management."
A third way could be for large companies to invite biotech staff to sit on project teams and management committees.
"By allowing the originator greater control over the outcome of the development, not only is the chance for success for the project enhanced but (the large company) is also more likely to achieve a return on its investment," he added.
British Biotech is unusual among its peers in choosing to develop and market its cancer portfolio, including its lead cancer drug Marimastat, on its own, although it has formed alliances in other key areas.
-- London newsroom 44 171 542 7717
