British utilities could find share buybacks and takeovers more costly as the government ruled out tax credits on buybacks and some special dividends on Tuesday, analysts said, but they are unlikely to stop such moves.
"It should not stop companies doing buybacks or special dividends," said Michael Cohen, utilities analyst at Salomon Brothers, "those should still go ahead if justified."
Chancellor Kenneth Clarke said shareholders would no longer be able to claim tax credits on share buybacks or special dividends associated with share consolidations or takeovers.  
The move is a means of giving the UK Treasury more room for a cut in income tax in its November budget, analysts said.
Shares in the utility sector, which has seen a steady flow of buybacks and special dividends both within and outside the context of takeovers, initially slumped on the news but later showed some recovery.
"It was a knee-jerk reaction, slightly overdone," said Kevin Lapwood, utilities analyst at Merrill Lynch.  
Shares in Anglian Water slid 31-1/2 to a low of 525 pence before edging back to 544-1/2 pence at 1300 GMT while Yorkshire Water was down 17-1/2 pence at 622-1/2 pence after slumping to a low of 613 pence.
In the electricity sector, London Electric stumbled to a low of 598 pence before recovering to be down 20-1/2 pence at 608-1/2 pence while generator PowerGen was off 10-1/2 pence at 479 pence from a low of 460 pence earlier.
"The market was of the view that release of value from the balance sheets was less likely, but I think that was overdone," Lapwood said.  
Water and electricity companies report half-year results in a flood between November and December and several had been tipped as likely to offer a buyback or special dividend.
Analysts said the upshot of the government's decision would be to make buybacks more expensive, but the impetus for such moves will not change.
"The logic of a buyback has not changed, it will just be at a premium. And the move on special dividends could make takeovers more expensive, but if it is a good acquisition, it will go ahead," said one analyst who asked not to be identified.  
Companies are generally reticent about specific plans and several contacted declined to comment on the new tax rules or share strategies.
Analysts suggested that of the water companies, Yorkshire Water might consider a buyback while Anglian and Thames might consider restructuring the balance sheet.
East Midlands Electricity, Yorkshire Electricity and London Electric were singled out as potentially considering special dividends, while the market is still waiting to see such a move from PowerGen, analysts said.
"It does not really affect the companies, just a group of investors," Cohen said.
Those funds affected by the move are likely to change investments to try to avoid any impact, analysts said.
"At the end of the day it will probably end up roughly equal," the analyst said.
"Gross funds will restructure and companies will come out with cleverer mechanisms," he added.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
Britain's nuclear generator British Energy Plc said on Tuesday it would announce job cuts and cost savings on October 9 which were largely expected by the market but criticised by opposition politicians.
"It is clear that British Energy has not performed as they promised they would," Labour's energy and industry spokesman John Battle said in a statement.
A British Energy spokesman confirmed Wednesday's announcement would cover job cuts and cost savings but declined to give further details.
Analysts said they were expecting the company to outline a cut of some 20 percent in its workforce of over 6,500 by the year 2000.
"That's what we have based our valuation on, it was the figure given to the analysts' briefing over privatisation," said one analyst who asked not to be identified.
Newspaper reports this week have said the company could cut between 1,300-1,500 posts in an effort to make cost savings of around 100 million pounds ($156.4 million).
Battle called on British Energy to confirm the dividend policy outlined in the company's privatisation prospectus, which warned that it was vulnerable to underperformance by nuclear power stations.
At privatisation, the company said its initial interim dividend would be 4.6 pence per share and forecasts for final dividend are at 9.1 pence for 1996/97.
But Labour's Battle said the job cuts could damage performance and see the company falling below targets. "Performance targets anticipated in the prospectus have never previously been consistently achieved and the loss of a reported 1,300...staff is expected to further undermine chances of reaching them," Battle said.
British Energy, which runs eight nuclear power stations in England and Scotland, was one of the ruling Conservative party's most unpopular privatisations when it was sold off in July.
It had a first instalment price of 100 pence for small investors and 105 pence for institutions but slid below these levels at its debut and has rarely moved above since.
Its launch was overshadowed by concerns over its future profitability when it closed two of its eight reactors after finding cracks just days before shares started trading. Analysts said the job cuts had largely been outlined at the time of privatisation.
"All that has been absorbed into forecasts," said Kevin Lapwood of Merrill Lynch.
British Energy shares were down half a penny at 105 pence by 1109 GMT, which analysts said reflected market nonchalance over job cuts. ($1=.6393 Pound)
Privatised nuclear power generator British Energy Plc sparked criticism on Wednesday when it announced job cuts that failed to impress the stock market and angered unions.
"I don't think this move transforms (British Energy's) prospects at all," said Philip Hollobone, utilities analyst at Williams de Broe.
British Energy said in a statement it aimed to cut 1,460 jobs in Scotland and Wales to make savings in staff costs of 50 million pounds ($78 million) within three years.
It said it would have a one-off restructuring charge of 100 million pounds which was already provided for.
Chief executive Robert Hawley said there could be more savings to come as cuts in office costs came through.
Union representatives slammed the move in a statement as "a high risk strategy," warning that job cuts could "reduce training, lower standards and threaten safety."
The Nuclear Installations Inspectorate (NII), part of Britain's Health and Safety Executive, said it would review the plans and take action if it felt safety would suffer.
"If we think (the plans) are adverse (for safety), we will use regulatory powers to stop (British Energy) doing them," a spokesman for the NII said.
But Hawley maintained that "safety is our bottom line, not profit."
British Energy's debut on the stock exchange in July was overshadowed by temporary closures of two of its eight reactors after cracks were discovered.
Shares kicked off below the partly-paid issue price of 105 pence to institutions and 100 pence to small investors and have rarely moved above those levels, mangaging just a half penny rise on the day on Wednesday to stand at 108 pence at 1130 GMT.
The ruling Conservative government pressed ahead with its privatisation despite the deep unpopularity of the deal and has been left with a stake of around 12 percent.
The opposition Labour Party also criticised the job cuts, which energy and industry spokesman John Battle said showed British Energy "has not performed as they promised they would."
He called on the company to confirm its dividend policy which it has said is vulnerable to underperformance by nuclear power stations.
Although Hawley maintained the company's plans were aimed at making "absolutely sure we are competitive in the market place," analysts expressed concern it faced stiff challenges and remained an unattractive investment.
"They are under pressure," said Marshall Whiting of Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull (SGST).
Whiting said the crucial factor for British Energy was price of electricity in the so-called "pool," or wholesale market.
"Pressure on electricity prices is downward in the medium to long term. (British Energy) has to address operating costs to get profits to stand still," he said.
Hollobone said the cost cuts should make predictions for dividend growth more secure but added that these were still below market averages.
"Dividend growth is one of the lowest in the sector and there is no sign of a special dividend," he said.
British Energy said at its privatisation that the first interim dividend would be 4.6 pence a share and forecasts for final dividend are for 9.1 pence in 1996/97.
"You can get better value elsewhere. Why invest in British Energy?" Hollobone said. ($1=.6393 Pound)
ASDA Plc may not be Britain's biggest supermarket chain but new chief executive Allan Leighton is determined to make it the best.
ASDA is currently one of Britain's top four supermarkets with around 13.1 percent of the market, behind Tesco's leading 22.7 percent and its arch-rival J. Sainsbury's 19.3 percent, according to industry figures for September.
"I don't want particularly to be the biggest but what I want to be is the best," Leighton told Reuters in an interview.
Leighton took over on August 27 from his close colleague Archie Norman, the dynamic former chief executive who stepped up to chairman and who has just embarked on a political career as a prospective parliamentary candidate for the Conservative Party.
Norman is credited with turning ASDA around from a debt-laden, downbeat chain when he took over five years ago to its current position as value-for-money with cheeky, high-profile marketing campaigns and a lively image.
But Leighton feels there is still more to do.
"We've still got less than half the store base that we're really satisfied with...a lot of the gain in terms of productivity...and supply chain that our competitors have, we have not yet got and have been slow in getting," he said.
CLOTHING MARGINS HIGHER THAN FOOD
Leighton wants to boost the chain's George clothing range to second place in the market behind own-brand high street name Marks &amp; Spencer. "I'd like it to be...close towards 10 percent (of total sales) in the chain...about a 600 million pound (a year) business," he said, adding that he thought that could be done in "the next couple of years".
Clothing margins are around twice those of groceries for ASDA, Leighton said.
The George clothing brand, exclusive to ASDA, is headed by George Davies who founded the Next chain of fashion stores.
Leighton sees the handover from Norman as an "evolution", valuing continuity but seeing clear areas for change.
"I think continuity in management succession is very important," he said. He added: "There will be some changes, that goes with the territory."
He said the pace of innovation could be speeded up. "We've got a bit more comfortable and I don't like that and so we're just going to hot (innovation) up a bit," he said.
Leighton, a graduate of Harvard business school, sees improvements in technology as a way of achieving greater profitability for the stores.
ASDA needs to make "another quantum (leap)" in using technology, Leighton said, primarily to speed up distribution and product roll-out.
He admitted that in technology "I'm not satisfied with what we are doing...We're not leaping, we're catching up."
Leighton also wants to see a quarter of ASDA's business unique to its outlets, mostly 40-50,000 square feet, in three years' time.
"One of our objectives (is that) in three years, 25 percent of what we do in our stores you would not be able to do in a competitor superstore of up to 30,000 square feet," he said.
DRIVE A JAGUAR FOR ONE MONTH
ASDA's renowned innovative management style, where everyone from checkout staff to chairman is a colleague and employees are encouraged to "Tell Archie" of ideas, has looked largely to Norman and Leighton to carry the company image.
Now, Leighton feels it needs to become "less dependent on two individuals. Now it's time for the team to deliver".
Employees work in an atmosphere where weekly and monthly sector targets are posted in staff areas while A,B,C,D awards are made for action "Above and Beyond the Call of Duty."
Sales competitions reward the winner with use of the company's red Jaguar for a month and there is strong participation in the employee share scheme.
"People want to work in successful businesses and the measure of our success will be in our profitability, earnings per share, and our sales performance and market share," he said.
Leighton feels the confidence in employees engendered by the management style accounts for "a third of our success".
And he sees it in tune with opposition Labour Party leader Tony Blair's concept of a "stakeholder society".
"That's exactly what it is. People should be involved in what they do and there's no reason why they shouldn't be," he said.
Leighton remains committed to ASDA's aim to be the cheapest across a basket of goods and vowed to respond to market leader Tesco's latest challenge of "Unbeatable Value" price offers.
ASDA VOWS TO KEEP MARKET SHARE
"ASDA is very determined we will hold our position. It is very important for us to do that and we will hold it," he said.
"If we are under pressure in some areas, we will and have and are responding," he added.
He said food retailing was currently very competitive and likely to stay that way for "six to nine months".
Own brand goods, which generally give higher margins to retailers, currently account for 35 percent or so of ASDA's sales and Leighton would like to push that up to around 40 percent, but cautioned that "five percent is a lot".
Healthcare, where ASDA has battled against Retail Price Maintenance (RPM), could be an area of opportunity for own brand, he suggested.
But one area where ASDA seems in no hurry is in launching loyalty cards in its stores nationwide, to match moves from Tesco and the other big supermarkets, Sainsbury and Safeway.
ASDA is trying out a loyalty card -- which rewards customers and also provides information about what they buy -- in selected stores but Leighton is unwilling to roll it out until he can see real value for the company in such a move.
"I only feel the need for the database (but) people have still not really worked out how to mine the database," he said.
Leighton suggested that if ASDA had to chose between investing in a decrease in margins through lower prices or loyalty, price would still win out.
"If 0.75 percentage point were the cost, well I could do quite a lot with 0.75 percent in terms of pricing," he said.
British industry watchdog Ofwat said on Tuesday it would review water company price limits in 1999, five years ahead of schedule, in a move which commentators said was not unexpected and possibly with political undertones.
The opposition Labour party, currently standing ahead of the ruling Conservative party in opinion polls with a general election due by May 1997, welcomed the move as "long overdue".
Ofwat set the current price limits in 1994 for a 10-year period with an option to review in five years at the request either of Ofwat director general Ian Byatt or the companies.
In a statement, Byatt said "a gap of ten years between reviews is too long even given the long term nature of the water industry."
"The regulator's decision to have a review in 1999 comes as no surprise," Janet Langdon, director of the Water Services Association which represents water firms, said in a statement.
Labour environment spokesman Frank Dobson said in a statement the review was an admission by Ofwat that Labour "has been right to argue that the water companies have been allowed to rip off their customers since privatisation."
Byatt said he was announcing the review now "to remove speculation and regulatory uncertainty...to give sufficient time for consultation with all those involved."
Water company shares dipped on the news with Anglian Water down six pence to 547-1/2 pence while Severn Trent shed four pence to 600 pence and Thames Water was down four pence to 548-1/2 pence.
Multi-utilities Hyder and United Utilities also suffered, sliding 12-1/2 pence to 700 pence and four pence to 585 pence respectively.
Byatt said major consideration would be given during the review to the need for balancing supply and demand and to pay more attention to leakage control, factors highlighted in last year's drought when many firms banned non-essential water use.
Labour criticised the industry at the time for allowing some 826 million gallons of water a day to seep out through pipes while paying large dividends and hefty salaries to directors.
Ofwat has already flexed its muscles against Yorkshire Water's inadequate handling of the drought which saw the company forced to tanker in supplies, by imposing price cuts for next year and singling it out at the time for a review in 1999.
The company, which has since had a change of management, said on Tuesday it would finally lift all restrictions imposed in the summer of 1995 on November 1.
Labour, which has utility companies in its sights for a proposed "windfall" profits tax, said Ofwat's planned price review would "have to play its part in (a) better deal for customers."
Byatt, by announcing an early review and stressing the need to pass savings on to customers, is "moving to assuage the politicians," said one analyst who declined to be named.
"There is lots of jockeying for position ahead of an election. The companies want to be seen to be doing the right thing," said Chris Perry, analyst at Charterhouse Tilney.
Later this year, companies will have an opportunity to go some way to pre-empting a harsh review when they announce interim results at the end of November.
Several of the water companies have used the announcement of past results to share out benefits of cost savings between customers and shareholders, giving rebates to the former and generous dividend payouts to the latter. "Companies may well consider there is a value now in laying out their plans for benefit sharing ahead of the next election," one analyst said.
Britain's decision to take legal action to ban Resale Price Maintenance (RPM) on non-prescription medicines is likely to boost competition and could benefit some stores in terms of market share, analysts said on Friday.
"Anything that actually causes prices to fall is not good news (for retailers), but for those wanting to increase market share it will mean more people coming through the stores," said one share analyst who asked not to be identified.
Office of Fair Trading head John Bridgeman said in a statement earlier that he would seek to remove RPM from over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, because "there are good reasons for believing that it is time to end price-fixing."
RPM allows manufacturers to set minimum levels for sale of certain over-the-counter medicines. The Community Pharmacy Action Group, which lobbies on behalf of pharmacies, said its removal could mean the closure of one in four local outlets.
The OFT's request goes to the Restrictive Practices Court which is unlikely to be able to consider the issue before late 1997, Bridgeman told a press conference.
Retailers therefore did not appear to be about to start an immediate round of price cuts.
Chemist and beauty products store chain Boots said it was disappointed at the decision and believed that RPM "operates in the public interest."
Boots has not reduced prices of such medicines during a long-running inquiry into price-fixing and industry sources said it was unlikely to take that route in the near future.
UniChem, a pharmaceuticals wholesaler and retailer, said removal of RPM would be "immaterial to...profitability," while Superdrug, the high street chemist chain owned by Kingfisher, welcomed the move but ruled out immediate price cuts.
Supermarket retailer ASDA, which has led the campaign over the last year to have RPM removed after successfully lobbying for it to be withdrawn from books, also welcomed the OFT's decision, saying it could save consumers 300 million pounds ($476 million) on everday healthcare products.
But it said its stance on prices would not change.
"RPM is still in place, we are still in the same situation we were in yesterday and we will still be in it tomorrow," a spokesman said.
ASDA is currently refusing to sell Anadin Paracetamol, a painkiller produced by Whitehall Laboratories, and large packs of indigestion treatment Alka Seltzer, after it baulked at manufacturers' price increases.
It has launched a range of some 40 own-brand OTC medicines and vitamins selling for as little as half the price of branded equivalents, and says they have helped it extend market share.
Also on Friday, ASDA said it was launching an initiative to help support local pharmacies, shops which chief executive Allan Leighton told BBC television he had no wish to see put out of business.
Share analysts said that removal of RPM on non-prescription medicines could see specialists such as Boots increasing market share, reflecting events after RPM was taken off books when specialist retailer W H Smith increased market share.
"Smiths got stronger, increasing market share through promotions and using muscle with suppliers. I expect the same will happen to Boots - it'll get bigger and stronger," said Nick Bubb of MeesPierson.
Boots shares dipped on the news and stood at 638-1/2p, down 5p, by 1440 GMT. ASDA was up a penny to 114-1/2 pence while Kingfisher was down 1-1/2 pence at 654 pence. ($1=.6298 Pound)
The stock of media group Pearson closed sharply higher Monday as takeover speculation swirled on a report, which was later denied, that broadcaster BSkyB might be planning a bid in the wake of announced management changes.
Pearson shares closed 34-1/2 pence (55 cents) higher at 731p ($11.60) after earlier touching a high for the year of 745p ($11.82), as 6.7 million shares changed hands.
"The price was boosted last week by the management change but now it reflects revived bid speculation," said one analyst, referring to last week's naming of a new Pearson chief executive and chairman.
A report in the Independent newspaper said BSkyB, in which Rupert Murdoch's News Corp. has a 40 percent stake, was in the early stages of planning a bid worth more than 4 billion British pounds ($6.4 billion) in cooperation with a U.S.-based media group.
But BSkyB's chief executive, Sam Chisholm, was quoted in later editions of Murdoch's Times newspaper saying there were "no talks taking place between News Corp, BSkyB or any associated company about a bid for Pearson."
A BSkyB spokesman confirmed Chisholm had denied any such talks.
Pearson, which owns Britain's main business newspaper, the Financial Times, Penguin Books and a number of television production companies, said it did not comment on speculation.
Analysts said that although BSkyB appeared to have ruled itself out of a bid, observers felt any move on Pearson was likely to be made before new management takes control next year.
Last week Pearson appointed Marjorie Scardino to be chief executive from Jan. 1 -- the first female head of a company represented in the key FTSE 100 share index. It also named Dennis Stevenson its new chairman.
"If someone is thinking seriously about a bid, now is the time to do it. The new management hasn't arrived yet and so it would be harder to mount a defence," said one media analyst, who asked not to be identified.
But analysts said Pearson shares were now approaching the top end of their price target range for full valuation of the business and the price tag attached to speculation around BSkyB was high.
"It is touching the stratosphere at these levels," said Anthony De Larrinaga of Panmure Gordon.
The media analyst said it was difficult to put a price tag on Pearson because its diversified nature meant it could have specific attractions for a variety of bidders.
Speculation of a bid for the company last surfaced in August, when Anglo-Dutch publisher Reed-Elsevier was rumoured as a possible buyer.
After initial stock market disappointment, Scardino's appointment at Pearson was greeted with a 12 pence (19 cents) jump in the stock price on Friday as hopes emerged that she might reorganize the sprawling media company.
So far, Scardino appears to be keeping her options open, analysts said. "There is no real evidence yet that she would consider any demergers (spin-offs) and it is open to question whether such a move would bring shareholder benefit," one said.
Shares in media group Pearson closed sharply higher on Monday as takeover speculation swirled on a report, later denied, that broadcaster BSkyB might be planning a bid in the wake of announced management changes.
Pearson shares closed 34-1/2p higher at 731p after earlier touching a high for the year of 745p, as 6.7 million shares changed hands.
"The price was boosted last week by the management change but now it reflects revived bid speculation," said one sector analyst in a reference to last week's naming of a new Pearson chief executive and chairman.
A report in the Independent newspaper said BSkyB, in which Rupert Murdoch's News Corp has a 40 percent stake, was in the early stages of planning a bid worth more than four billion pounds ($6.4 billion) in cooperation with a U.S.-based media group.
But BSkyB's chief executive, Sam Chisholm, was quoted in later editions of Murdoch's Times newspaper saying there were "no talks taking place between News Corp, BSkyB or any associated company about a bid for Pearson."
A BSkyB spokesman on Monday confirmed Chisholm had denied any such talks.
Pearson, which owns Britain's main business newspaper, the Financial Times, Penguin Books and a number of television production companies, said it did not comment on speculation.
Analysts said although BSkyB appeared to have ruled itself out of a bid, observers felt any move on Pearson was likely to be made before new management takes control next year.
Last week, Pearson appointed Marjorie Scardino to be chief executive from January 1 -- the first female head of a company represented in the key FT-SE 100 share index -- and Dennis Stevenson chairman.
"If someone is thinking seriously about a bid, now is the time to do it. The new management hasn't arrived yet and so it would be harder to mount a defence," said one media analyst who asked not to be identified.
But analysts said Pearson shares were now approaching the top end of their price target range for full valuation of the business and the price tag attached to speculation around BSkyB was high.
"It is touching the stratosphere at these levels," said Anthony De Larrinaga of Panmure Gordon.
The media analyst said it was difficult to put a price tag on Pearson because its diversified nature meant it could have specific attractions for a variety of bidders.
Speculation of a bid for the company last surfaced in August when Anglo-Dutch publisher Reed-Elsevier was rumoured as a possible buyer.
After initial stock market disappointment, Scardino's appointment at Pearson was greeted with a 12 pence jump in shares on Friday as hopes emerged that she might reorganise the sprawling media company.
The Sunday Times newspaper reported that a sale of its television interests, which include soap opera and games show producer Grundy, might be on the cards.
"It may be that BSkyB want to acquire Grundy or Thames Television but whether they would want the entire group is another matter," said Anthony De Larrinaga of Panmure Gordon.
So far, Scardino appears to be keeping her options open, analysts said.
"There is no real evidence yet that she would consider any demergers and it is open to question whether such a move would bring shareholder benefit," one said.
"We have the stock on a hold at the moment. Let's see what the new management comes up with and let's see if there is anything concrete behind this bid speculation." ($1=.6298 Pound)
Shares in media group Pearson rose sharply on Monday as takeover speculation swirled on a report, later denied, that broadcaster BSkyB might be planning a bid, just days after new management was appointed.
"The price was boosted last week by the management change but now it reflects revived bid speculation," said one sector analyst who declined to be named.
Pearson shares were up 25 pence at 721-1/2 pence by 1115 GMT after touching a peak of 745 pence, a high for the year.
A report in Monday's Independent newspaper said BSkyB, in which Rupert Murdoch's News Corp has a 40 percent stake, was in the early stages of planning a bid worth more than four billion pounds ($6.4 billion) in cooperation with a U.S.-based media group.
But BSkyB's chief executive, Sam Chisholm, was quoted in later editions of Murdoch's Times newspaper saying there were "no talks taking place between News Corp, BSkyB or any associated company about a bid for Pearson."
BSkyB was not immediately available for comment on Monday.
Pearson, which owns the Financial Times newspaper, Penguin Books and a number of television production companies, said it did not comment on speculation.
Analysts said although BSkyB appeared to have ruled itself out of a bid, observers felt any move on Pearson was likely to be made before new management takes control next year.
Last week, Pearson appointed Marjorie Scardino to be chief executive from January 1 -- the first female head of a company represented in the key FT-SE 100 share index -- and Dennis Stevenson chairman.
"If someone is thinking seriously about a bid, now is the time to do it. The new management hasn't arrived yet and so it would be harder to mount a defence," said one media analyst who asked not to be identified.
But analysts said Pearson shares were now approaching the top end of their price target range for full valuation of the business and the price tag attached to speculation around BSkyB was high.
"It is touching the stratosphere at these levels," said Anthony De Larrinaga of Panmure Gordon.
The media analyst said it was difficult to put a price tag on Pearson because its diversified nature meant it could have specific attractions for a variety of bidders.
Speculation of a bid for the company last surfaced in August when Anglo-Dutch publisher Reed-Elsevier was rumoured as a possible buyer.
After initial stock market disappointment, Scardino's appointment at Pearson was greeted with a 12 pence jump in shares on Friday as hopes emerged that she might reorganise the sprawling media company.
The Sunday Times newspaper reported that a sale of its television interests, which include soap opera and games show producer Grundy, might be on the cards.
"It may be that BSkyB want to acquire Grundy or Thames Television but whether they would want the entire group is another matter," said Anthony De Larrinaga of Panmure Gordon.
So far, Scardino appears to be keeping her options open, analysts said.
"There is no real evidence yet that she would consider any demergers and it is open to question whether such a move would bring shareholder benefit," the sector analyst said.
"We have the stock on a hold at the moment. Let's see what the new management comes up with and let's see if there is anything concrete behind this bid speculation," he added. ($1=.6298 Pound)
Cable &amp; Wireless Communications, a major new British cable operator formed on Tuesday from a group led by Cable &amp; Wireless Plc, has the potential to be competitive and focuses attention on the fast-growing area, analysts said.
"The logic is irrefutable...the advantages of scope and size are undoubtedly there," said Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull analyst John Tysoe.
Cable &amp; Wireless, NYNEX Corp of the U.S. and Bell Canada International announced they would merge the operations of their British subsidiaries in a complex deal, culminating in a float of 15 percent of the new company.
"That creates an integrated second force, which will give BT a run for its money," Tysoe said, referring to telecommunications giant British Telecommunications.
Shares in Cable &amp; Wireless closed up 25.5 pence to 466.5, after touching a high of 476.5 pence, while NYNEX Cable Communications gained 23.5 pence to 119.5 pence.
"It's a jolly bold and impressive move," said one sector analyst.
The merger should result in quite significant cost savings, said Chris McFadden of Merrill Lynch, including tax offsets, refinancing of high-yield cable television funding and possibly through staff cuts.
"The new company can offer the complete range of services and it will be competing with BT in the franchises which it operates," the sector analyst said.
Analysts added that the deal was expected to dilute earnings slightly in the first year but enhance them from year two.
BT's shares edged down four pence to 354 pence as the market weighed the emergence of a new competitor.
But BT welcomed the consolidation in the sector, saying it would create a market "where competition can become the natural regulator."
Analysts said BT's calls to be allowed to provide cable television, which the Conservative government has so far rebuffed, could gain impetus from the emergence of Cable &amp; Wireless Communications.
For other cable companies, the move has focused market attention, which had been flagging, back on the fast-growing sector, with stock market valuations now looking a little low.
"People are reassessing the value (of cable companies). There could be more consolidation. They have to respond," McFadden said, adding that calculations suggested a 2.9 billion pounds ($3.6 billion) tag for C&amp;W's Mercury unit after the deal.
Telewest Communications shares jumped 12 pence to 135, while General Cable gained 18 to 197 pence.
The British cable market is growing fast, with around 7.5 million homes now within striking distance of connections, as around six billion pounds has already been invested in building cable networks and a further six billion is planned.
The new company will eclipse its rivals in terms of market share, with 2.47 million homes within reach, compared with its nearest rival, Telewest, with around two million.
But analysts said it would not be in direct competition with other cable network companies as they mainly operated in different franchises.
Cable &amp; Wireless Communications may flex its muscles in securing more favourable terms for programming from BSkyB, the satellite broadcaster in which Rupert Murdoch's News Corp has a 40 percent stake, analysts said.
BSkyB shares were down 16-1/2p to 680p, after touching a low of 678p.
"I think that is why BSkyB has come under pressure. People think the merged company might secure more attractive rates," the sector analyst said. ($1=.7986 Pound)
The birth of a cable giant led by British Telecom's rival Cable &amp; Wireless should enliven competition and ease pressure on BT by regulators long worried by its dominance of the UK market, analysts said on Wednesday.
In its latest rebuff, telecommunications watchdog Oftel on Wednesday banned a promotion by BT, Britain's biggest telephone company, with satellite broadcaster BSkyB, due to a ban on BT's use of its network for entertainment.
"Oftel's decision is nuisance value for BT. (but) the Cable &amp; Wireless deal has far-reaching implications," said Patrick Hickey of Henderson Crosthwaite.
The merger announced on Tuesday created Cable &amp; Wireless Communications, a company controlled by C&amp;W that brings together its own Mercury telecoms business with the British operations of NYNEX of the U.S., Bell Canada International, and Videotron to create a $7.5 billion group. Its constituent companies already reach almost 2.5 million homes in Britain.
Following the Oftel decision, by 1230 GMT, BT shares were off 5.5 pence to 348.5 pence and BSkyB was off 17 pence to 661.5 pence, a low for the day, while C&amp;W was up 7.5 pence to 474.5.
Oftel said that BT's promotion, which involves discounts on subscriptions to BSkyB for customers using a "Friends and Family" phone charges offer, was discriminatory.
BT said it was "baffled" by Oftel's statement and claimed that the promotion offered cost savings to customers and was open to all BT users.
Oftel's decision is particularly emotive, analysts said, as it follows hot on the heels of its rivals' merger and despite active lobbying by BT to have the restriction on it offering television lifted.
BT welcomed the new Cable &amp; Wireless Communications, saying that it would help to create a market where "competition can become the natural regulator."
"The stronger Cable &amp; Wireless is perceived, the more Oftel will get off BT's back," suggested Tressan MacCarthy, analyst at Panmure Gordon. "BT is likely to push hard and use this as an argument for letting them into the market," she added.
The Conservative government has stood its ground on BT's ban from cable television, saying there will be a review of the situation in 2001 with a possible early look in 1998.
The opposition Labour party, currently leading in polls ahead of a general election which must be held by May 1997, has linked opening doors for BT to connecting up schools to the Internet.
BT's promotion with BSkyB would have seen cost savings of around 90 pounds ($143.8) a year per customer in subscription discounts and credits to telephone bills, a BT spokesman said.
Analysts said customers also stood to benefit from the emergence of C&amp;W as a strong domestic competitor to BT.
"As the businesses are put together, say a year out, it will begin to have an impact on BT," said Hickey.
"It will be a pretty competitive environment," he added.
Cable &amp; Wireless Communications has around 2.47 million homes in its sights through a variety of franchises throughout the country and access to 18 million business and domestic telephone customers through its Mercury unit.
It will be offering not just cable television and telephony but also home shopping and Internet link-ups.
"It will be a more coherent competitor to BT, customers will feel more confident of one name instead of fractured franchising," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
For BSkyB, which is 40 percent owned by media tycoon Rupert Murdoch's News Corp, the new cable power could mean harder negotiations on programme pricing, analysts said.
"Cable &amp; Wireless Communications might feel it has more muscle to flex but BSkyB could see it as desperate for content; they both will need each other," Hickey said. ($1=.6260 Pound)
The birth of a cable giant led by British Telecom's rival Cable &amp; Wireless should enliven competition and could eventually ease pressure on BT by regulators long worried by its dominance of the UK market, analysts said on Wednesday.
In its latest rebuff, telecommunications watchdog Oftel on Wednesday banned a promotion by BT, Britain's biggest telephone company, with satellite broadcaster BSkyB, citing a ban on BT's use of its network for entertainment.
"Oftel's decision is nuisance value for BT. (but) the Cable &amp; Wireless deal has far-reaching implications," said Patrick Hickey of Henderson Crosthwaite.
The merger announced on Tuesday created Cable &amp; Wireless Communications, a company controlled by C&amp;W that brings together its own Mercury telecoms business with the British operations of NYNEX of the U.S., Bell Canada International, and Videotron to create a $7.5 billion group. Its constituent companies already reach almost 2.5 million homes for cable television.
"The stronger Cable &amp; Wireless is perceived, the more Oftel will get off BT's back," suggested Tressan MacCarthy, analyst at Panmure Gordon.
"BT is likely to push hard and use this as an argument for letting them into the market," she added of the potentially lucrative multi-media business opportunities.
Following the Oftel decision, BT shares fell, closing off 7 pence to 346 pence and BSkyB was off 40 pence to 637 pence, a low for the day. C&amp;W was up 4 pence to close at 470.
Oftel said that BT's promotion, which involves discounts on subscriptions to BSkyB for customers using a "Friends and Family" phone charges offer, was discriminatory.
BT said it was "baffled" by Oftel's statement and claimed that the promotion offered cost savings to customers and was open to all BT users.
Oftel's decision is particularly emotive, analysts said, as it follows hot on the heels of its rivals' merger and despite active lobbying by BT to have the restriction on it offering television lifted.
BT welcomed the new Cable &amp; Wireless Communications, saying that it would help to create a market where "competition can become the natural regulator." It points out that C&amp;W already has a telephony company that competes with BT.
The Conservative government has stood its ground on BT's ban from cable television, saying there will be a review of the situation in 2001 with a possible early look in 1998.
The opposition Labour party, currently leading in polls ahead of a general election which must be held by May 1997, has linked opening doors for BT to connecting up schools to the Internet.
BT's promotion with BSkyB would have seen cost savings of around 90 pounds ($143.8) a year per customer in subscription discounts and credits to telephone bills, a BT spokesman said.
Analysts said customers also stood to benefit from the emergence of C&amp;W as a strong domestic competitor to BT.
"As the businesses are put together, say a year out, it will begin to have an impact on BT," said Hickey.
"It will be a pretty competitive environment," he added.
Cable &amp; Wireless Communications has around 2.47 million homes in its sights through a variety of franchises throughout the country and access to 18 million business and domestic telephone customers through its Mercury unit.
It will be offering not just cable television and telephony but also home shopping and Internet link-ups.
"It will be a more coherent competitor to BT, customers will feel more confident of one name instead of fractured franchising," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
For BSkyB, which is 40 percent owned by media tycoon Rupert Murdoch's News Corp, the new cable power could mean harder negotiations on programme pricing, analysts said.
"Cable &amp; Wireless Communications might feel it has more muscle to flex but BSkyB could see it as desperate for content; they both will need each other," Hickey said. ($1=.6260 Pound)
British utility South West Water could face bids worth 950 million pounds ($1.51 billion) if the government lets Severn Trent and Wessex Water go ahead with firm offers, analysts said on Thursday.
However, the official go-ahead for any bids is likely to be linked to a deal offering price cuts for customers, they said.
"The Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) will probably decide that the bids are against the public interest unless there are price cuts to outweigh that," said Philip Hollobone, analyst at Williams de Broe.  
The DTI could make an announcement as early as Friday, four weeks after a report on the bids was submitted in late September by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC).
Wessex Water announced that it intended to bid for South West Water on March 7, prompting Severn Trent to put its hat into the ring on March 21.
Both intended bids were automatically passed on to the MMC under government regulations covering mergers of water and sewerage companies.  
Neither Wessex nor Severn Trent put a figure on their offers, preferring to wait for the DTI's decision, while South West Water has consistently said the bids are unwelcome.
South West Water shares were trading at 705.5 pence, up 4.5 pence by 1253 GMT, prompting analysts to suggest that offers might be at around 750 pence per share which would value the company at over 950 million pounds ($1.52 billion).
Severn Trent, which covers the Midlands of England, saw its shares trading down 3.5 pence to 572.5 pence while Wessex, which abuts South West Water's territory in the west of England, was down two pence to 317.5 pence.  
Analysts expect the DTI to seek price cuts of about 20 percent before giving approval to bids, after it secured decreases of 15 percent by 2001 from France's Lyonnaise des Eaux last year when it paid 823 million pounds for Northumbrian Water.
"I think there will be significant price cuts proposed but they will not want to over-egg the pudding," said Nigel Hawkins of Yamaichi.
The government could put off the two bidders if price cut requirements were too severe, analysts pointed out, leaving South West Water with no incentive to cut bills.  
"They won't want to make the price cuts so big that there's no bid, because then there will not be any price cuts at all," Hollobone said.
The area, which has large stretches of coastline demanding hefty investment to meet environmental standards, has some of the highest customer bills in the country and a strong representation from the minority opposition Liberal Democrats.
"There are some clear political incentives for getting price cuts in place for the area, particularly ahead of a general election," the analyst said.  
The ruling Conservative party, which sold off the water companies in 1989 as part of its privatisation drive, must call a general election by May 1997 and currently lags in the polls behind the opposition Labour party.
Analysts said price cuts of 20 percent should still leave South West Water an attractive proposition for the two bidders, who stand to make cost savings from combining operations.
United Utilities, formed from the merger of North West Water and Norweb earlier this year, forecast that it could secure annual savings of 140 million pounds by the turn of the century.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 5427717
Britain's J. Sainsbury Plc stole a march on competitors on Friday by announcing plans to become the first supermarket to launch banking services in a link with Bank of Scotland which analysts said may prove to be a money spinner.
"It could be a winner if it is done in the right way," said one analyst who asked not to be identified.
Marketing director Kevin McCarten said in an interview with Reuters that he expected the banking services to turn in profits "in a relatively short space of time."
Sainsbury, second placed to Tesco in market share, said in a statement it had applied to the Bank of England for authorisation for a new bank to be owned 55 percent by the company and 45 percent by Bank of Scotland.
The venture, to be called Sainsbury's Bank, will use telebanking for a range of deposit, lending and cash management services to 12 million customers, the company said.
McCarten said the banking service would offer "great products...at better value than is currently available," but declined to comment on possible interest rates on accounts or give financial terms of the venture.
Sainsbury's Bank will kick off in 1997 with the launch of Classic and Gold Visa cards along with account and card-based services.
"It certainly shows Sainsbury is alive and kicking, which we had begun to doubt," one sector analyst said. Sainsbury, which turned in its first fall in profits for 22 years last year, was forced to launch its Reward loyalty card in June after arch-rival Tesco Plc pipped it to market leader with its ClubCard, and it has been struggling to regain the intiative.
Tesco pre-empted Reward's launch by introducing its ClubCard Plus account which allowed shoppers to build up credit balances with favourable rates of interest to be used in its stores. But Sainsbury's move "makes ClubCard Plus look a bit of a damp squib," the analyst said.
"The bank plan has certainly cheered the market up, the initial reaction is clearly positive," the sector analyst said.
Sainsbury shares closed up 10.5 pence at 360.5 pence, off a high of 363 pence while Tesco was up 2.5 pence to 324 pence, off a high of 326 pence.
"The market wanted to see them doing something and this is certainly a pleasant surprise," the analyst said.
Sainsbury chairman David Sainsbury said that Sainsbury's Bank would give customers "the reassurance of a name they know and trust, coupled with the banking expertise of the Bank of Scotland."
The move will result in "a compelling alternative to the conventional high street bank or building society for Sainsbury's customers," said Bank of Scotland chief executive Peter Burt.
Sainsbury currently has around five stores in Scotland and 367 supermarkets in the UK, along with 307 do-it-yourself outlets and 12 hypermarket SavaCentres.
It owns Shaw's in the U.S. with 105 stores and has 50 percent voting rights in Giant, which runs 169 U.S. outlets.
Bank of Scotland will benefit because it has a limited presence south of the border.
"It's a lovely distribution channel," a Bank of Scotland spokesman told Reuters, adding that the new bank would have its own identity and not carry the Bank of Scotland logo.
Analysts warned, however, that Sainsbury's Bank would have to offer attractive deals to secure customers, many of whom already have bank accounts. "It has to undercut the competition or link banking up to Reward points, a lot will depend on the marketing," the sector analyst said.
"They will have to decide to really go for it if they are going to make it profitable," he said. And analysts said the market would still look for progress in its core grocery business sales when Sainsbury reports interim results on October 30.
Analysts forecasts for half-year pre-tax profits range from 383 million pounds ($611.4 million) to 396 million pounds, compared with 450 million previously.
J. Sainsbury Plc announced plans Friday to launch a jointly owned banking service with Bank of Scotland, the first supermarket to do so in Britain's hotly competitive food retailing business.
Sainsbury said it had applied to the Bank of England for authorisation for a new bank to be owned 55 percent by the company and 45 percent by the Bank of Scotland, a banking and financial services company based in Edinburgh.
Industry analysts said the move was a bold one that could eventually prove profitable but noted that Sainsbury, Britain's largest supermarket chain in terms of sales, had its work cut out for it.
"It could be a winner if it is done in the right way," said one industry analyst who asked not to be identified.
Sainsbury has about 690 supermarkets and other outlets in Britain, including five in Scotland. Its Shaw's chain has 105 stores in the United States and it also owns a stake in Giant, with 169 U.S. outlets.
The new venture, to be called Sainsbury's Bank, will offer telebanking services for deposits, lending and cash management to a targeted 12 million customers, Sainsbury said. It will kick off next year with the launch of Classic and Gold Visa cards along with account and card-based services.
"It certainly shows Sainsbury is alive and kicking, which we had begun to doubt," one sector analyst said.
Sainsbury, which posted lower profits for the first time in 22 years last year, was forced to launch its Reward loyalty card in June after archrival Tesco Plc offered its ClubCard, which allows shoppers to build up credit balances at favourable interest rates to be used in Tesco stores.
But Sainsbury's move makes ClubCard Plus look timid, one analyst said. "The market wanted to see them doing something and this is certainly a pleasant surprise," the analyst said.
Sainsbury Chairman David Sainsbury said that Sainsbury's Bank would give customers "the reassurance of a name they know and trust, coupled with the banking expertise of the Bank of Scotland."
The move will result in "a compelling alternative ... for Sainsbury's customers," said Bank of Scotland Chief Executive Peter Burt.
Analysts warned, however, that Sainsbury's Bank would have to offer attractive deals to secure customers, many of whom already have bank accounts.
"It has to undercut the competition or link banking up to Reward points, a lot will depend on the marketing," one industry analyst said.
Sainsbury marketing director Kevin McCarten said the new service would offer "great products ... at better value than is currently available," but declined to specify interest rates on accounts or give financial terms of the venture.
Sainsbury expected the new services to turn in profits "in a relatively short space of time," he said in an interview.
One analyst noted, however, that the financial services of retailer Marks &amp; Spencer Plc, although not directly comparable, has made only a small contribution to profits although it has been running for 15 years.
"They will have to decide to really go for it if they are going to make it profitable," he said of Sainsbury.
Sainsbury shares rose 10.5 pence (17 cents) to 360.5 pence ($5.75). Tesco rose 2.5 pence (4 cents) to 324 pence ($5.17).
J. Sainsbury Plc announced plans Friday to launch a jointly owned banking service with Bank of Scotland, the first supermarket to do so in Britain's hotly competitive food retailing business.
"It could be a winner if it is done in the right way," said one industry analyst who asked not to be identified.
Sainsbury said it had applied to the Bank of England for authorisation for a new bank to be owned 55 percent by the company and 45 percent by the Bank of Scotland, based in Edinburgh.
The venture, to be called Sainsbury's Bank, will offer telebanking services for deposits, lending and cash management to a target audience of 12 million customers, Sainsbury said. It will kick off next year with the launch of Classic and Gold Visa cards along with account and card-based services.
"It certainly shows Sainsbury is alive and kicking, which we had begun to doubt," one sector analyst said.
Sainsbury, which posted lower profits for the first time in 22 years last year, was forced to launch its Reward loyalty card in June after archrival Tesco Plc offered its ClubCard, which allows shoppers to build up credit balances at favourable interest rates to be used in Tesco stores.
But Sainsbury's move makes ClubCard Plus look timid, one analyst said. "The market wanted to see them doing something and this is certainly a pleasant surprise," the analyst said.
Sainsbury Chairman David Sainsbury said that Sainsbury's Bank would give customers "the reassurance of a name they know and trust, coupled with the banking expertise of the Bank of Scotland."
The move will result in "a compelling alternative ... for Sainsbury's customers," said Bank of Scotland Chief Executive Peter Burt.
Analysts warned, however, that Sainsbury's Bank would have to offer attractive deals to secure customers, many of whom already have bank accounts.
"It has to undercut the competition or link banking up to Reward points, a lot will depend on the marketing," one industry analyst said.
Another warned that the financial services of retailer Marks &amp; Spencer, although not directly comparable, made only a small contribution to profits even though it had been running for 15 years.
"They will have to decide to really go for it if they are going to make it profitable," he said.
Analysts said the market would still look for progress in its core grocery business sales when Sainsbury reports interim results on Oct. 30.
Sainsbury shares rose 10.5 pence (17 cents) to 360.5 pence ($5.75). Tesco rose 2.5 pence (4 cents) to 324 pence ($5.17).
British supermarket retailer J. Sainsbury Plc expects its new banking venture to turn in profits "in a relatively short period of time," marketing director Kevin McCarten told Reuters in an interview.
"We see this as a commercial venture...it is not a huge sink of money," he said.
Sainsbury announced on Friday that it had applied for authorisation from the Bank of England to set up Sainsbury's Bank in which it would have 55 percent with Bank of Scotland taking 45 percent.  
He said the banking service would offer "great products...at better value than is currently available," but declined to comment on possible interest rates on accounts.
Sainsbury will draw on its database of customers signed up to its Reward loyalty card and other store cards for direct marketing of the banking facilities, McCarten said, but added that it was not planning to limit access to these customers.
"Our objective is to build (the business) across the UK," he said.  
Sainsbury currently has about five stores in Scotland, while Bank of Scotland will benefit because it has a limited presence south of the border.
"It's a lovely distribution channel," a Bank of Scotland spokesman told Reuters, adding that the new bank would have its own identity and would not carry the Bank of Scotland logo.
McCarten said there would not initially be banking counters in stores but added it could not be ruled out for the future.  
No decision has yet been reached on use of cash dispensers, the Bank of Scotland spokesman said, although he ruled out stand-alone machines.
McCarten said the banking facilities would be "completely separate" from its Reward loyalty card other than using the database.
He added that the aim was to encourage customers to see banking as part of Sainsbury's supermarket offer, which should have a knock-on effect for the stores.
"If you can increase customer spend a little, you grow your business," McCarten said.  
-- London Newsroom +44 171 5427717
Britain's J. Sainsbury Plc stole a march on competitors on Friday by becoming the first supermarket to launch banking services in a link with Bank of Scotland, which analysts said may prove to be a money spinner.
"It could be a winner if it is done in the right way," said one analyst who asked not to be identified.
Sainsbury said in a statement it had applied to the Bank of England for authorisation for a new bank to be owned 55 percent by the company and 45 percent by Bank of Scotland.
The venture, to be called Sainsbury's Bank, will use telebanking for a range of deposit, lending and cash management services to 12 million customers, the company said.
It will kick off in 1997 with the launch of Classic and Gold Visa cards along with account and card-based services.
"It certainly shows Sainsbury is alive and kicking, which we had begun to doubt," one sector analyst said.
Sainsbury, which turned in its first fall in profits for 22 years last year, was forced to launch its Reward loyalty card in June after arch-rival Tesco Plc pipped it to market leader with its ClubCard, and it has been struggling to regain the intiative.
Tesco pre-empted Reward's launch by introducing its ClubCard Plus account which allowed shoppers to build up credit balances with favourable rates of interest to be used in its stores.
But Sainsbury's move "makes ClubCard Plus look a bit of a damp squib," the analyst said.
"The bank plan has certainly cheered the market up, the initial reaction is clearly positive," the sector analyst said.
Sainsbury shares closed up 10.5 pence at 360.5 pence, off a high of 363 pence while Tesco was up 2.5 pence to 324 pence, off a high of 326 pence.
"The market wanted to see them doing something and this is certainly a pleasant surprise," the analyst said.
Sainsbury chairman David Sainsbury said that Sainsbury's Bank would give customers "the reassurance of a name they know and trust, coupled with the banking expertise of the Bank of Scotland."
The move will result in "a compelling alternative to the conventional high street bank or building society for Sainsbury's customers," said Bank of Scotland chief executive Peter Burt.
Analysts warned, however, that Sainsbury's Bank would have to offer attractive deals to secure customers, many of whom already have bank accounts.
"It has to undercut the competition or link banking up to Reward points, a lot will depend on the marketing," the sector analyst said.
One analyst warned that the financial services of retailer Marks &amp; Spencer, although not directly comparable, made only a small contribution to profits even though it had been running for 15 years.
"They will have to decide to really go for it if they are going to make it profitable," he said.
And analysts said the market would still look for progress in its core grocery business sales when Sainsbury reports interim results on October 30.
Analysts forecasts for half-year pre-tax profits range from 383 million pounds ($611.4 million) to 396 million pounds, compared with 450 million previously.
($1=.6264 Pound)
Electricity stocks crackled higher on Friday as rumours swirled around the market of a U.S. buyer for one of five remaining regional utilities and analysts said the forthcoming results season could provide a spur for action.
"There is going to be a big focus on the ability of these companies to hand out more cash...if the results season is not going to get it going, then nothing will," said Chris Perry, analyst at Charterhouse Tilney.
Electricity sector companies kick off their half year results season towards the end of November.
Leading the sector higher on Friday was East Midlands Electricity, after a report in the Daily Mail newspaper that a bid might emerge from Houston Industries of the United States at around 750 pence a share.
Houston, tipped to buy one of the five remaining regional electricity companies (Recs) earlier this year, had been thought to have given up on the idea in August when it bought U.S. gas utility NorAm Energy for $3.8 billion.
East Midlands shot up to a high of 565 pence but eased back to close at 562, up 44 pence.
"At the time of its last results, the company effectively indicated its surprise that it hadn't been taken over. Their shares had fallen back a long way and perhaps it's no surprise that bid rumours are re-emerging," Perry said.
Other power utilities which remain independent also climbed, with Yorkshire Electricity up 28 pence to 742 pence and Southern Electric adding 13.5 pence to 631 pence.
Northern Electric, which survived a takeover bid from Trafalgar House last year, was up 29 pence to 523 pence and London Electricity, which supplies the capital with power, jumped 18.5 pence to 585 pence.
"East Midlands is the one most likely to face a bid, it is smaller than others and more purely a distribution company," Nigel Hawkins at brokers Yamaichi said.
A report in the Daily Telegraph newspaper also suggested that U.S. utility Duke Power might be circling the sector but no comment was available from either U.S. company.
Analysts said U.S. companies might not be the only ones interested in the sector, which has seen seven of the 12 Recs created at privatisation in 1990 fall prey to takeover bids.
The domestic supply business is to be opened to competition in 1998 and a range of companies from oil producers to supermarkets have already indicated an interest.
Other potential interest could come from water companies, analysts said, especially following Britain's decision on Friday to block planned bids for South West Water from Severn Trent and Wessex Water.
"You've got two disappointed companies there," said Marshall Whiting of Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull.
Analysts said Severn Trent could decide to use its resources to make a share buyback or a special dividend payout.
But Wessex Water may be enticed to link up with Southern Electric, analysts said, as multi-utilities have been approved.
Welsh Water took over Swalec to form Hyder while United Utilities combined North West Water and Norweb.
"The idea of multi-utilities is gaining ground," Whiting said.
The government's surprise decision to block proposed bids for South West Water on Friday seems to make mergers between water firms taboo but keeps open the door to the creation of more multi-utilities, analysts said.
"It is surprising...(now) the idea of multi-utilities is gaining ground, it does look as if that is the platform from which companies can grow," said Marshall Whiting of Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull.
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) head Ian Lang said in a statement he had decided not to permit planned bids by Severn Trent and Wessex Water for South West because they would be against the public interest.
Ian Byatt, head of industry watchdog Ofwat, told Reuters Financial Television such mergers were "not in my view the best way to get efficiency for customers."
He added takeovers from outside the water industry "do not damage competition and my use of (yardsticks) in the same way."
Wessex Water said on March 7 it wanted to bid for South West, prompting Severn Trent to enter the arena on March 21 but both companies declined to name a price until the DTI, which automatically considers such mergers, announced its decision.
Analysts had suggested such bids might value South West Water at over 950 million pounds ($1.52 billion) or around 750 pence per share.
The two bids were the first by British water companies for one of their colleagues, although France's Lyonnaise des Eaux bought Northumbrian Water last year after promising 15 percent price cuts to 2001.
North West Water took over regional electricity company (REC) Norweb to create United Utilities in January this year while Hyder was formed when Welsh Water bought South Wales Electricity (Swalec).
The DTI's block shook the market, which had been expecting approval conditional on price cuts, possibly up to 20 percent.
Ofwat said it had recommended price cuts of 15 percent from Wessex if its bid were to be approved but had advised that it saw no remedy which would make Severn Trent's bid acceptable.
South West Water's shares plunged to touch a low of 565 pence before recovering slightly to be down 128 pence at 577.5 pence by 1144 GMT.
Severn Trent shares peaked at 619 pence but then eased back to be up 37 pence at 612.5 pence while Wessex added 25 pence to 342.5 pence, off a high of 349 pence.
Relieved of the bid pressure, South West bowed to promptings from Ofwat and said it would pay customers a 15 pound rebate in June 1997 while promising to hike its interim dividend 20.4 percent to 11.8 pence as sector results begin to flow next week.
The company, whose area covers large stretches of coastline requiring hefty investment to meet environmental standards, has the highest customer bills in the country.
Wessex said it was "disappointed" that it could not go ahead with a bid, saying it felt a merger would have created "significant benefits for both customers and investors."
The utility, which abuts the area of South West Water in western England, said it remained committed to strategic goals of delivering quality service and enhanced shareholder value.
Analysts said Severn Trent might now buyback shares or make a special dividend, despite recent tax changes adverse to these.
Severn Trent said it had expected to offer savings of 27 pounds a year to households from the proposed merger, adding that now it would concentrate on sharing benefits of improved operational performance with shareholders and customers.
Wessex Water, meanwhile, might switch attention to the possibility of a merger with another utility, analysts said.
"Now the government has blocked Wessex from bidding for South West, Southern Electric might take a look," said Nigel Hawkins of Yamaichi.
The regional electricity company was confounded in its attempts to take over Southern Water earlier this year, losing out to generator and distributor Scottish Power. ($1=.6264 Pound)
A unit of CalEnergy Co., a fast-growing, Nebraska-based energy company, Monday launched a $1.2 billion takeover bid for British regional utility Northern Electric Plc, which promptly rejected the unsolicited offer.
The bid is the latest for a British power company and the second for Northern Electric in just over a year. Industry analysts said Northern Electric might end up agreeing to a takeover if it could extract a higher price.
Omaha, Neb.-based CalEnergy, through its 70 percent-owned CE Electric unit, said it would pay 630 British pence ($10.06) for each common share and 103 pence ($1.64) for each preferred share of Northern Electric, making the deal worth about $1.23 billion. The U.S.-based construction and mining company Peter Kiewit Sons owns the other 30 percent of CE Electric.
Northern Electric successfully fended off a hostile bid last year from Trafalgar House, now owned by Sweden's Kvaerner, by offering a special package worth 560 million pounds ($894 million) for shareholders.
"Our strategy is to become a leading global provider of a full range of energy services," CalEnergy Chairman David Sokol said in a statement announcing the offer.
Sokol's company has invested in geothermal and other energy projects at home and in Indonesia and the Philippines in recent years. Its core operations are in California, New York and Texas, and the bid for Northern Electric is a major move outside the U.S. market.
U.S. utilities, faced with slow growth and deregulation in their local markets, have been merging in the United States and investing abroad as they seek to grow.
Sokol said Northern Electric, based in northeastern England, had distribution and supply know-how that would complement CalEnergy's production capacity, while its size was "very manageable."
"They are the smallest regional electricity company and that means that you can get them cheaper," said one analyst who asked not to be identified.
"We will see an agreed bid eventually," said Philip Hollobone at brokers Williams de Broe, who said CE Electric might eventually raise its price to secure agreement from Northern's board of directors.
In its statement rejecting the bid, Northern Electric said that in talks through Sunday, CE Electric had contemplated offering about 700 pence ($11.17) per share.
"Northern Electric is clearly saying you can have us for 700 pence per share," said one sector analyst who asked not to be identified.
CE Electric, which bought a 12.7 percent stake in Northern in the open market, said that it never suggested "any intent to value the company at 'around 700 pence per share' or even anywhere close to this figure."
Sokol said he felt the offer was "a very full price," adding that CE Electric had sought a merger agreement with Northern Electric but "the only area we could not agree on was value."
Some analysts said Northern Electric's weak balance sheet would limit what CE Electric would be willing to bid and that it might be hoping to attract another bidder. The special shareholders' package it paid to fend off Trafalgar House left it heavily in debt.
Northern Electric stock jumped 131 pence ($2.09) to close at 651 pence ($10.40) after CE Electric had managed to buy its 12.72 percent stake at the offered price earlier in the session.
CalEnergy announced in August that it bought three gas-fired cogeneration plants in Texas, Pennsylvania and New York for $226 million from Falcon Seaboard Resources Inc., a closely held energy company.
A unit of CalEnergy Co., a fast-growing, Nebraska-based energy company, Monday launched a $1.2 billion takeover bid for British regional utility Northern Electric Plc, which promptly rejected the unsolicited offer.
The offer was the second for Northern Electric in just over a year and the fourth for a British power company by a U.S. utility. Industry analysts said Northern Electric might end up agreeing to a takeover if it could extract a higher price.
Omaha, Neb.-based CalEnergy, through its 70 percent-owned CE Electric unit, said it would pay 630 British pence ($10.06) for each common share and 103 pence ($1.64) for each preferred share of Northern Electric, valuing the company at about $1.23 billion. The U.S.-based construction and mining company Peter Kiewit Sons owns the other 30 percent of CE Electric.
Newcastle-based Northern Electric successfully fended off a hostile bid last year from Trafalgar House, now owned by Sweden's Kvaerner, by offering a special package worth 560 million pounds ($894 million) for shareholders.
"Our strategy is to become a leading global provider of a full range of energy services," CalEnergy Chairman David Sokol said in a statement announcing the offer.
Sokol's company has invested in geothermal and other energy projects at home and in Indonesia and the Philippines in recent years. Its core operations are in California, New York and Texas, and the bid for Northern Electric is a major move outside the U.S. market.
U.S. utilities, faced with slow growth and deregulation in their local markets, have been merging in the United States and investing abroad as they seek to grow.
Sokol said Northern Electric had distribution and supply know-how that would complement CalEnergy's production capacity, while its size was "very manageable."
"They are the smallest regional electricity company and that means that you can get them cheaper," said one analyst who asked not to be identified.
"We will see an agreed bid eventually," said Philip Hollobone at brokers Williams de Broe, who said CE Electric might eventually raise its price to secure agreement from Northern's board of directors.
In its statement rejecting the bid, Northern Electric said that in talks through Sunday, CE Electric had contemplated offering about 700 pence ($11.17) per Northern Electric share.
"Northern Electric is clearly saying you can have us for 700 pence per share," said one sector analyst who asked not to be identified.
CE Electric, which bought a 12.7 percent stake in Northern in the open market, said that it never suggested "any intent to value the company at 'around 700 pence per share' or even anywhere close to this figure."
Sokol said he felt the offer was "a very full price," adding that CE Electric had sought a merger agreement with Northern Electric but "the only area we could not agree on was value."
Some analysts said Northern Electric's weak balance sheet would limit what CE Electric would bid and that it might be hoping to attract another bidder. The shareholder package paid to fend off Trafalgar House left it heavily in debt.
Northern Electric stock jumped 131 pence ($2.09) to close at 651 pence ($10.40) after CE Electric had managed to buy its 12.72 percent stake at the offered price earlier in the session.
CalEnergy announced in August that it bought three gas-fired cogeneration plants in Texas, Pennsylvania and New York for $226 million from Falcon Seaboard Resources Inc., a closely held energy company.
CalEnergy of the U.S. threw British regional electricity company Northern Electric its second bid challenge in just over a year on Monday with a $1.225 billion offer and analysts said it may succumb.
"We will see an agreed bid eventually," said Philip Hollobone at Williams de Broe, who said the price could rise to 650-657 pence per share from the current 630 pence offer.
CE Electric, jointly owned by CalEnergy with 70 percent and U.S.-based construction, mining and telecoms group Peter Kiewit Sons with 30 percent, said on Monday it would pay 630 pence each for the ordinary shares of Northern Electric.
The deal also offers 103 pence per preference share. CE Electric pounced on 12.72 percent of Northern at the bid price of 630 pence as the shares vacillated between a peak of 645 pence and a low of 609.75 pence, trading up 120 pence at 640 by 1320 GMT.
Northern Electric successfully fended off a hostile bid last year from Trafalgar House, now owned by Sweden's Kvaerner, offering the carrot of a special package worth 560 million pounds ($894 million) for shareholders.
That has left its balance sheet too weak to squeeze a substantially higher bid, according to Hollobone.
CalEnergy chairman David Sokol said he felt the offer was "a very full price," adding that CE Electric had sought to agree a bid with Northern Electric but "the only area we could not agree on was value."
A rash of bids last year in the electricity sector were made at levels of around 14 times earnings, according to Andrew Stone, analyst at Daiwa, but CE Electric's price values Northern at a ratio of about 10.5.
"There might well be some upside, but I don't think we're likely to see the 14 times earnings figure," Stone added.
CalEnergy's Sokol said CE Electric had targeted Northern Electric, based in north-east England, because it wanted to add distribution and supply to its existing skill base of generation while the previous bid had made information on the regional electricity company more accessible.
In addition, he said Northern's size was "very manageable."
"They are the smallest regional electricity company and that means that you can get them cheaper," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
Northern urged its shareholders to do nothing and said it would make a further statement later on Monday, while CalEnergy's Sokol said he hoped to secure a recommended bid.
Rumours a U.S.-based company, possibly Houston Industries or Duke Power, might bid for one of the five remaining independent British regional electricity companies sent shares surging on Friday, but Northern had been seen as one of the least attractive because of its high gearing.
East Midlands Electricity, which led Friday's climb, slipped back 9.5 pence to 555 pence, while Yorkshire Electricity added nine pence to 757 pence and Southern Electricity rose 18.5 pence to 647 pence with London Electric gained 16 pence to 600 pence.
Some analysts suggested that CE Electric might have to raise its bid to cover a 56.5 pence special dividend which Northern intends to pay as a special dividend in February.
CalEnergy is a U.S.-based power generator which uses geothermal, natural gas and hydroelectric resources and operates facilities worldwide. Total assets are $3.5 billion with a market capitalisation of $1.9 billion. ($1=.6264 Pound)
CE Electric's $1.225 billion bid for British regional electricity company (Rec) Northern Electric has highlighted possible renewed interest in the four other remaining independent Recs, analysts said on Tuesday.
"There are clearly operational reasons which make the bid attractive to CE Electric, so there may be other bidders. And other Recs must also be under the spotlight," said one sector analyst who asked not to be identified.
The U.S. group said it wanted Northern's expertise in supply to complement its own generation capabilities as the international market in electricity opens up to privatisation.
But Northern Electric rejected the bid, the second unwanted advance it has faced in two years. However, its chairman, David Morris, has indicated that it might consider a higher price.
On Monday he said talks with CE Electric, which is 70-percent owned by Nebraska-based CalEnergy, culminated on Sunday with a proposal that bid negotiations be pitched at about 700 pence per share, compared with the 630 pence which was then offered.
This was promptly denied by CE Electric, which insisted that it had at no time suggested such a price.
Even that level is some way off the giddy heights paid for many of the seven cash-rich Recs already sold to predators, four of them to U.S. companies. Those sales peaked with North West Water's 11.50 pounds per share bid for Norweb in November 1995.
But analysts said Northern, which used a 560 million pound ($900 million) package of benefits to shareholders to beat a hostile bid last year from shipping and construction firm Trafalgar House, now owned by Norway's Kvaerner, has little left in its cupboard.
"They (CE Electric) are not going for its cash pile, because it hasn't got one. The logic must be for operational reasons," the sector analyst said.
Northern's attractions in this context could be that its price would be cheaper than other Recs because it lacks cash.
Reports have suggested other possible interested U.S. buyers of CE Electric might be Houston Industries, Duke Power, Florida Power and Light or Pacific Gas and Electric.
But if other U.S. firms decline to get involved in a tussle with CE Electric, they might look at other Recs and be keen to buy before the next British election, due by May 1997, which could give power to the opposition Labour Party. Labour has slammed previous takeovers.
"These U.S. companies need the expertise, they need the supply experience and they are looking to move into the international market ahead of further privatisation," the sector analyst said.
However, one analyst questioned the strategy and asked why U.S. companies did not just hire employees with the required knowledge.
"It doesn't make sense to me to buy these companies at these prices," he said. Northern Electric shares eased on Tuesday to 636 pence, down 12 pence by 1600 GMT, as the market held its breath to see if a higher offer would emerge.
Without a rival bidder, analysts said there was little to prompt CE Electric, in which U.S.-based construction, mining and telecoms group Peter Kiewit Sons has a 30 percent stake, to raise its offer, apart from the prospect of an agreed rather than a hostile bid.
That might be possible around half way between CE Electric's current offer and Northern's price ideas, they added.
But one analyst noted that CE Electric had already snapped up 12.72 percent of the company at the offer price, indicating that some investors were happy to sell at this level.
Northern, which has said it will bring forward its half-year results, will have two weeks to submit an initial bid defence after CE Electric posts its offer document.
Under British takeover rules, the last day a company may announce defence measures is 39 days after posting the bid document. A bidder has up to 46 days after posting its offer in which to raise the terms, unless a rival bidder emerges. ($1=.6223 Pound)
Thames Water reported a strong rise in profits and dividend on Tuesday to kick off Britain's water utility half-year results season, perking up shares in the sector with hopes others would be as generous to shareholders.
Thames said first half pre-tax profits rose to 176 million pounds ($281 million) after exceptional items from 165.4 million pounds in the same period last year while profits before exceptionals were up 15 percent to 188 million pounds.
The one-off items included a 12.2 million pound cost on the premium of repurchasing convertible bonds alongside its buyback of 10 percent of its shares over the summer. Thames hiked its dividend by 22 percent to 11.2 pence.
"The figures are quite reassuring, the dividend is probably the major feature," said David Campbell of broker Greig Middleton.
Thames managing director Bill Alexander told Reuters he expected to "maintain the dividend at this sort of level," pointing out that the half year increase included a rise of some 11 percent taking account of the buyback.
"They are indicating the rate of dividend increase will be like this for the full year," Campbell said.
Thames shares were up four pence to 549 pence by 1056 GMT, off a high of 555 pence. Among other privatised water companies due to report in the coming weeks, Severn Trent was up eight pence to 611 pence and Yorkshire Water gained six pence to 590 pence.
Thames also said it would make extra investment of 150 million pounds in services, which Alexander said would be targeted at reducing leakage of water, at sewerage systems, an extension to the London ring main supply and a new reservoir.
Leakage, which has been a hot political issue for the privatised water firms, was down 10 percent from year-ago levels, Alexander said.
Thames will focus on core water and sewerage activities, it said, but still managed to turn round its activities outside the regulated British water sector to a nine million pound profit at the half year from three million pounds loss a year ago.
"People will be pleased we got nine million pounds from the non-core for the first time...but our primary concern is the core and getting that right," Alexander said.
The non-core businesses cover international contracts, services such as waste management, and property and insurance. Thames said in a statement i
"There is a little confusion as to where all that's going," Campbell said.
Thames said that operating margins rose to 33.7 percent in the first half, up 2.6 percent on the same time last year, while gearing was up to 39 percent from 30 percent.
Alexander said the company was looking at broadening cooperation with local electricity supplier London Electricity but said a merger between the two was still not on the cards.
"We considered that and ruled it out some time ago," he said.
($1=.6264 Pound)
Shares in Britain's second biggest supermarket chain J. Sainsbury Plc rose on Wednesday after the group held out hope of an improved performance despite a fall in half year profits and sluggish sales.
"The share price rise is a triumph of hope over statistics," said one sector analyst.
Sainsbury, which last year was overtaken as market leader by arch-rival Tesco, said half year pre-tax profits slipped, as analysts expected, to 393 million pounds ($637.4 million) from 456 million pounds in the same period last year.
Sainsbury also announced a dividend of 3.5 pence per share, up from 3.4 pence.
The company suffered its first fall in full year profits in 22 years when it reported in May. Pre-tax earnings before exceptional items fell 5.5 percent to 764 million pounds in the business year to March 9, 1996.
After Wednesday's results, several analysts cut forecasts for the current full year to 710-725 million pounds, a level some analysts were already predicting, market sources said.
But shares closed up 8.5 pence to 363.5 pence, in a market which was generally easier after an unexpected quarter-point rise in British interest rates.
The group said current sales from comparable stores, excluding petrol, were rising in line with inflation of around three percent, well below the 7.5-percent gain reported by Tesco in September.
A sector analyst who asked not to be named said "Sales moving in line with inflation is pretty disappointing, considering they've introduced the loyalty card."
The Reward card is now accounting for much of the increase in sales Sainsbury is currently seeing.
"Clearly, we want to do better (than three percent)", chairman David Sainsbury told Reuters. "This year will be about getting the basics right, next year will be about getting profits moving."
The company said marketing and operations initiatives along with the Reward card should continue to help boost sales and provide a strong Christmas season.
"We will be fighting on our traditional ground of quality and choice, along with customer loyalty," Sainsbury said.
Sainsbury, which last week announced plans to launch a bank with Bank of Scotland, said there would be another "major development" on Reward soon and that it would move to strengthen its leadership in quality and choice.
The group also said Dino Adriano, currently deputy chief executive of the supermarket business, will take over from Tom Vyner as chief executive of the unit on March 8 rather than at the end of 1997 as previously planned. ($1=.6165 Pound)
Britain's second biggest supermarket group J. Sainsbury Plc reported a fall in half year profits as expected on Wednesday and sluggish sales.
But the company, which last year was overtaken as market leader by arch-rival Tesco, held out the hope of improvements, and its shares rose.
Sainsbury said half year pretax profits slipped to 393 million pounds ($631.5 million) from 456 million pounds in the same period last year and is paying out a dividend of 3.5 pence per share, up from 3.4 pence.
The company suffered its first fall in full year profits for 22 years when it reported in May.
Its shares were up 11 pence to 366 pence by 1120 GMT, however, just off a high of 367 pence.
"The share price rise is a triumph of hope over statistics," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
The group said current sales from comparable stores, excluding petrol, were rising in line with inflation of around three percent, well below the 7.5 percent gain reported by Tesco in September.
"Clearly we want to do better (than three percent)", chairman David Sainsbury told Reuters.
"This year will be about getting the basics right, next year will be about getting profits moving," David Sainsbury said.
"Sales moving in line with inflation is pretty disappointing considering they've introduced the loyalty card," said one sector analyst who asked not to be named.
The company was forced to introduce its Reward loyalty card offering special deals for regular customers four months ago after Tesco's ClubCard helped it to beat Sainsbury to the market leader slot, and it is now accounting for much of the sales uplift.
Sainsbury said marketing and operations initiatives along with the Reward card should help to boost sales and the company said it was looking forward to a strong Christmas season.
"We will be fighting on our traditional ground of quality and choice, along with customer loyalty," David Sainsbury said.
Sainsbury, which last week announced plans to launch a bank with Bank of Scotland, said there would be a further "major development" on Reward soon and said it would move to strengthen its leadership in quality and choice.
The group said Dino Adriano, currently deputy chief executive of the supermarket business, will take over from Tom Vyner as chief executive of the unit on March 8 rather than at the end of 1997 as previously planned.
Analysts have been waiting for Adriano to show himself as a rising star but so far he remains largely unproven, they said.
The company said it intended to boost its sales area by 6.4 percent this year, which David Sainsbury said "enormously helps in driving forward market share."
Despite sluggish sales growth, Sainsbury managed to increase market share during the first half to 12.5 percent from 12.3 percent and still has the highest sales per square foot of the big four retailers, including ASDA and Safeway.
At the same time, the group is now breaking even on petrol sales after a fierce price war triggered losses which helped to erode first half gross margins by 0.8 percent of sales.
"There's relief that it was not even worse and Sainsbury carries an enormous amount of goodwill, but sentiment could still go either way," one analyst said. ($1=.6223 Pound)
Britain's Northern Electric is set to rush out a glowing set of figures aimed at persuading the market that the 630 pence per share hostile bid by CE Electric is too low, analysts said on Friday.
The regional electricity company (Rec) said it would bring its half-year results forward from a scheduled date of December 5 when it rejected U.S.-based CE Electric's bid on Monday. Industry sources expect the results to come some time next week.
Northern could boost its case with an improved gearing forecast after a 560 million pound ($918.6 million) package for shareholders which helped it fend off last year's bid from Trafalgar House.
"The critical answer is interim results, especially the balance sheet, which could be stronger than expected," said David Campbell of Greig Middleton.
Northern has said that CE Electric, which is 70 percent owned by CalEnergy of the U.S., had indicated a price of 700 pence per share, but that claim was denied by the Americans, who said their $1.225 billion bid was a full and fair price.
Since the bid on Monday, there have been no further talks between the companies, industry sources said, and CE Electric has snapped up around 13 percent of Northern's shares.
The share price has struggled to rise above the offer level, which was at a premium of 21.2 percent to the last closing prices before the bid, and On Friday was trading at 631.5 pence, down two pence.
"I think Northern should be able to force a higher price but the critical factor is portfolio investors, who may prefer an instant 630 pence rather than a possible higher number," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
Northern's costly defence against Trafalgar House, the only successful rebuttal by any of the eight Recs which have faced bids since privatisation in 1990, has left it with little more to offer, analysts said, which could keep a lid on the shares.
There is also scepticism a rival bid will emerge, as the remaining four independent and cash-rich Recs could be more attractive without the operational rationale of CE Electric, which wants to add supply expertise to its generating business.
Electricity sector shares were led higher last Friday by East Midlands Electricity, which was seen as the most attractive bid candidate before CE Electric launched its offer for Northern.
Northern is likely to report pretax profits slightly down at around 50 million pounds from 58.7 million pounds a year ago and raise the dividend by seven percent to near 13 pence.
Gearing could come in around 125 percent and show signs of falling to 100 percent or less, analysts said, from peaks nearer 170 percent under the impact of the costly defence package.
The market is also waiting for CE Electric, in which U.S. construction, mining and telecoms company Peter Kiewit Sons has a 30 percent stake, to post its offer document. This move will set the 60-day clock ticking for the takeover timetable.
At the same time, electricity industry watchdog Offer has started a review of the bid, requesting comments by November 7.
Analysts said Offer's move might have contributed to dampening Northern's share price by triggering concerns the bid might be referred to British competition authorities.
There appears to be little precedent for such a referral, however, as three Recs have already fallen to U.S. companies with approval from the government.
But last week's surprise decision to block rival bids for water utility South West Water from its colleagues Severn Trent and Wessex has unsettled the market, analysts said.
The Conservative government, well behind the opposition Labour party in opinion polls with no more than six months to go before a general election, might see Northern's takeover as a political hot potato.
Labour, traditionally against privatisation and fiercely critical of takeovers in the sector, might take an additional interest in Northern as it supplies the party leader Tony Blair's constituency in north east England.
British spirits, pubs and fast food outlet group Allied Domecq on Tuesday reported a fall in annual profits but effectively ruled out a demerger of its spirits business as a solution to its problems.
Allied chairman Sir Christopher Hogg said in a statement the company was "clear that the best way to improve shareholder value is to improve operating performance and that this should be our overriding objective for the foreseeable future."
Costs of a demerger, which the market had hoped was on the cards, would have been "very, very expensive," chief executive Tony Hales said in an interview with Reuters Financial Television.
It would have distracted management for at least 12 months, he said, adding that there was "no obvious shareholder value to be unlocked."
Full-year pretax profits to August before exceptionals slipped to 575 million pounds ($950.4 million) from 645 million previously but were within analyst forecasts of between 560 and 581 million.
Allied Domecq said exceptional losses for the year totalled 311 million pounds, the largest part of which was on the 205 mllion pound sale of its 50 percent stake in brewer Carlsberg-Tetley to Bass in August.
Allied paid out a total dividend of 23.59 pence a share, unchanged from the year ending March 1995, which was used as a comparison because of a change to its accounting period.
"The figures were very much in line with expectations. Some people had been worried the dividend may be cut but it has been maintained and that's positive," one analyst said.
Allied's shares had shed 15 pence to 453 pence by 1330 GMT after touching a low of 451 pence.
"The divisions have gone in the direction expected but if you were someone who wanted action -- a demerger or management change -- you haven't got either and there will be some disappointment," the analyst said.
But Hales stressed in the interview that there was "a lot we can do in terms of improving performance."
The spirits and wines business could benefit from increasing marketing, improving relations with customers, taking more costs out and improving returns on capital employed, he said.
In the retail sector, expansion in the pub business and cost cutting should push business forward, he added.
The company said that the cost of tackling overstocking of U.S. spirits was the main factor in a 14 percent fall in year trading profits in the group's spirits business.
It said it was "determined to increase prices (in spirits and wines) where we can," adding that strong brands and market leadership were the best basis for achieving this.
But it warned that the trading environment "may offer little prospect of improvement."
The group's retailing business, which includes pubs and fast food outlets, saw underlying profits rise by four percent during the year and Allied said it saw further opportunities for developing its leading pub brands.
"The important thing now is to get the businesses trading well," said one sector analyst who declined to be named.
Some analysts were sceptical, however, that Allied could achieve its goals.
"They are trying to do the right things, but they have poor raw material," the sector analyst said. ($1=.6050 Pound)
British spirits, pubs and fast food group Allied Domecq on Tuesday reported a fall in annual profits but effectively ruled out a demerger as a solution to its problems.
Allied chairman Sir Christopher Hogg said in a statement the company was "clear that the best way to improve shareholder value is to improve operating performance and that this should be our overriding objective for the foreseeable future."
He disappointed market hopes of a demerger of the company's spirits and wines business, saying this option had been "thoroughly reviewed" and the company was "intent on developing the group's two principal businesses."
Full-year pretax profits to August before exceptionals slipped to 575 million pounds ($947.4 million) from 645 million previously but were within analyst forecasts of between 560 and 581 million.
Allied Domecq said exceptional losses for the year totalled 311 million pounds, the largest part of which was on the 205 million pound sale of its 50 percent stake in brewer Carlsberg-Tetley to Bass in August.
Allied paid out a total dividend of 23.59 pence a share, unchanged from the year ending March 1995, which was used as a comparison because of a change to its accounting period.
"The figures were very much in line with expectations. Some people had been worried the dividend may be cut but it has been maintained and that's a positive," one analyst, who asked not to be identified, said.
Allied's shares eased 10 pence to 458 pence by 1040 GMT.
"The divisions have gone in the direction expected but if you were someone who wanted action -- a demerger or management change -- you haven't got either and there will be disappointment," the analyst said.
Allied said its corporate restructuring had been largely completed with the sale of its stake in Carlsberg-Tetley and smaller food companies.
Hogg said the group "must improve the returns it delivers to shareholders." He said an essential part of this was recognising and remedying overstocking of spirits distributors.
The cost of tackling overstocking of U.S. spirits was the main factor in a 14 percent fall in year trading profits in the group's spirits and wines business, the company said.
Allied said it was "determined to increase prices (in spirits and wines) where we can," adding that strong brands and market leadership were the best basis for achieving this.
The company said it hoped the division would benefit from the increasing focus on key brand/market combinations, more favourable shipment patterns and from efficiency gains.
But it warned that the trading environment "may offer little prospect of improvement." The group's retailing business, which includes pubs and fast food outlets, saw underlying profits rise four percent during the year and Allied said it saw further opportunities for developing its leading pub brands.
"The company has said they can grow earnings and that's the way to create shareholder value," the analyst said.
But he added that there was still "a lot of scepticism that they have to dispose of." ($1=.6069 Pound)
U.S. group Dominion Resources on Wednesday agreed a 1.3 billion pound ($2.15 billion) bid for East Midlands Electricity, one of only five remaining British independent regional electricity companies.
But East Midlands shares languished well below the 670 pence per share offer price, as concerns emerged the bid might face obstacles from British competition authorities.
Virginia-based Dominion said last week it was considering a bid "at a price not much in excess of 608 pence per share". But East Midlands had scorned that price, saying it would undervalue the Nottingham-based electricity company's prospects.
Executives from Dominion, the fifth U.S. utility to bid for a British power supplier, met East Midlands management late on Tuesday with a takeover price top of the agenda.
East Midlands chairman Sir Nigel Rudd said in a joint statement that his board was recommending the offer "because it represents fair value for an excellent business, which has successfully differentiated itself from the sector."
East Midlands shares were up 13 pence at 624 pence ahosrlty after 1400 GMT, off a high of 650 pence.
"Everyone's expecting the MMC (Monopolies and Mergers Commission) to take a close look at the deal. That is why the shares are only trading around 630 pence," said one trader.
Seven of the original 12 Recs have already been bought since they came up for grabs last March after the government's protective golden share expired, five years after privatisation in 1990.
Northern Electric is currently fighting off its second hostile approach in less than two years, rejecting a bid at 630 pence per share from CE Electric, a subsidiary of U.S. energy group CalEnergy, which holds just over 29 percent of the
"Dominion's offer looks a fair compromise price," said Chris Perry, utilities analyst at Charterhouse Tilney.
But he added there were "very genuine concerns" that the offer might be referred to the MMC.
"If Dominion is allowed to buy East Midlands and CalEnergy secures Northern, that would leave only three independent Recs," one analyst said.
British electricity watchdog Offer is expected to consult on Dominion's bid and then pass on its advice to Ian Lang, the trade and industry secretary, who will then decide whether the bid should be referred to the MMC.
Offer has completed consultations on CalEnergy's bid and will be passing on its advice to Lang shortly, industry sources said.
So far, only generators National Power and PowerGen have had their bids for Recs blocked, as they would have created fully integrated generation and supply companies.
Dominion's chief financial officer Linwood Robertson said in an interview that the company was now talking to the regulator.
"We intend to run this as a stand-alone business," he said, adding that he certainly hoped for approval from Offer.
He also said the group hoped to keep East Midlands' management team, which is highly regarded by industry analysts.
East Midlands was the first of Britain's electricity utilities, which were privatised with strong cash balance sheets, to launch a share buy-back to redistribute cash to shareholders.
Robertson said Dominion looked forward to the diversification East Midlands would bring to it and said the U.S. company would bring strengths to the British firm. ($1=.6050 Pound)
U.S.-based Dominion Resources on Wednesday agreed a 1.3 billion pound ($2.15 billion) takeover of East Midlands Electricity, one of only five remaining British independent regional electricity companies (Recs).
But doubts that the deal would make it past UK competition authorities as political pressures gather ahead of a general election due by May 1997 kept the lid on share prices.
Executives from both firms told a press conference they saw no reason for a referral of the 670 pence per share bid, the fifth by a U.S. utility for a Rec, to the UK's Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC).
But East Midlands shares closed up only 12 pence at 623 pence, as concerns grew trade secretary Ian Lang might halt this latest in a wave of bids in which seven of the 12 cash-rich Recs have been snapped up since expiry of a protective golden share last March, five years from privatisation.
"Everyone's expecting the MMC to take a close look at the deal. That is why the shares are only trading around 630 pence," said one trader.
Three of the seven Recs sold have already gone to U.S. utilities which are attracted by relatively loose UK regulation.
Only two bids have so far been blocked by trade secretary Ian Lang, who stunned the market by stopping generators National Power and PowerGen from consuming two Recs earlier this year.
Executives from Dominion met East Midlands management late on Tuesday with a takeover price top of the agenda.
The Virginia-based company said last week it was considering a bid "at a price not much in excess of 608 pence per share." But East Midlands rejected that, saying it would undervalue the Nottingham-based electricity company's prospects.
East Midlands chairman Sir Nigel Rudd said in a joint statement that his board was recommending the current offer "because it represents fair value for an excellent business, which has successfully differentiated itself from the sector."
"Dominion's offer looks a fair compromise price," said Chris Perry, utilities analyst at Charterhouse Tilney.
Dominion chairman Tom Capps told a press conference that the company had looked at many Recs but focused on East Midlands in spring as it "liked the management...and the way the numbers fitted with ours."
Chief financial officer Linwood Robertson told Reuters that the company intended to run its target as a stand-alone business and that it wanted to keep East Midlands' management team, which is highly regarded by industry analysts.
East Midlands was the first of Britain's electricity utilities, which were privatised with strong cash balance sheets, to launch a special dividend to redistribute cash to shareholders, in November 1994. Robertson said Dominion looked forward to the diversification East Midlands would bring to it and said the U.S. company would bring strengths to the British firm.
The U.S. company has a 1.3 billion pound credit to fund its bid underwritten by NationsBank and Union Bank of Switzerland, banking sources said.
($1=.6054 Pound)
Political pressures ahead of a general election may mean the latest bids in a wave of takeovers of British regional electricity companies (Recs) do not get a rapid nod from the UK government, analysts said on Wednesday.
"A referral (to competition authorities) is a distinct possibility. I think it is a 50-50 shot," said Gordon Culfeather, utilities analyst at Greig Middleton.
Seven of the original 12 cash-rich Recs have now been sold in a flurry of takeovers since they came up for grabs last March after the government's protective golden share expired, five years after privatisation in 1990.
Three of those have been sold to U.S. utilities, who see the UK sector as an opportunity to expand outside U.S. regulatory shackles, particularly into a market which is scheduled to be liberalised to supply competition in 1998.
The latest bid is from  U.S. energy group Dominion Resources which agreed to pay 1.3 billion pounds ($2.15 billion) on Wednesday to take control of East Midlands Electricity, one of only five remaining independent Recs, in an a offer at 670 pence per share.
Northern Electric faces its second hostile approach in less than two years as it battles to throw off a 630 pence per share bid from CE Electric, a unit of U.S.-based CalEnergy, which has already snapped up 29 percent of its target.
Only two bids have so far been blocked by trade secretary Ian Lang, who stunned the market by stopping generators National Power and PowerGen from consuming two Recs earlier this year.
Another two Recs fell prey to their regional water and sewerage companies, while industrial conglomerate Hanson picked up Eastern Electricity, which it now aims to spin off as part of a separate business under its demerger plans.
The remaining victim was Manweb, which succumbed to Scottish Power, an aggressively expansive electricity generator and distributor based in Scotland.
Dominion and East Midlands said they saw no reason for their deal to be referred to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC), adding that a meeting was scheduled with industry watchdog Offer, which initially consults on bids.
"If Lang was following a consistent route, he would not stop these latest bids," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
"But if I were a regulator, I would probably want at least five firms to make comparisons," he added.
Offer head Stephen Littlechild will send his advice on both bids to Lang for the trade secretary to decide whether they should be referred to the MMC.
Another pressure on Lang is the prospect of a general election, which must be held by May 1997, with the opposition Labour party running ahead in opinion polls and allegations of sleaze miring the current Conservative government.
Its privatisations, which have seen most of Britain's strategic industries sold off, have been heavily criticised for huge executive pay packets, hefty shareholder payouts and heady takeovers which value firms well above privatisation levels.
Labour, which has vowed to levy a "windfall" tax on privatised utilities, said in an opening salvo on the latest bids that it planned "tough, efficient regulation wherever necessary in the privatised utilities and we intend to see it enforced whoever is the owner."
Lang could chose to refer the bids to the MMC in order to delay any decision on this hot political issue beyond an election, some analysts said.
The market on Wednesday showed its concerns by capping share prices at well below the bid levels, with Northern trading at 592 pence per share by 1450 GMT and East Midlands at 623 pence.
"The market is holding its breath on this issue," Culfeather said. ($1=.6054 Pound)
Virginia-based Dominion Resources Inc., continuing an American invasion of the recently privatised utility industry in Britain, agreed Wednesday to acquire East Midlands Electricity Plc for about 1.3 billion pounds ($2.15 billion).
Executives from Dominion met East Midlands management late Tuesday to offer 6.7 pounds ($11.07) a share for one of five remaining independent electric companies in Britain.
But East Midlands shares languished well below the offer price Wednesday as concerns emerged that the bid might face obstacles from British competition authorities.
"Everyone's expecting the MMC (Monopolies and Mergers Commission) to take a close look at the deal," said one trader.
Dominion, based in Richmond, Va., said last week it was considering a bid "at a price not much in excess of 608 pence per share." But East Midlands scorned that price, saying it would undervalue the Nottingham-based electricity company.
East Midlands Chairman Sir Nigel Rudd said Wednesday that his board was recommending the latest offer "because it represents fair value for an excellent business, which has successfully differentiated itself from the sector."
Seven of Britain's original 12 regional electricity companies have already been bought -- four by U.S. firms -- since they came up for grabs last March when the government's protective golden share expired, five years after privatisation in 1990.
"Dominion's offer looks a fair compromise price," said Chris Perry, utilities analyst at Charterhouse Tilney.
But he added that there were "very genuine concerns" that the offer might be referred to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
Dominion Chief Financial Officer Linwood Robertson said in an interview that the company was talking to the regulator.
"We intend to run this as a stand-alone business," he said, adding that he certainly hoped for approval.
He also said the group hoped to keep East Midlands' management team, which is highly regarded by industry analysts.
Robertson said Dominion looked forward to the diversification East Midlands would bring to it and said the U.S. company would bring strengths to the British firm.
Dominion's stock gained 37.5 cents to $40.125 in early trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
U.S. group Dominion Resources on Wednesday agreed a 1.3 billion pound ($2.15 billion) bid for East Midlands Electricity, one of only five remaining British independent regional electricity companies.
But East Midlands shares languished well below the 670 pence per share offer price, as concerns emerged the bid might face obstacles from British competition authorities.
Virginia-based Dominion said last week it was considering a bid "at a price not much in excess of 608 pence per share". But East Midlands had scorned that price, saying it would undervalue the Nottingham-based electricity company's prospects.
Executives from Dominion, the fifth U.S. utility to bid for a British power supplier, met East Midlands management late on Tuesday with a takeover price top of the agenda.
East Midlands chairman Sir Nigel Rudd said in a joint statement that his board was recommending the offer "because it represents fair value for an excellent business, which has successfully differentiated itself from the sector."
East Midlands shares were up 13 pence at 624 pence after 1400 GMT, off a high of 650 pence.
"Everyone's expecting the MMC (Monopolies and Mergers Commission) to take a close look at the deal. That is why the shares are only trading around 630 pence," said one trader.
Seven of the original 12 Recs have already been bought since they came up for grabs last March after the government's protective golden share expired, five years after privatisation in 1990.
Northern Electric is currently fighting off its second hostile approach in less than two years, rejecting a bid at 630 pence per share from CE Electric, a subsidiary of U.S. energy group CalEnergy, which holds just over 29 percent of the
"Dominion's offer looks a fair compromise price," said Chris Perry, utilities analyst at Charterhouse Tilney.
But he added there were "very genuine concerns" that the offer might be referred to the MMC.
"If Dominion is allowed to buy East Midlands and CalEnergy secures Northern, that would leave only three independent Recs," one analyst said.
British electricity watchdog Offer is expected to consult on Dominion's bid and then pass on its advice to Ian Lang, the trade and industry secretary, who will then decide whether the bid should be referred to the MMC.
Offer has completed consultations on CalEnergy's bid and will be passing on its advice to Lang shortly, industry sources said.
So far, only generators National Power and PowerGen have had their bids for Recs blocked, as they would have created fully integrated generation and supply companies.
Dominion's chief financial officer Linwood Robertson said in an interview that the company was now talking to the regulator.
"We intend to run this as a stand-alone business," he said, adding that he certainly hoped for approval from Offer.
He also said the group hoped to keep East Midlands' management team, which is highly regarded by industry analysts.
East Midlands was the first of Britain's electricity utilities, which were privatised with strong cash balance sheets, to launch a share buy-back to redistribute cash to shareholders.
Robertson said Dominion looked forward to the diversification East Midlands would bring to it and said the U.S. company would bring strengths to the British firm. ($1=.6050 Pound)
British water and sewerage company South West Water turned in sparkling first half profits on Thursday and hiked its dividend by an expected 20 percent, promising further increases in years to come.
The company, which evaded takeover earlier this year when two proposed bids were blocked by the UK government, said it expected to raise its total dividend by 20 percent this year and make real a rise of eight percent "for the foreseeable future".
South West Water's pretax profits for the six months ending September 30 rose to 72.9 million pounds ($121.4 million) up 35 percent and ahead of expectations of 57 to 68 million pounds.
It paid out a dividend of 11.8 pence as promised when the bids, from Severn Trent and Wessex, were unexpectedly halted by the UK government in October.
"The dividend policy will continue to be based on the pursuit of progressive growth," the company said in a statement.
But the half year surge in profits was unlikely to be repeated, finance director Ken Hill told Reuters. "I do not think a 35 percent increase in PBT (profit before tax) is likely to occur at the end of this year," he said, nor in years immediately following. "But we are looking for profit increases," he added.
Shares in the company closed three pence up at 580 after touching a high of 589 pence.
Anglian Water, which reported last week, saw half year profits rise 5.5 percent and raised its dividend 14.6 percent. Thames Water, which kicked off the flow of interim results in the sector on October 29, turned in pretax profits before exceptionals up 15 percent and raised its dividend 22 percent.
South West Water has also committed to pay out a rebate of 15 pounds each to customers after the planned bids were blocked but Hill warned further rebates would not be automatic.
The company failed last year in a bid to have price caps imposed by regulator Ofwat raised as the Monopolies and Mergers Commission said it should find an extra 100 million pounds it said it needed for environmental upgrades from efficiencies.
It has since made an earlier rebate of 10 pounds to customers, announced additional investment of 74 million pounds and brought forward 20 million pounds of investment in cleaning up at Newquay, a favourite beach area for surfers. Hill said the company's strategy now was to "focus on the core business...and develop very carefully the strategy of the non-regulated businesses."
Dividend payouts would be helped by efficiency savings and improved profitability in its non-regulated businesses, which contributed 6.6 million pounds to interim profits, executives told a press conference.
Chairman Keith Court told journalists the company aimed to balance turnover contributions of non-regulated and regulated businesses "as soon as we can."
New acquisitions contributed around 3.5 million pounds to operating profits of some 7.5 million pounds in non-regulated business this year and Hill said there was between 100 and 200 million pounds available to make further purchases.
But there are no specific plans for acquisitions. "Our track record shows...we are not frightened (of making acquisitions) but it is a question of finding ones that make sense," Colin Drummond, head of the group's non-core division, said.
At the same time, the company's balance sheet was strong enough to effect a share buyback if it decided to make use of a mandate to buy 10 percent of shares, Hill said.
($1=.6004 Pound)
British water and sewerage company South West Water saw half year profits surge on Thursday and it hiked its dividend 20 percent, as expected, with a promise of real dividend increases of eight percent in coming years.
"The dividend policy will continue to be based on the pursuit of progressive growth," the company said in a statement.
South West Water's pretax profits for the six months ending September 30 rose to 72.9 million pounds ($120.4 million), up 35 percent and ahead of expectations which were between 57 and 68 million pounds.
It had promised to pay out an interim dividend of 11.8 pence when two proposed bids for it, from Severn Trent and Wessex, were blocked by the UK government in October.
In a statement, the company said it hoped to raise the total dividend for the year by 20 percent and then reach eight percent real increases in the annual payout to shareholders.
But the half year surge in profits was unlikely to be repeated, finance director Ken Hill told Reuters.
"I do not think a 35 percent increase in PBT (profit before tax) is likely to occur at the end of this year," he said, nor in years immediately following. "But we are looking for profit increases," he added.
Shares in the company gained five pence to 582.5 pence by 0940 GMT.
Anglian Water, which reported last week, saw half year profits rise 5.5 percent and raised its dividend 14.6 percent.
Thames Water, which kicked off the flow of interim results in the sector on October 29, turned in pretax profits before exceptionals up 15 percent and raised its dividend 22 percent.
South West Water has also committed to pay out a rebate of 15 pounds each to customers after trade secretary Ian Lang blocked the bids, which were awaiting approval before being priced.
Hill said the company's strategy now was to "focus on the core business...and develop very carefully the strategy of the non-regulated businesses."
South West Water has interests in waste management, environmental instrumentation and construction services, which contributed 6.6 million pounds to profits in the first half.
Hill said recent tax changes affecting some share buy backs would not alter the company's strategy of only using its mandate if it were in the interests of shareholders.
South West Water said a complicated financing deal which involves standby letters of credit which are counter-indemnified by cash deposits had contributed 5.7 million pounds to first half profits.
The facility should boost annual profits by nine million pounds in each of the next three years, the company added.
It said capital expenditure was 61.6 million pounds in the first half of the year and "a further substantial uplift is planned for the second half."
Water leakage, an issue which has triggered severe criticism of water companies from politicians and lobby groups, has been cut to 21 percent from 28 percent in 1992, the company said.
Its target of only 15 percent of water leaking from infrastructure by 1999 should be reached, it added.
The company's non-executive chairman Keith Court steps down in February and a replacement is being sought after non-executive deputy chairman Alan Fletcher bowed out.
($1=.6054 Pound)
Shares in British utility Northern Electric rose on Friday after a newspaper reported that U.S. group CalEnergy was set to raise its 630 pence a share takeover offer.
The report in the London Evening Standard said CalEnergy, through CE Electric in which it has a 70 percent stake, might be willing to increase its 650 million pound ($1.08 billion) bid to 660 pence to win a recommendation from the regional power distribution company (Rec).
Neither side would make any offical comment, however, and market sources were sceptical that any increased bid was in the offing.
Despite market scepticism, Northern shares rose to an intraday high of 618 pence before easing back to close up seven pence at 608.
Other stocks in the sector also gained, bouyed by a resurgence in bid activity which saw East Midlands succumb to an agreed 1.3 billion pounds bid at 670 pence per share from U.S.-based Dominion Resources on Wednesday.
Seven of Britain's original 12 regional power firms have been swallowed up in under two years. Among the remaining five, Southern Electric jumped 30p to 708p, while London Electric added 21-1/2p to 627p.
CalEnergy, which has already snapped up more than 29 percent of Northern, has consistently said its 630 pence offer is a full and fair price.
But Northern has argued the offer undervalues the company and claimed a level of 700 pence was discussed in talks ahead of the bid launched on October 28, an assertion which CalEnergy has denied.
Analysts said the U.S. company might be in no rush to improve its offer as it has already attracted nearly 30 percent of Northern shareholders and the shares are languishing below this level.
Hanging over both bids are concerns they may be referred to British competition authorities as political pressure mounts on the Conservative government, which lags the opposition Labour Party in the polls ahead of a general election due by next May.
Previous similar bids have been approved, but the market is worried that heavy criticism of high shareholder payouts, hefty executive pay packets and high takeover prices might weigh the scales against approval this time.
In addition, approval of both bids would leave just three independent power firms in the sector and this may not be enough for industry regulator Offer to make comparisons, analysts said. Those worries have kept share prices of both bid targets largely below offer levels, with East Midlands closing down 4-1/2p at 623p.
It is not clear whether Trade Secretary Ian Lang, who will decide whether to refer the bids, would be swayed by a recommended offer.
In addition, CalEnergy might want to wait for Northern's defence document, expected by next Tuesday, and interim results due by the end of the month instead of the previously scheduled December 5 announcement.
Northern, which spent 560 million pounds last year on a package of shareholder benefits to successefully fend off Trafalgar House, now a unit of Hanson, is expected to use sparkling interim results to pitch for a higher offer.
Analysts said CalEnergy's bid compares favourably with that of Dominion on a cashflow basis and shows a 27.5 percent premium to share prices ahead of the bid, compared with a 25 percent level for Dominion's offer.
But on a price to earnings basis, CalEnergy's offer comes in slightly lower than that for East Midlands, they added. ($1=.6005 Pound)
British regional electricity company Northern Electric on Monday promised to rush out results by the end of November to prove that a $1.225 billion hostile bid from America's CE Electric undervalued it. But CE Electric said it still felt its 630 pence per share offer was full and fair, adding that there was "nothing in Northern Electric's defence document which changes our view."
In its first formal defence since CE Electric posted its bid on November 5, Northern said the half-year figures, previously scheduled for December 5, would include "important financial information" to show the value of the company. It reiterated its belief that the offer was too low and said that when CE Electric announced the bid at the end of October, it had suggested a price of 700 pence per share.
But CE Electric, which is 70 percent owned by U.S. energy group CalEnergy, denied this in a statement on Monday, saying: "This ambitious range was entirely the proposal of Northern Electric's board."
The U.S. group has already snapped up nearly 30 percent of its target, as Northern's shares were clouded by uncertainty over whether the government would approve the bid. Northern shares eased half a penny to 608-1/2 pence by 1543 GMT. Northern confirmed it planned to pay a 56.5 pence special dividend in February 1997 if CE Electric's offer lapsed and said that could mean the U.S. firm stood to reap gross yields of over 9.5 percent a year from its net investment. "Northern Electric is worth more to CE Electric," the company said in a statement. But CE Electric said the special dividend was "fully reflected" in the share price before the offer was launched. Northern chairman David Morris said the company believed that uncertainty as to whether CE Electric's bid would be referred to the MMC (Monopolies and Mergers Commission) was dominating the market's reaction and keeping the share low. The British government has approved takeovers of seven of the original 12 cash-rich regional electricity companies (Recs) in two years, of which three were bought by U.S. companies. Only two bids for Recs have been blocked, when offers from generators National Power and PowerGen were deemed against the public interest by trade secretary Ian Lang. Northern itself is the only Rec to have survived a hostile bid, when it fended off Trafalgar House, now a unit of Kvaerner, with a 560 million pound ($934.2 million) benefit package last year.
Since Northern came under threat, East Midlands Electricity agreed to a 670 pence per share $2.15 billion takeover by Dominion Resources of the U.S. last week. Bid speculation has sparked price rises in other RECS, including Yorkshire Electricity.
A report in the Sunday Telegraph said Yorkshire was in talks with Entergy of the U.S., but both firms denied this on Monday.Shares in Yorkshire gained 12 pence to 747-1/2 pence while East Midlands slipped 2-1/2 pence to 623 pence. The market is worried that political pressures on the ruling Conservative government, which opinion polls put in second place before the general election less than six months away, might prompt it to block any more bids.
The electricity sector, privatised by the Conservatives in 1989, has proved unpopular due to high dividend payouts, hefty executive pay packets and head-turning takeover deals.
($1=.5994 Pound)
British regional electricity company Northern Electric said on Monday it would rush out results by the end of November to show that a $1.225 billion bid from CE Electric of the U.S. was inadequate.
In its first formal defence since CE Electric posted its bid on November 5, Northern said the half-year figures, previously scheduled for December 5, would include "important financial information" to show the value of the company.
It reiterated its belief that the 630 pence per share CE offer was too low and "below even the lowest price put...by the bidder prior to the launch of its hostile offer."
Northern said when the bid was announced at the end of October that CE Electric, which is 70 percent owned by U.S. energy group CalEnergy, had suggested a price of 700 pence per share, a claim that the Americans have denied.
CE Electric made no immediate comment on Northern's latest statement.
The U.S. group has already snapped up nearly 30 percent of its target, as its shares have been clouded by uncertainty over whether the government will approve the bid. Northern shares were up just a penny by 1310 GMT to 610 pence.
The company reiterated plans to pay a 56.5 pence special dividend in February 1997 if CE Electric's offer lapsed and said that could mean the U.S. firm stood to reap gross yields of over 9.5 percent a year from its net investment.
"Northern Electric is worth more to CE Electric," the company said in a statement.
Chairman David Morris added that the company "believes that uncertainty as to whether CE Electric's bid will be referred to the MMC (Monopolies and Mergers Commission) is currently dominating the market's reaction," which is keeping shares low.
So far, the government has approved takeovers of seven of the original 12 cash-rich regional electricity companies (recs) in under two years, three of which have been bought by U.S. companies.
Only two bids for recs have been blocked, when offers from generators National Power and PowerGen were deemed against the public interest in a surprise decision by trade secretary Ian Lang.
Northern itself is the only rec to survive a hostile bid, when it fended off Trafalgar House, now a unit of Kvaerner, with a 560 million pound ($934.2 million) benefit package last year.
Since Northern came under threat, East Midlands Electricity has agreed to a 670 pence per share $2.15 billion takeover by Dominion Resources of the U.S.
Yorkshire Electricity, one of the three remaining recs untouched by bids so far, denied on Monday a report in the Sunday Telegraph that it was in talks with Entergy of the U.S., a report also denied by Enetergy.
Shares in Yorkshire gained 12 pence to 746-1/4 pence while East Midlands slipped four pence to 620 pence.
The market is now worried that political pressures on the Conservative government, in second place in opinion polls ahead of a general election which is expected within six months, might prompt it to block any more bids.
The sector, privatised by the Conservatives in 1989, has reaped unpopularity for high dividend payouts, hefty executive pay packets and head-turning takeover deals.
"We believe this bid should be decided on value and...(call) for a rapid end to this period of regulatory uncertainty," Northern's chairman David Morris said in a statement.
($1=.5994 Pound)
London Electricity on Tuesday became the latest British regional electricity company (Rec) to attract bid speculation after U.S. firm Entergy was reported to be mulling a 1.2 billion pound bid.
London Electricity declined comment on a report in the Wall Street Journal Europe that confidential documents showed the U.S. company was seeking 1.1 billion pounds to acquire an unnamed British electricity firm whose financial profile matched that of London Electricity.
Entergy told Reuters that any talks with another party were "too early in the scheme of things to be really meaningful."
"As far as specifying a target of that interest, we're not simply going to comment on what has been speculated and rumoured," Entergy spokesman Patrick Sweeney said.
However, he declined to deny the Wall Street Journal Europe article.
Shares in London Electicity touched a high of 671 pence before easing back to close at 667 pence, up 30-1/2 pence. The newspaper article said confidential Entergy company documents referred to used a code name "Atlantic" for the target company whose financial profile met that of London Electricity on a number of points.
The Journal said the bid was assumed in the documents to be for around 700 pence per share. The newspaper quoted Entergy's Sweeney as saying Entergy was interested in the British market and "obviously if you're interested, one of the results could be an acquisition."
The article followed a denial by Entergy on Monday of a report in Britain's Sunday Telegraph newspaper that the U.S. firm was considering a bid for Yorkshire Electricity Group Plc. The electricity sector has seen a flurry of bid speculation recently over the five remaining independent Recs. Northern Electric currently faces its second hostile offer in less than two years as it tries to fend off a $1.225 billion.
($1=.5994 Pound)
London Electricity on Tuesday became the latest British regional electricity company (Rec) to attract bid speculation after U.S. firm Entergy was reported to be mulling a 1.2 billion pound ($2 billion) bid.
London Electricity declined comment on a report in the Wall Street Journal Europe that confidential documents showed the U.S. company was seeking 1.1 billion pounds to acquire an unnamed British electricity firm whose financial profile matched that of London Electricity.
Entergy told Reuters that any talks with another party were "too early in the scheme of things to be really meaningful."
"As far as specifying a target of that interest, we're not simply going to comment on what has been speculated and rumoured," Entergy spokesman Patrick Sweeney said.
However, he declined to deny the Wall Street Journal Europe article.
Shares in London Electicity touched a high of 671 pence before easing back to close at 667 pence, up 30-1/2 pence. The newspaper article said confidential Entergy company documents referred to used a code name "Atlantic" for the target company whose financial profile met that of London Electricity on a number of points.
The Journal said the bid was assumed in the documents to be for around 700 pence per share. The newspaper quoted Entergy's Sweeney as saying Entergy was interested in the British market and "obviously if you're interested, one of the results could be an acquisition."
The article followed a denial by Entergy on Monday of a report in Britain's Sunday Telegraph newspaper that the U.S. firm was considering a bid for Yorkshire Electricity Group Plc. The electricity sector has seen a flurry of bid speculation recently over the five remaining independent Recs. Northern Electric currently faces its second hostile offer in less than two years as it tries to fend off a $1.225 billion ($1=.5994 Pound)
London Electricity on Tuesday became the latest British regional electricity company (Rec) to attract bid speculation after U.S. Entergy was reported to be planning a 1.2 billion pound ($2 billion) bid.
London Electricity declined comment on the report in the Wall Street Journal Europe.
"It is speculation and obviously we can't comment on a rumour," a London Electricity spokeswoman said.
Shares in the company leapt to a high of 665 pence before easing back to 662-1/2 pence, up 26 pence by 1115 GMT.
The Wall Street Journal Europe said on Tuesday that a 1.2 billion pound bid for the Rec could be in the offing.
It said confidential Entergy company documents showed the company seeking 1.1 billion pounds for an acquisition.
The documents used a code name "Atlantic" for the target company whose financial profile, the newspaper said, met that of London Electricity on a number of points.
The Journal said the bid was assumed in the documents to be for around 700 pence per share.
The newspaper quoted Entergy spokesman Patrick Sweeney as saying Entergy was interested in the British market and "obviously if you're interested, one of the results could be an acquisition."
Sweeney on Monday denied to Reuters a report in The Sunday Telegraph newspaper that it was considering a bid for Yorkshire Electricity Group Plc.
But he added, "We simply don't comment on situations until they get to a point until it is prudent to do so."
The electricity sector has seen a flurry of bid speculation recently over the five remaining independent Recs.
Northern Electric currently faces its second hostile offer in less than two years as it tries to fend off a $1.225 billion bid at 630 pence per share from CE Electric, of which CalEnergy of the U.S. holds 70 percent.
Last week, East Midlands Electricity agreed to a 1.3 billion pound offer at 670 pence per share from U.S.-based Dominion Resources.
Both bids depend on approval from the British government, which has already nodded through the sale of seven of the original 12 cash-rich Recs, three of which were bought by U.S. firms attracted by the looser regulations in the British market.
But concerns that political pressures might prompt the government to block the latest batch of bids have kept share prices of both targets well below offer levels.
Northern was trading down a penny at 593 pence while East Midlands off half a penny at 617 pence.
High dividend payouts, hefty executive pay packets and head-turning takeover deals have all contributed to criticism of the electricity sector, which was privatised by the Conservative government in 1989.
The Conservatives currently lag the opposition Labour party in opinion polls and must hold a general election by May 1997.
An added concern is that approval of current bids would leave just three independent Recs -- London Electricity, Southern Electricity and Yorkshire Electricity -- which might not be adequate for watchdog Offer to use as yardsticks. ($1=.5994 Pound)
Entergy Corp on Wednesday called off talks with British regional electricity company (Rec) London Electric but the U.S. firm said it was still keeing an eye on the electricity sector, which has seen a recent flurry of bids and rumours.
In a statement responding to newspaper reports it planned a 1.2 billion pound ($2.02 billion) takeover of London Electric, Entergy said exploratory discussions had taken place but had been discontinued.
"We continue to evaluate attractive markets and investment opportunities worldwide and consider the UK electricity market to be in that category," Entergy spokesman Patrick Sweeney said.
Shares in London, which had surged higher on the bid reports, slipped to a low of 630 pence but later climbed back to 661-1/2 pence, down just 3-1/2 pence.
"What (Entergy is) saying is that the talks with London Electricity have ended. That doesn't mean they've ruled out a hostile bid for London Electricity, Yorkshire, or another," said Yamaichi analyst Nigel Hawkins.
Recent interest has seen two of the five remaining Recs attract U.S. predators -- Northern Electric is fighting CalEnergy's $1.225 billion bid and East Midlands has agreed to a $2.15 billion offer by Dominion Resources.
Seven of the original 12 cash-rich Recs have already been sold, three of them to U.S. companies which are attracted by the looser regulatory system in the UK.
Earlier this week, Entergy denied a report in the Sunday Telegraph newspaper that it was interested in bidding for Yorkshire Electricity, considered the most attractive of the remaining Recs.
Southern Electric, which has so far kept out of this round of bid speculation, avoided takeover by British generator National Power when the government blocked the bid on competition grounds in April.
The company then went on to make an offer itself for its cousin Southern Water but was pipped by power company Scottish Power with a 1.68 billion pound bid.
The latest two bids for Recs are clouded by concerns that political pressures might prompt a block, however, as the ruling Conservatives struggle to catch the opposition Labour party's lead in polls before a general election due by May 1997.
The Recs, which were privatised by the Conservatives in 1989, have triggered sharp public and opposition party criticism for big dividends, bulging executive pay packets and bumper takeover prices.
But companies may well consider chances of an approval for takeover more likely with a Conservative government than from Labour, which already plans a "windfall" tax on utilities if it gains power.
"There's definitely a feeling that the window of opportunity is closing on these bids," said the sector analyst.
Analysts said there could be other U.S. companies looking at the sector, adding that Yorkshire Electricity remained one of the most attractive for a predator.
Industry watchdog Offer completed consultation on CalEnergy's bid on November 7 while the closing date for comments on Dominion's offer is November 22.
Trade secretary Ian Lang has a first deadline for deciding on CalEnergy's bid of November 25, analysts said, but might extend it to mid-December. ($1=.5950 Pound)
British power generator National Power Plc said on Wednesday that half year profits had slipped, hurt by exceptional charges over costs of an aborted takeover, and said the year's output could be 20 percent down.
Pretax profits for the half year before exceptional items of 57 million pounds ($95.79 million) were 251 million pounds, down from 254 million pounds previously, compared with forecasts of between 210 and 253 million pounds.
The company paid out a dividend of six pence per share, up from 5.4 pence, towards the lower end of forecasts, and said it would continue to deliver real dividend growth.
Shares slid 12-1/2 pence by 1206 GMT to 440-1/2 pence, having touched a low of 435 pence.
"The results were all pretty solid and as expected but there is some disappointment that the dividend was skimpy and the market was a bit caught out on the exceptionals," said one sector analyst who asked not to be named.
National Power's 11 percent increase in dividend compares with a 20 percent hike made by its colleague PowerGen at interim results on November 14.
The exceptional charges included an unrealised loss on its investment in and abortive acquisition costs of regional electricity company (rec) Southern Electric.
The bid was blocked by the UK authorities in April along with PowerGen 's proposed takeover of Midlands Electricity.
"Taking a charge over Southern is a prudent thing to do and they may be able to sell at a profit later," the analyst said.
National Power was understood to have written down the stake it holds in Southern at 615.5 pence per share, compared to trading levels of around 700 pence on Wednesday.
"The situation could reverse itself very easily, look at PowerGen," the analyst said.
PowerGen sold the 21 percent stake it had built up in Midlands to the Rec's eventual owner Scottish Power and took an exceptional credit of 69 million pounds.
National Power said increasing competition in the UK market had affected first half results and that its market share slipped to 27 percent from 30 percent a year ago as total demand grew by three percent.
The slide was largely anticipated after National Power was forced to sell 4,000 MegaWatts of generating capacity to comply with industry watchdog Offer requirements.
The company said it was changing shape to emerge as "a leading global power company," and pointed to an increasing input from overseas activities, which are expected to contribute post tax income of 70 million pounds for the year.
Overseas investments now total 900 million pounds with interests in some 7,500 MW of capacity or 3,000 MW on a net basis.
"Overseas is coming along quite nicely," the analyst said.
National Power said its repositioning "means we are well placed both to compete strongly in the UK market, and to build on our material and increasingly profitable overseas business."
The company said costs associated with paying out a one pound per share special dividend, announced with full year results in May, would total around 50 million pounds and would fall in the second half of the year.
"Over time, National Power is going to become a different type of company with less earnings from the UK. This is the uncertain transition period," the sector analyst said.
($1=.5950 Pound)
British opposition Labour party's plans for a one-off "windfall" tax on utility companies may be causing more stock market damage through uncertainty than the tax itself would, analysts said on Thursday.
If it won the next general election, due within six months, Labour has said it would levy a tax to reap excess profits from recently privatised utilities to help pay for welfare reform.
"The market does not like uncertainty -- give it a tax like this with no parameters and it will assume the worst-case scenario," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
As parliament prepared to debate the issue, at the prompting of the ruling Conservatives, analysts said if the Labour party would be more specific about plans, some of the uncertainty weighing on utility shares might lift.
"They have promised to raid the utilities but they have not said which, how much or when, and that is damaging," said Philip Hollobone, analyst at Williams de Broe.
Labour, which is well ahead in opinion polls, has said it would use the funds to tackle youth and long-term unemployment but has declined to set target companies, amounts or timeframes.
Newspaper reports have suggested the tax might be aimed at raising more than five billion pounds ($8.42 billion) and possibly as much as 10 billion pounds.
Speculation on possible targets has widened to include up to 30 companies, like British Telecom, British Gas and perhaps airport operator BAA Plc, in addition to the water and electricity companies initially pointed to.
Some of these, such as BAA, have already rehearsed arguments why they should not be included in any windfall tax net.
The water and electricity sectors, privatised around the start of the decade by the Conservatives, became unpopular after a spate of huge executive pay rises, hefty dividend payouts, and head-turning takeovers deals.
One analyst who declined to be named, suggested that the water sector stocks are currently undervalued by around five billion pounds, reflecting concerns over the tax.
Thames Water, for example, has underperformed the FT All Share Index by as much as 10 percent since late August, according Reuters Securities 3000 data, although its relative has improved recently to underperformance of some four percent.
Shares in regional electricity companies, however, were pulled in two directions as a resurgence of bids in the sector boosted speculation which analysts said may have offset some of the downside of a utility tax.
"The worries over the windfall tax are severely overdone...even if it does happen, most companies will be able to find the money, even if they do not want to," said Hollobone.
Along with several other analysts, he warns that even if Labour does win power it may not be able to effect the tax because of legal problems in ensuring it is non-discriminatory.
Several utility companies have said they would challenge any windfall tax plans in court, but Labour's treasury spokesman Gordon Brown described the proposal as "legally iron tight."
On Thursday, the Institute of Directors (IoD), which represents British business interests, warned against the tax although it acknowledged that "some of the utilities do have spare funds at the moment."
The IoD said the tax could lead to problems over who should pay what amounts and said customers might face increased prices.
The Conservatives have claimed the tax could mean an extra 192 pounds on the average household bill and challenged Labour to come up with figures to contradict this.
"Investors who are wise to the market's over-caution on the proposed tax are buying. These stocks are undervalued and...some are yielding more than long-term bonds," said one analyst.
($1=.5940 Pound)
British supermarket chain Safeway, known for cute kid adverts and innovative technology, turned in a seven percent rise in half year profits on Thursday and said sales were rising with hopes of a cheery Christmas.
"I am positive about Christmas, there are some good statistics on retail generally...I would hope that (consumers) would have more confidence to spend," chief executive Colin Smith said in an interview.
The company announced plans to open 450,000 square feet (41,810 sq metres) of extra space, or about 18 stores, in the next two years, which will generate about 5,200 jobs.
But with the company's profits and dividend coming in towards the lower end of expectations, Safeway shares reversed a recent trend to slip to a low of 362 pence, down nine, before recovering to 370 by 1150 GMT,
Safeway checked in half year pretax profits of 228.2 million pounds ($383.5 million), compared with forecasts of between 228 and 231 million. It paid a dividend of 4.4 pence, up from 4.05 pence and within forecasts of 4.4 to 4.6 pence per share.
The company, which completed its "Safeway 2000" strategic review in the summer aimed at boosting sales and cutting costs, said sales from existing stores were up five percent in the first five weeks of the second half.
That followed a 5.1 percent gain in the first half, including price inflation of 2.6 percent.
"Our strategy to attract more family shoppers to our stores is succeeding and this success is reflected in sales growth which is outperforming the industry average," the company said.
But Smith said the sector was "very competitive...and margins at the moment are slightly down."
Supermarkets are attempting to steer clear of an all-out price war by relying on marketing initiatives such as loyalty cards and customer service to boost sales, but pricing remains a key element.
In the first half, a fierce petrol price war hit profitability in Safeway's petrol forecourts to the tune of 10 million pounds, but Smith said he hoped this would not impact on the second half.
Gross margins have run slightly down on a year ago in the first half and start of the second half, Safeway said, driven by "our immediate and vigorous response to a number of significant marketing and pricing initiatives launched by our competitors."
But net margins were stable in the first half at 6.9 percent as productivity gains and efficiency improvements helped.
The supermarket chain plans to extend its innovative self-scan shopping, where customers track and total their own shopping to avoid queueing at checkouts. The scheme will be added at 50 stores on top of the current 100.
Smith said the company would continue to focus on the family shopper and the large family weekly shop to boost sales.
"Increasing efficiencies mean we can be a low cost operator...which allows us to afford to reinvest in being competitive." ($1=.5950 Pound)
Welsh multi-utility Hyder's shares rose after it posted a 25 percent hike in half-year profits on Friday and said electricity business Swalec, which it took over in January, should boost earnings.
Pretax profits rose to 100.7 million pounds ($169.5 million) for the six months ending September 30 from 80.6 million pounds a year ago, and Hyder paid an interim dividend of 14.6 pence per share from 12.6 pence. The results were in line with forecasts.
Shares were up 13-1/2 pence to 755-1/2 pence by 1127 GMT.
The company said in a statement that Swalec, taken over by Welsh Water to form Hyder, "should be materially earnings enhancing on a full year basis."
It added that efficiency savings from its merged services were ahead of target.
"These are very good results. Hyder is also showing that synergy savings are happening more quickly than expected," said one analyst who asked not to be identified.
Hyder managing director Graham Hawker said in an interview with Reuters that Swalec's savings were ahead of targets set before Welsh Water's bid last year.
"Before the bid, Swalec was looking at savings of 45 million pounds by 2000. We are slightly ahead on achieving those," he said.
Hyder said in June that the merger could cut operating costs by 46 million pounds in 2000 while cumulative cost savings from the merger should total 275 million pounds by then.
That compares with cost savings of 105 million pounds in 1997/98 predicted by United Utilities, the first multi-utility to be created when North West Water took over regional electricity company Norweb last year.
United Utilities also said it expected real dividend growth of 11 percent, but Hawker would not comment on whether Hyder would maintain half year real dividend growth of 11 percent.
"We will let actions speak louder than words," he said.
Hyder will continue to take costs out of its regulated businesses which should help dividend growth, Hawker said.
But it will also be looking to increase its non-regulated business, he said. Those turned in profits before interest of 13.1 million pounds in the half year.
Its infrastructure business saw profits before interest leap to 3.3 million pounds from 0.6 million a year ago and the company said its Infrastructure Developments business profits are "continuing to improve."
Hawker said the infrastructure business should benefit from government moves to finance projects through the government-sponsored Private Finance Initiative.
"That could be a very big market," he said.
Hyder will aim to secure a "largish number of five to 10 million pound-a-time projects," which spread exposure, he said.
He said returns for Hyder on its involvement with a group which won a contract to run 122 kilometres of the busy M40 motorway between London and Warwick in central England "will considerably exceed our cost of capital."
Hyder holds a 40 percent stake in that group, UK Highways, along with Tarmac, John Laing, France's Caisse des Depots et Consignations and Transroute International. ($1=.5940 Pound)
British electricity transmission business National Grid should report a rise in half year profits on November 26 and could explain how it will cope with new pricing controls that come into effect on April 1, 1997.
"We will be looking for indications on how they are going to cope, whether there will be any cost cutting," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
Analysts expect National Grid's first half profits to range from 279 to 304 million stg, up from 278.9 million previously. A dividend payout of 4.45 to 4.9 pence per share is forecast.  
The company, which was floated in December 1995, capitulated in October to revised transmission pricing proposed by industry watchdog Offer which included a one-off reduction of 20 percent in the first year starting April 1, 1997.
For the following three years, price increases will be capped at four points below inflation.
National Grid had called Offer's original proposals of a one-off cut between 20 and 26 percent "contrived, illogical and inconsistent."  
The company said when it accepted the revised controls that it would introduce further measures to improve efficiency but that the cuts would have "a material impact on transmission business profitability."
"Does the review mean that its finances are going to be hit hard?" asked the analyst. "I feel it needs to justify its capitulation, which sold shareholders down the river," he added.
National Grid chief executive said at the time price cuts were agreed that he was confident of maintaining a "progressive" dividend policy but analysts said clearer indications would be welcomed.  
The market will also be watching for updates on progress in finding a partner for its Energis telecommunications service.
Energis said in October that it was on track to announcing a link with an international carrier within a year.
Energis made an operating loss of 72.8 million stg last year but expects to break even in 1999/2000.
National Grid shares were up 6p in late trade on Friday at 192p.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
Tax changes on long-term assets made in the British budget sparked falls in utility sector stocks on Wednesday but analysts said the concerns might be overdone and expected the sector to recover.
"It is not a welcome move but it should not be a disaster. I do not think it should have a significant impact," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
The changes, proposed by finance minister Kenneth Clarke in the budget on Tuesday, cut capital allowances on assets with a working life of over 25 years to six percent from 25 percent.
The Treasury said it hoped to raise around 1 billion pounds ($1.68 billion) over three years from the move.
Shares in utilities fell across the board, with water company Anglian Water down five pence to 566 pence at 1150 GMT, Yorkshire Water losing seven pence to 677 pence and Severn Trent slipping nine pence to 671 pence.
Multi-utility Hyder slid 18 pence to 738 pence.
Among energy and power companies, PowerGen shed eight pence to 571.5 pence and Yorkshire Electricity lost 7.5 pence to 772 pence.
"The tax changes are definitely why the shares are down," one analyst said. The proposals will affect companies spending over 100,000 pounds a year on long-term fixed assets with exceptions for shipping and rail businesses and office buildings.
Utilities could be particularly vulnerable because they have large amounts of infrastructure and plant which will require future investment, analysts said.
"But a billion pounds across all companies means the impact will be pretty small for each business," one analyst said.
Companies were largely unwilling to comment immediately on the likely impact, with United Utilities and Southern Electric both saying it was too early to assess.
But both companies might give further details when they report half year results on Thursday, analysts said.
The change has been seen by some observers as pre-empting the opposition Labour party's proposals for a one-off "windfall" tax levy on utilities for what are seen as excess past profits.
These plans, from a party which is well ahead of the Conservative government in polls running up to a general election in the next six months, have been keeping a dampener on utility stocks recently.
Analysts said the changes in the budget would mean that any windfall tax imposed by a Labour government might hit companies harder.
Estimates are that a Labour government might seek to raise five billion pounds or more from such a measure in order to finance measures to combat youth and long-term unemployment.
At the same time, Labour might seek to reverse the changes on capital allowances, analysts said, as it pushes for increased investment by companies.
"These measures could reduce Labour's ability to push ahead with any windfall tax, on the other hand the party might repeal the changes to encourage investment," the analyst said.
"Utility shares have been discounted because of worries over any plans for a windfall tax by Labour. Today's falls could make some of them more attractive for canny investors," he added. ($1=.5956 Pound)
