The Ministry of Mines and Energy will investigate drug kingpins' alleged involvement in Colombia's oil industry, a spokeswoman said on Thursday.
State oil company Ecopetrol and a foreign multinational said on Thursday they had awarded multimillion-dollar service contracts to a company now thought to have been headed by suspected drug trafficker Pastor Perafan. But they said the contracts, some dating back to 1991, had been put out to bidding and there were no grounds for suspicion.
In a congressional debate on Wednesday, Margarita Mena, a former minister of Mines and Energy, said the once-powerful Medellin drug cartel had tried to invest in Colombia's oil industry in the late 1980s as a way of laundering profits from international cocaine trafficking. She did not say which companies were involved.
A spokeswoman at the Ministry of Mines and Energy said on Thursday: "An investigation will be organized. The process is likely to be a long one. It will begin with the formation of a special commission."
The current Mines and Energy minister, Rodrigo Villamizar, is likely to launch the inquiry formally when he returns to address Congress on Oct. 22, the spokeswoman said.
Villamizar opened congressional debate on Wednesday on the possible renegotiation of association contracts between foreign oil companies and Ecopetrol.
Mena's remarks, made during the session, took him by surprise. Afterward he told reporters he had not been aware of drug cartel efforts to muscle in on the oil industry but said he was concerned.
Earlier this week, Cromos magazine reported on Ecopetrol's and Occidental's business ties with Inversismica, a seismic surveying company in which it said fugitive businessman Perafan was the majority shareholder.
The prosecutor's office issued an arrest warrant for Perafan at the start of this year. A spokesman at the office was unable to say on Thursday whether Perafan, who is reputedly worth more than $12 billion, was involved with Inversismica. According to a recent report in Colombia's influential news weekly Semana, Perafan's investments include an oil pipeline project in the former Soviet Union.
An Ecopetrol spokesman said the state oil company had awarded seven contracts to Inversismica since 1991, including one to carry out a seismic survey of the Coporo field, a new find on Colombia's eastern plains that may eventually rival the Cusiana and Piedmonte fields.
He was unable to specify the total value of the contracts but said they would have amounted to hundreds of thousands of dollars.
Occidental signed just one contract with Inversismica, worth $1,500,000, between May 1995 and last June.
"When we had doubts about this company and after consultation with the head of police and the chief prosecutor, we canceled the contract. We do not want relations with any company that may be linked to narcotrafficking," the multinational's spokesman said.
An industry insider said he did not think it likely that drug traffickers would have sought to launder money in the oil industry, saying that all transactions were strictly controlled by the government and Ecopetrol.
When novice torero Ricardo Gomez steps into the arena and faces down a raging bull, only his fast-developing flair and a passion born of poverty lie between him and a gory end.
Art and courage fuse as the 22-year-old swirls his cape and moves with the elegance of a dancer. The rays of the afternoon sun glisten on his Suit of Lights -- the bullfighter's traditional costume. But when the going gets tough, the 120 pound (54 kg), 5 foot 5 inch (1.7 metre) baker's son knows the most important lessons to remember are those he has learned growing up on the tough streets of Bogota, the Colombian capital.
"I've got more passion than a rich person. I've had to put up with things in my life that a rich person would not have to suffer and when I get in front of a bull I have the same attitude. My daily life has given me one of the most important lessons for bullfighting," Gomez explained.
As a hand-me-down from Spanish colonialists, bullfighting -- the so-called fiesta brava -- has the image of a wealthy man's sport in Colombia. But while most of those in the stands at the capital's 15,000-capacity Santamaria bullring are from the nation's elite, the ones at the sharp end come mostly from humble origins.
Gomez is one of the rising stars of Bogota's fledgling school for bullfighters. His training programme, which he began at 16, includes pitting his wit against a contraption that resembles a shopping cart with horns. And for the last four seasons as a novice, he has cut his teeth on fighting the smaller bulls.
Like scores of other youngsters, his dream is to become a top professional -- a major league matador. His performances on two consecutive Sundays in October have drawn rave reviews from critical crowds and the specialist press. If all goes well, he may get his chance at the big time when the main season starts in December.
"I've often thought what would happen if I don't succeed in becoming a matador but I don't worry. It's something that I have to achieve -- it's as simple as that," he said in a short break from training.
Even if he does succeed in following in the footsteps of his idol Cesar Rincon -- reigning king of Colombian bullfighting -- 1,300 pounds (600 kgs) of killing machine will not be the only obstacle between him and living happily ever after. The sport's patrons are a wealthy minority who often value political and social contacts above ability, making it difficult for poorly connected youngsters to rise on merit.
In addition, every time a Colombian steps into the ring, he is fighting to get out of the ghetto that he has been cast into by a sport dominated by Spaniards.
"Colombian bullfighters have always been on unequal terms compared to the Spanish. While the Spanish were going from one big bullring to another the Colombians have to travel by bus along dusty village tracks looking for bulls to fight," said matador Alberto "El Bogotano" Ruiz, the training school's resident instructor.
When young hopefuls between the ages of 13 and 17 arrive at the school, Ruiz watches closely for a rare combination of intelligence, physical fitness, bravery and "the poor man looking for fame and the chance to live a little like the rich man." Fellow instructor Pablo Becerra separates bullfighters into those who are brave and those with great artistry. The brave ones, he says, fill seats and make millions as crowds flock to feel the fear and see if the bull finally gets its own back.
But far from the macho world portrayed in novelist Ernest Hemingway's "Death in the Afternoon" and "The Sun Also Rises," the head of Colombia's only bullfighting school does have his sensitive side. "Of course it's cruel to kill the bull but that's our job," Ruiz said. "But it's not like killing an enemy. We try to do it the best way possible. The fiesta brava is all about courage and death."
Colombia's main oil workers' union, known for its fiercely nationalistic stance and opposition to multinationals, will merge with smaller labor organizations to form an industry-wide front, its leader Hernando Hernandez said on Friday.
The 5,700-strong USO union, which currently only represents workers of the state oil company Ecopetrol, will approve the decision in a general assembly on Monday in a move that Hernandez believes could eventually pave the way to a 40,000-member "super- union".  
Foreign oil companies fear the move will give the USO a foothold in their fields, mostly operated by non-unionized workers, and that the union will sour labor relations with its aggressive, left-wing stance. They also accuse the USO of ties with leftist guerrilla movements, which frequently target the oil industry -- a charge union leaders deny.  
"This merger will help us maintain union solidarity in the face of detrimental government policies and enable us to present a single platform," Hernandez said. "This will put us in a better position to defend the future of our natural resources....
At Monday's meeting in the oil production center Barrancabermeja, the USO will approve a merger with the Association of Oil Industry Workers (ASOPETROL), which has a small but established presence in a number of multinational oil companies.  
SINTRAOXY, made up of U.S. multinational Occidental Petroleum workers, also seems set to heed the merger call.
Hernandez said the immediate effect would be the creation of a 10,000-strong organization, adding that non-unionized oil companies would be targeted in a drive to create a union 40,000 members to represent the entire industry.
This week the USO flexed its muscles and paralyzed the country's two main oil pipelines for the first time ever.  
The 24-hour strike was to combat government plans to restructure Ecopetrol, which USO fears will lead to the company's eventual privatization, and to protest against British Petroleum's demands to renegotiate an association contract with the state oil company.
A foreign oil company senior representative, who did not wish to be named, described USO's merger plans as an USO ploy to regain control after seeing its influence progressively eroded by the entry of multinationals into exploration and production.
"The merger will complicate relations with our labor force and the prospect of having to deal with a belligerent labor union with close ties to the guerrilla movements is far from stimulating," the representative said.
Hector Penuela, head of ASOPETROL, confirmed the imminent merger with USO.
A Labor Ministry spokesman said there was no bar on the merger but said those unions involved would have to formally inform the ministry to gain legal recognition.
At least 24 soldiers and leftist rebels died in fierce fighting in three provinces of Colombia over the weekend, military sources said on Sunday.
The bloodiest clashes took place on Saturday in the conflict-torn region of Uraba, a banana-growing area in northwest Colombia where guerrillas and right-wing paramilitary groups have traditionally fought for control of lucrative contraband routes.
An army spokesman said 10 soldiers and eight Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) insurgents died in battles there. Gen. Rito Alejo said intensive counterinsurgency operations continued on Sunday.
Elsewhere, in southwestern Huila province the FARC, Colombia's largest and oldest guerrilla force, dynamited a military convoy, killing four soldiers. And in firefights in northeastern Norte de Santander province, one soldier and one FARC rebel died early on Sunday, military sources said.
In the Caribbean port city of Barranquilla, four suspected rebels were injured when their clandestine bomb-making factory exploded.
The latest wave of deaths comes against the backdrop of what military experts say is the worst guerrilla violence in more than three decades of armed uprising.
The rebels unleashed their new offensive on Aug. 30 when they overran a military base in southern Colombia, killing 27 soldiers and taking at least 60 prisoner.
The FARC is still holding the troops and in its latest communique issued over the weekend repeated accusations that the army was planning to rescue the captives by force, thereby putting their lives at risk.
The rebel force said it has a leaked military document proving its allegations and added the army was planning to try the soldiers for cowardice once they were released -- claims denied by Interior Minister Horacio Serpa on Sunday.
While the current guerrilla offensive has led many defence analysts to suggest the situation has slipped out of control of the military, the government has been buoyed by news of the surrender of 110 fighters from the People's Liberation Army (EPL), Colombia's third-largest guerrilla force.
The Maoist-inspired rebels handed over their weapons to the military on Saturday in a rural zone of northern Cordoba province.
A leading lawmaker said on Monday that Colombia would continue to be a "paradise for drug traffickers" unless Congress voted to overturn a 5-year-old ban on the extradition of drug lords and other criminals wanted abroad.
"If we don't end the culture of impunity in Colombia then we have no right to ask for international help in the fight against drugs," said Senator Luis Guillermo Giraldo.
Giraldo, a member of the ruling Liberal party but an outspoken opponent of President Ernesto Samper, proposed legislation in August that would reactivate a 1979 extradition treaty with the United States.
The legislation faces a key hurdle in the Senate on Tuesday when a 12-member constitutional committee was set to vote on whether it should be submitted to plenary for approval or thrown out altogether.
"If we don't restore our (extradition) treaty, Colombia will continue to be a paradise for drug traffickers," Giraldo said in a telephone interview with Reuters.
In the run-up to the vote in the Senate, graffiti has appeared in Cali, home to the criminal syndicate that has dominated the world's cocaine trade, threatening those who support sending Colombians to stand trial abroad.
But growing numbers of legislators appear to be increasingly swayed by the United States' argument that extradition is a vital weapon in the drug war. Moreover, some political analysts believe it may be impossible for Colombia to regain U.S. certification as an ally in the fight against drugs, withdrawn in March, unless extradition is reintroduced.
Samper, dogged by accusations that he took drug money to finance his 1994 election campaign, said on Friday he thought Giraldo's bill was poorly timed, arguing that priority should be given to a package of tougher penalties for drug crimes currently going through Congress.
Justice Minister Carlos Medellin has spoken out in favour of renewing extradition, however, and Alfonso Valdivieso, chief prosecutor and a fervent anti-drug crusader, has even called for extradition to be made retroactive -- a proposal unlikely to please those drug traffickers who surrendered to the Colombian authorities in return for lenient treatment.
While politicians, ministers and lawyers argue the merits of the move, more than 60 percent of ordinary Colombians surveyed by RCN radio in September said they opposed extradition.
Political analysts say such opposition reflected a combination of nationalistic pride and fear that renewing extradition could unleash a new campaign of bombings, kidnappings and assassinations like those led by the late drug lord Pablo Escobar in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
Colombia's main oil workers' union, USO, known for its fierce nationalism and opposition to multinationals, has merged with a smaller labor organization in a bid to create an industry-wide front, one of its leaders said Tuesday.
The new grouping will target workers not currently represented by any union, primarily those employed by foreign companies operating in the country, USO social security secretary Gustavo Triana said.
The merger vote took place late Monday in the oil production center of Barrancabermeja and has set alarm bells ringing in some sectors of the industry, which fear the USO's spreading influence could sour labor relations with the non-unionized workforce.
"The merger was unanimously agreed and this opens a new phase of union organization in the oil industry. We will try to enter into those sectors where there is little or no union presence," Triana said. "The multinationals have already spoken out against this grouping and we think they will show a great deal of resistance and look for ways to keep it out of their fields."
The USO has about 5,700 workers and has until now only been able to recruit within the state oil company Ecopetrol. But the merger with the small ASOPETROL, which already has a foothold in the multinationals, will pave the way to what USO chief Hernando Hernandez believes could be a 40,000-strong "super-union".
Triana said the new union would not only cover production and refinery workers but could also extend to contractors and those involved in transport and distribution operations related to the oil industry.
SINTRAOXY, which represents multinational Occidental Petroleum's workers, is expected to join USO and ASOPETROL, Triana said.
USO, formed in the 1920s, has accused foreign multinationals of undermining national sovereignty through its production and exploration contracts with Ecopetrol. It has also attacked them for exploiting Colombian workers.
For their part, some of the multinationals believe USO has ties with Colombia's leftist guerrilla movements -- a charge its leaders deny.
A foreign oil spokesman said last week: "The prospect of having to deal with a belligerent union with close ties to the guerrilla movements is far from stimulating."
Another contacted Tuesday said his company was analyzing the merger decision, saying: "It may be something we can live with. It's surprising what people who want to earn a dollar will put up with."
Last week, the USO staged a 24-hour strike which paralyzed pumping operations along Colombia's two main oil pipelines.
Colombia has taken the first step to lifting a constitutional ban on extradition but the country's crusading anti-drug prosecutor on Wednesday dismissed the move as virtually meaningless.
Amid threats of a repeat of the bloodbath unleashed by drug gangs against extradition in the late 1980s, a Senate panel approved draft legislation late on Tuesday to lift the prohibition on sending Colombians abroad to stand trial
But chief prosecutor Alfonso Valdivieso said the measure prohibited as much as it allowed and threatened to hog-tie the government in endless red tape. He said the legislation should be strengthened before a final vote in Congress.
"What we should be doing here is lifting the 1991 ban, which was a national disgrace. But the text approved by the Senate doesn't represent any advance," he said. "I'm not saying it's a step back but it leaves us in exactly the same position."
The draft legislation approved by an 11-8 vote by the Senate constitutional committee was also unlikely to satisfy Colombia's critics in the United States.
If the draft survives a required seven more congressional votes, it would open the door to extradition in some isolated cases. But it would not be retroactive, ensuring that the Cali cartel drug lords jailed last year, the target of a U.S. extradition request in June, will never see U.S. courts.
Furthermore, the legislation would prevent the extradition of criminals who voluntarily surrendered to Colombian justice and forbid their handover if they risked receiving stiffer sentences abroad than those they would face at home.
One of the main arguments by U.S. authorities, who have long pressed for the extradition of drug traffickers, is that Colombian justice is too lenient and convicted drug lords continue running their criminal empires from behind bars.
Drug lords led by Pablo Escobar, the late and notoriously violent leader of the Medellin cartel, waged a nationwide campaign of bombings, kidnappings and assassinations in the late 1980s and early 1990s to force the government to impose the constitutional ban on extradition passed by Congress in 1991. Memories of the thousands of people who died in that campaign of terror are still fresh.
Death threats against extradition supporters have been scrawled in the last week on walls around Cali, home to the powerful syndicate that edged out Escobar's organisation to become the world's major cocaine supplier.
A group calling itself "Colombians For Peace" issued pamphlets reminding people of the bloodbath of the 1980s because of the extradition issue.  "Today that situation is once again threatening Colombia. Avoiding it depends on the government, congress and our judges," it said.
President Ernesto Samper, dogged by allegations of his own ties to drug lords, has said the extradition debate was poorly timed and insisted that priority should be given to his own proposal to introduce stiffer penalties for drug crimes.
Colombia has taken the first step to lifting a constitutional ban on extradition but the country's crusading anti-drug prosecutor on Wednesday dismissed the move as virtually meaningless.
Amid threats of a repeat of the bloodbath unleashed by drug gangs against extradition in the late 1980s, a Senate panel approved draft legislation late on Tuesday to lift the prohibition on sending Colombians abroad to stand trial
But chief prosecutor Alfonso Valdivieso said the measure prohibited as much as it allowed and threatened to hog-tie the government in endless red tape. He said the legislation should be strengthened before a final vote in Congress.
"What we should be doing here is lifting the 1991 ban, which was a national disgrace. But the text approved by the Senate doesn't represent any advance," he said. "I'm not saying it's a step back but it leaves us in exactly the same position."
The draft legislation approved by an 11-8 vote by the Senate constitutional committee was also unlikely to satisfy Colombia's critics in the United States.
If the draft survives a required seven more congressional votes, it would open the door to extradition in some isolated cases. But it would not be retroactive, ensuring that the Cali cartel drug lords jailed last year, the target of a U.S. extradition request in June, will never see U.S. courts.
Furthermore, the legislation would prevent the extradition of criminals who voluntarily surrendered to Colombian justice and forbid their handover if they risked receiving stiffer sentences abroad than those they would face at home.
One of the main arguments by U.S. authorities, who have long pressed for the extradition of drug traffickers, is that Colombian justice is too lenient and convicted drug lords continue running their criminal empires from behind bars.
Drug lords led by Pablo Escobar, the late and notoriously violent leader of the Medellin cartel, waged a nationwide campaign of bombings, kidnappings and assassinations in the late 1980s and early 1990s to force the government to impose the constitutional ban on extradition passed by Congress in 1991. Memories of the thousands of people who died in that campaign of terror are still fresh.
Death threats against extradition supporters have been scrawled in the last week on walls around Cali, home to the powerful syndicate that edged out Escobar's organization to become the world's major cocaine supplier.
A group calling itself "Colombians For Peace" issued pamphlets reminding people of the bloodbath of the 1980s because of the extradition issue.  "Today that situation is once again threatening Colombia. Avoiding it depends on the government, congress and our judges," it said.
President Ernesto Samper, dogged by allegations of his own ties to drug lords, has said the extradition debate was poorly timed and insisted that priority should be given to his own proposal to introduce stiffer penalties for drug crimes.
Colombian truckers began climbing back behind the wheel early on Friday after their leaders signed a deal with the government to end their crippling 11-day old strike.
Colombian Truck Drivers' Association (ACC) head Javier Suarez said the accord granted an immediate 16 percent raise in cargo freight rates with the promise of another inflation-linked increase at the start of next year -- short of the instant 30 percent hike originally demanded.
The breakthrough in talks between the independent association, the Transport and Interior Ministries and private transport companies came late on Thursday, a day after Interior Minister Horacio Serpa threatened to use police and the military to help smash the nationwide strike by clearing road blocks and forcing truckers back to work.
"This is a partial solution to our problems but I think it will be good for our members. This doesn't mean truckers will now be making any profits but at least we won't be operating at a loss like at present," Suarez told Reuters in a telephone interview. "We have also agreed to set up a joint committee that will look at future transport policies."
Key sectors of the economy, primarily those linked to import and export, had issued stiff criticism of the transport paralysis earlier in the day but heaved a collective sigh of relief with news of the agreement.
But the lifting of the strike seems unlikely to offer an instant fix for the crisis-hit coffee sector, which has seen 250,000 60-kg sacks of coffee -- a quarter of that promised for October delivery -- delayed by the truckers' action.
Earlier in the week, private coffee exporters said many would be forced to default on this month's delivery contracts even if the stoppage ended before the weekend because of the backlog of coffee in port and in warehouses.
In addition to the raise in freight cargo rates, a joint committee of truckers, industry representatives and Transport Ministry officials will be created to look at other concerns highlighted by the drivers' association, Transport Minister Carlos Hernan Lopez said.
These include the cost of highway tolls, the price of operating licenses and associated taxes and maximum load restrictions on cargoes.
Part of Thursday night's agreement means the Transport Ministry will send a communique to transport companies ordering them to lift unilateral bans on contracting the services of drivers operating trucks more than 11 years old where these are currently in force.
Suarez said he did not think the deal hammered out would have an impact on inflation, already running above the 18 percent originally targetted at this point in the year by the government.
"Hopefully we will not see any gains in inflation or the cost of this accord being passed on to the consumers because the intermediaries, the transport companies, will be absorbing the cost of it by taking a cut in their profit margins," he said.
The overall cost of the strike is difficult to calculate but certainly runs into many million dollars. Colombia's main Pacific coast port, Buenaventura, estimated its losses at more than $20 million a day because no cargo was coming in or out.
Colombia's Foreign Relations Ministry said on Thursday it would give its "fullest attention" to recent accusations that oil giant British Petroleum was linked to political killings, but denied any official investigation was underway.
In a statement, the ministry said: "The allegations made (against BP) merit the government's fullest attention. But in the absence of judicial investigations it is irresponsible to give credit to such claims."
Attempts by the Colombian government to clear BP of the allegations fuelled new controversy on Thursday. Spokesmen at the chief prosecutor's office and for the attorney general said they had opened inquiries into a series of gross human rights abuses in the eastern oil-producing provinces of Casanare and Arauca, documented in a 1995 multi-agency report.
The report, a copy of which was shown to Reuters, blamed the military and paramilitary groups for seven murders since 1991 in Casanare, the centre of BP's Colombia operations, and another 17 in Arauca, Occidental Petroleum's base.
Neither company was mentioned by name but the report blamed oil companies for generating huge social upheaval in the region, stating: "The security forces are frequently operating outside the law and abusing peasants ... Oil exploration and production has generated harmful environmental and socioeconomic impacts and has provoked crime, sales of drugs and an increase in prostitution and begging."
In a statement last week, BP said it paid a "war tax" to the government, which was partly used for the army's counterinsurgency campaign against leftist guerrillas who regularly target foreign oil companies. It also said it provided non-lethal aid to the army and denied any links to irregular, or paramilitary forces.
In recent months British newspapers, based on first-hand accounts, alleged BP was behind the wave of killings carried out by right-wing death squads and the military in Casanare and had provided photos to the army of those community leaders opposed to its oil plans.
The backing for BP, Colombia's biggest single foreign investor, in a report that also praised its social contribution to the country, came the day after the government announced it would not sweeten the terms of its oil contract, which it complained was not profitable.
"We are investigating some of these accusations of extra-judicial killings and massacres contained in the 1995 report. It is certain the chief prosecutor's office is doing the same," said a source at the attorney general's office.
In a speech on Thursday, President Ernesto Samper rejected the European Parliament's recent stiff criticism of Colombia's human rights record.
"It is not true the Colombian security forces have developed an emergency strategy, characterised by aid to paramilitary groups, extra-judicial killings, torture and disappearances," he said at an official event in Bogota.
Moves toward just-in-time roasting and savage cuts in coffee inventories in consumer countries will force exporters, traders and processors to resort to sophisticated financial mechanisms to offset price volatility, the head of the International Coffee Organization said.
ICO chief Celsius Lodder predicted booming growth in risk management measures such as options, futures and secondary instruments and said they would become key in influencing short and medium term coffee prices.  
They will also replace more traditional methods of building up stocks, and other physical strategies, as a buffer to sudden swings in the market, he said.
Meanwhile, in some producer countries, growers may find themselves bearing an increasing responsibility for storing the crop, thereby seeing their costs pushed up.
"Risk management, similar to an insurance contract, will become an increasingly important instrument for exporters, traders and processors," Lodder said in a speech organized by Bogota's Los Andes University.  
"Growers and growers' cooperatives will have to take on greater responsibilities for storing inventories. This will push up costs, reduce their cash flow and mean much of the stocks will be stored in remote areas, delaying dispatch," the coffee chief said.
Despite the grim message that shifting trends in consumer countries could force their costs up higher, Lodder did offer a ray of hope for Colombian growers, already hard hit by the strengthening peso and the high cost of credit.  
Lodder highlighted the growing opportunity for niche marketing of specialist coffees in traditional markets where consumer palates are becoming more sophisticated even though the overall demand in those areas may have stagnated.
He also talked up prospects of new markets opening in the former Soviet Union and China. Colombia's President Ernesto Samper, and his official delegation, returned from the Far East at the end of last week. His itinerary included China and both he and his Foreign Minister Maria Emma Mejia were upbeat about the chance of selling the Colombian bean to the country's 1.3 billion-strong population.  
During the visit to Beijing and Shanghai, Mejia calculated that if Colombia could sell one cup of coffee a day to every inhabitant of China, the Communist nation would absorb Colombia's entire annual harvest.
National Coffee Growers' Federation chief Jorge Cardenas did his own calculations and worked out that Colombia would have to double its coffee harvest if it was looking to meet Mejia's target.
In his speech, Lodder recognized the ICO's changing role and agreed it was no realistic for it to adopt interventionist strategies in a globalized free market.  
"The patterns of economic and political cooperation seen in the 1960s have been replaced by a new  model, perhaps more realistic and certainly different. There's no consensus for a return to intervention but the ICO is a dynamic organization and it must reflect the current situation and not be constrained by its former role," he said.
"I believe the ICO must remain flexible and look for the broadest possible consensus and build on the foundations of our cooperation with trade experts."
He added that the ICO would concentrate on looking for specific solutions to specific problems as they arose throughout the coffee sector either in production or marketing.
Meanwhile, Colombia's transport system got back to normal this week after a crippling 11-day strike by truckers, which ended with an agreement early last Friday.
There has, nevertheless, been a significant delay in coffee deliveries and Cardenas forecast that about 150,000 60-kg sacks of coffee promised for October delivery would not in fact reach buyers until November.
-- Bogota newsroom 571 610 7944.
The Colombian government this week may sidestep congressional stalling and use special powers to force through stiffer anti-drug laws, Justice Minister Carlos Medellin said.
In comments to local media over the weekend, he also called for the draft laws -- which include confiscating drug barons' ill-gotten gains -- to be retroactive, applying to traffickers already jailed.
The retroactivity issue has sparked controversy in parallel moves to end Colombia's constitutional ban on extradition, currently under debate in the senate.
Former justice minister Enrique Parejo believes lawmakers may welcome the decree since it would remove them from the line of fire in any violent backlash by drug traffickers.
"If we don't do something soon then it could be too late. If congress does not make headway on the confiscation (of drug traffickers' property) then I will be looking for the faculty to introduce the legal measures," Medellin told the conservative El Nuevo Siglo newspaper.
President Ernesto Samper submitted the tougher anti-drug proposals to congress in July with a firm eye on winning back U.S. certification as an ally in the drugs war, which was withdrawn in March. He has sent repeated requests to legislators to speed up debate, but sessions continue to be dogged by lengthy political wrangling and poor attendance, which has left committees without a quorum.
If the congress fails to pass the measures, the government is expected to announce a decision by Thursday to introduce the new anti-drug laws by decree. But political and legal analysts say the move could raise constitutional issues about whether the government has the right to override congress.
"The government wants to legislate by decree because it fears decertification by the United States again next year, which could spark a fresh crisis which it may not recover from," Parejo said in a telephone interview.
"It may be a relief to many congressmen who have links with drug traffickers because there are real signs that the cartels are once again preparing to unleash a new war."
In the 1980s and early 1990s, the late Pablo Escobar, head of the once-mighty Medellin drug cartel, waged a war of bombings, assassinations and kidnaps against the state in a successful bid to get extradition banned.
The specter of a similar terror campaign is again looming after a series of bombings in recents weeks, including one defused by police which had been planted by the so-called Movement for National Sovereignty in the centre of Cali.
Colombia moved a step closer to lifting its five-year ban on extradition but backlash from drug traffickers began to be felt on Wednesday as a senator fled abroad to escape death threats.
In the second of eight scheduled congressional votes late on Tuesday, the Senate approved a draft law to overturn the constitutional ban on sending criminals to stand trial in foreign courts. But proposals in Congress to introduce stiffer anti-drug laws at home, including confiscation of drug barons' properties and longer jail terms, have stagnated.
This has led to a warning from the government, eager to win back U.S. certification as an ally in the drug war, that it may bypass Congress and push through some of the measures by decree, which could trigger a constitutional crisis.
Meanwhile, signs were growing that Colombia may be on the verge of a new terror campaign, mirroring the one waged by the late Pablo Escobar, head of the Medellin drug cartel, that forced the original extradition ban in 1991.
Police last week defused a powerful bomb in a vehicle parked outside a chemical plant owned by relatives of Senator Claudia Blum in Colombia's second largest city Cali, home to the cartel said to supply 80 percent of world cocaine. In another incident, a small bomb exploded outside government offices in Bogota.
Blum and other lawmakers in the forefront of efforts to lift the extradition ban and introduce tougher anti-drug laws have received regular death threats since mid-October. In a letter to congress on Tuesday, Blum requested a leave of absence and a spokeswoman at her Bogota office said on Wednesday that she had left for the United States.
"I understand she left because of the threats she has received. Her departure was rather quick and unexpected. She has gone for an indefinite period," the spokeswoman said.
Justice Minister Carlos Medellin welcomed Tuesday's senate vote, describing it as a "clear message that all political institutions are committed to strengthening our legal system".
But chief prosecutor Alfonso Valdivieso, an anti-drug crusader and a favourite of Washington, is deeply dissatisfied with the draft law to renew extradition. Echoing calls by the United States, he believes the law must be retroactive.
Valdivieso has also charged that the extradition law, if approved in its present form, would be virtually meaningless, since it would not allow for criminals to be extradited if they faced stiffer penalties abroad than those in force in Colombia, which the United States complains are too lenient.
The current bill would dash U.S. hopes of winning the extradition of the Rodriguez Orejuela brothers, the kingpins of the Cali cartel captured last year.
Two Germans, thought to be members of a Colombia leftist guerrilla group, were arrested in the northwest of the country early on Sunday as they tried to smuggle a kidnap victim out of the country, police said.
They were seized at Rionegro international airport, near Medellin, at 1 am local time (0600 GMT) as they tried to bundle a third German, Brigitte Schoene, the wife of a former BASF Chemicals director snatched on Aug. 15, on to a charter plane.
A list of 83 international guerrilla organisations together with a number of false passports were found in the bags of the two detainees -- a 54-year-old man and a 36-year-old woman -- police said.
"I would dare to say that these (German) citizens we captured are the international finance heads and advisers of the National Liberation Army (ELN)," Gen. Alfredo Salgado, head of the anti-kidnap police in nortwest Antioquia province, told reporters.
The ELN is Colombia's second largest rebel group. It is notorious for its attacks on oil infrastructure and on multi- national companies and their employees.
Gen. Salgado said the two Germans in initial questioning claimed they were carrying out an international peace mission and merely mediating the release of Schoene, seized from her home in Prados de Llanogrande, Antioquia, along with her five-year-old son and chauffeur. Both her son and the chauffeur were released hours after being snatched.
Salgado gave no details of the other guerrilla groups named in the documents seized from the couple and was unable to say if either had been linked to the German urban guerrilla groups of the 1970s.
The German Embassy in Bogota declined to comment on the arrests. Names found on the man's forged ID papers were Norbert Schroder, of Munich, and Jurgen Seidel. The woman's papers gave her name as Silvia Schroder and Isabel Seidel.
The man is also believed to have played a prominent role in the kidnap of a British, Danish and German engineer in Antioquia province earlier this year, Gov. Alvaro Uribe said. The release of the three in return for an undisclosed ransom, paid without the knowledge of the Colombian authorities, led to an angry exchange between Uribe and the German and British embassies.
In comments to reporters on Sunday, Uribe said he had spoken to Schone after her release and that she had confirmed she had been held by the ELN and complained of pyschological torture.
Colombia is the kidnap capital of the world with one person abducted every 2-1/2 hours, according to security experts. About half the kidnaps are attributed to the country's rebel armies.
A former German secret agent and his wife were formally charged with abduction on Wednesday after their bid to smuggle a rebel kidnap victim out of Colombia backfired at the weekend.
The charges, announced by the chief prosecutor's office, brought another twist to a brewing scandal that has set the Colombian government at odds with German diplomats and businessmen over clandestine payments to kidnappers.
Police and Colombian officials accuse Werner Mauss, 56, of being an international member of the country's National Liberation Army (ELN) guerrilla force, or a mercenary negotiating the release of abducted foreigners in return for a cut of the ransom.
In a statement issued in Bonn on Wednesday, German government official Peter Hausmann said the government was "fully informed" of the former state security agent's mission and welcomed such "unconventional methods to rescue Germans from life and death situations."
Mauss and Silvia Schroder, 36, were seized at Rionegro airport near Medellin early on Sunday as they tried to bundle a third German, Brigitte Schoene, the wife of a former BASF Chemicals executive, aboard a private charter plane bound for Venezuela. Schoene was kidnapped in mid-August by the ELN, which had demanded $6 million for her release.
In its press release, the chief prosecutor's office referred to Mauss and his wife as Juergen and Isabel Seidel -- one of their many aliases. The couple were remanded in custody.
An executive secretary of Siemens-Colombia said on Wednesday she had hired the plane that Mauss was to use for his getaway on the orders of a top industrialist formerly based in Bogota.
Security experts say Colombia -- home to Latin America's longest-running guerrilla war -- is swarming with foreign mercenaries carrying out shadowy undercover missions as kidnappings reportedly run at almost one every 2-1/2 hours.
"Many multinationals are hiring so-called security advisers for kidnap, terrorist and extortion situations but these are simply mercenaries and adventurers willing to make pacts with kidnappers and guerrillas," said private security consultant Col. Luis Enrique La Rotta.
Parliamentarian Guillermo Martinez, a retired air force officer, told Reuters he was sure dozens of foreign mercenaries like Mauss had poured into Colombia to carry out hostage rescue missions.
"Regardless of whether the Colombian authorities can or cannot control the (kidnap) situation it is totally unacceptable for foreign companies to fly in mercenaries to do this type of work," he said.
Colombia denied on Monday that its army was linked to paramilitary death squads and said the world should focus instead on the "cursed alliance" between leftist guerrillas and drug traffickers.
"Narco-guerrilla groups are heading a disinformation campaign throughout the world. ... The United States and the world must wake up to the new threat posed by the cursed alliance between drug traffickers, guerrillas and international mafias," Defence Minister Juan Carlos Esguerra said.
The comments were part of a fiery response to a report issued in Bogota by New York-based Human Rights Watch.
The organisation's report, titled "Colombia's Killer Networks," concluded, "The military has not only created paramilitary groups but allows virtually all of them to carry out political killings when it serves a common purpose, ridding the country of perceived guerrilla support."
The rights group, citing confidential defence documents, said U.S. military advisers fuelled the surge in death squads after helping restructure Colombia's gathering of military intelligence in 1990.
The organisation's legal adviser, Jamie Fellner, alleged that top army commanders Gen. Harold Bedoya and Gen. Manuel Jose Bonett were "accomplices" or tolerated such groups in a systematic "dirty war" on political dissidents.
Human Rights Watch echoed calls by London-based Amnesty International last month demanding the immediate suspension of U.S. and European military aid and arms sales to Colombia until human rights violations were curbed.
Human Rights Watch estimated that much of the $322 million in U.S. military aid to Colombia since 1989 had been handed out to counterinsurgency battalions accused of rights violations.
A U.S. State Department spokesman said in Washington on Monday there were no plans for tighter checks.
The Colombian Army was dramatically humiliated when the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia overran a jungle post in southern Colombia on Aug. 30, killing 27 soldiers and taking 60 prisoners.
"These soldiers are being kept in cells reminiscent of the infamous tiger cages seen in Vietnam. Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch would do well to investigate those abuses instead of inventing new charges," Esguerra said.
British Petroleum Co Plc gave a lukewarm reception Tuesday to a Colombian proposal that would see it losing almost half the oil-rich Piedemonte field in return for sweeter contract terms on much of the remainder.
The proposal, outlined by Mines and Energy Minister Rodrigo Villamizar to reporters Monday, is the latest twist in a long- running saga that has seen BP trying to boost the profit margins on its Piedemonte operations while Colombia seeks to sidestep criticism that it is allowing multinationals to call the shots.  
Piedemonte, in Colombia's eastern plains is estimated to contain between 600 million and one billion barrels of crude oil and condensates.
But so far BP has only pinpointed three hydrocarbon formations -- Volcanera, Pauto and Florena -- accounting for about 15 percent of the total area, arguing that current overheads do not make it profitable to explore the rest.  
If Villamizar's complex proposal were accepted, a BP spokesman said it would require the company to hand back rights to the 85 percent of the Piedemonte field that is still virtually unexplored, with the guarantee that state oil company Ecopetrol would re-award BP half that area under improved contract terms.
The spokesman for BP's Colombian subsidiary, BP Exploration Co (Colombia) Ltd, told Reuters: "This is an interesting proposal but we regret that this solution would mean losing access to what is a large proportion of the Piedemonte field."  
He conceded it may be a possible way forward but indicated that it represented little more than an opening gambit in the search for a new working formula between BP, Colombia's single largest foreign investor, and Ecopetrol.
Under the so-called "sliding scale" terms of the existing Piedemonte association contract, profits are divided equally between BP and Ecopetrol while production remains below 60 million barrels. Ecopetrol's share rises as production increases, topping out at 76 percent when output hits 150 million barrels.  
BP had been pressing for the entire Piedemonte contract to be renegotiated using the new-style Factor R, which takes account of investment and operating costs in individual fields to ensure adequate profit margins for foreign companies.
But those demands were rejected by Villamizar last month following a congressional debate. Villamizar's new proposal, however, would open the way for a Factor R contract to be drawn up on that area of the Piedemonte field which BP would cede and then win back. Ecopetrol would then operate the rest of field itself or contract it to other private oil companies.  
Gustavo Triana, a senior official of the powerful USO oil workers' union, known for its fierce opposition to multinationals, said the union would not readily welcome any "underhand deal" that granted better terms to BP after the government had said it would not do so.
Thousands of demonstrators thronged Bogota's streets on Sunday calling for an end to the crime wave that has turned Colombia into the kidnap capital of the world.
At least 1,100 people have been abducted this year -- more than half of those by the warring factions in Colombia's simmering internal conflict -- according to event organisers.
National Police chief Rosso Jose Serrano, who took part in the first march of its kind in Colombia, saw it as a direct challenge to leftist guerrillas, who fill their war chests with ransoms. Scores of others clutched photos in silent tribute to their loved ones -- kidnapped by criminals.
"When you're abducted, you become like the living dead -- it strips you of your soul. Today's march is a sign that civil society is saying no to kidnap," said Francisco Santos, founder of Pais Libre, an independent foundation that counsels kidnap victims' families and which organised Sunday's march.
Santos, part of the family that runs Colombia's leading newspaper, was kidnapped six years ago as part of a campaign unleashed by the late drug lord Pablo Escobar and his Medellin cartel.
In a move timed to coincide with Sunday's protest, one of Colombia's most-feared right-wing paramilitary leaders released the mothers of two guerrilla chieftains in the northwest.
The women were snatched in a wave of retaliatory kidnappings carried out by Carlos Castano's paramilitary gang in the last six months in a bid to persuade the guerrilla chief to halt its campaign of abductions.
An estimated 15,000 to 20,000 people took part in the march. Organisers put the figure at twice that.
Norberto Garcia, 62, tearfully watched the march and subsequent rally in the historic Plaza Bolivar square. Almost a year to the day his 14-year-old daughter Andrea disappeared on her way to school in a working-class district of the capital.
"When your child is kidnapped it is like your own life ends. It's the hardest thing for a parent to suffer," Garcia said.
Only last Wednesday, the country was rocked by the kidnap and murder of seven-year-old schoolboy Victor Alvarez in southwest Colombia. His corpse was dumped on the doorstep of his family home when his parents failed to pay a $10,000 ransom.
But in a country where even conservative estimates put the number of abductions at three a day, the tragedy of young Victor, of Papayan, was almost forgotten by Sunday.
Anti-kidnap czar Alberto Villamizar was jeered by crowds as he delivered a message from President Ernesto Samper pledging to crack down on kidnapping.
The catcalls were preceded by chants of "Serrano will save the motherland", in support of the no-nonsense chief of National Police, who heads the fight against kidnapping and drug-trafficking.
Thousands of demonstrators thronged Bogota's streets on Sunday calling for an end to the crime wave that has turned Colombia into the kidnap capital of the world.
A small bomb exploded minutes before the march began about 100 yards (90 metres) from where demonstrators gathered but did not cause any injuries, police said. A spokesman said the device contained just a few ounces (under 100 grams) of explosive and was probably simply intended to sow panic.
At least 1,100 people have been abducted this year -- more than half of those by warring factions in Colombia's simmering internal conflict -- according to march organisers.
National Police chief Rosso Jose Serrano, who took part in the first march of its kind in Colombia, saw it as a direct challenge to leftist guerrillas, who fill their war chests with ransoms. Scores of others clutched photos in silent tribute to their loved ones -- kidnapped by criminals.
"When you're abducted you become like the living dead -- it strips you of your soul. Today's march is a sign that civil society is saying no to kidnap," said Francisco Santos, founder of Pais Libre, an independent foundation that counsels kidnap victims' families and which organised Sunday's march.
Santos, part of the family that runs Colombia's leading newspaper, was kidnapped six years ago as part of a campaign unleashed by the late drug lord Pablo Escobar and his Medellin cartel.
In a move timed to coincide with Sunday's protest, one of Colombia's most-feared right-wing paramilitary leaders released the mothers of two guerrilla chieftains in the northwest.
The women were snatched in a wave of retaliatory kidnappings carried out by Carlos Castano's paramilitary gang in the last six months in a bid to persuade the guerrilla chief to halt its campaign of abductions.
An estimated 15,000 to 20,000 people took part in the march. Organisers put the figure at twice that.
Norberto Garcia, 62, tearfully watched the march and subsequent rally in the historic Plaza Bolivar square. Almost a year ago to the day his 14-year-old daughter Andrea disappeared on her way to school in a working-class district of the capital.
"When your child is kidnapped it is like your own life ends. It's the hardest thing for a parent to suffer," Garcia said.
Only last Wednesday, the country was rocked by the kidnap and murder of seven-year-old schoolboy Victor Alvarez in southwest Colombia. His corpse was dumped on the doorstep of his family home when his parents failed to pay common criminals a $10,000 ransom.
But in a country where even conservative estimates put the number of abductions at three a day, the tragedy of young Victor, of Popayan, was almost forgotten by Sunday.
Anti-kidnap czar Alberto Villamizar was jeered by crowds as he delivered a message from President Ernesto Samper pledging to crack down on kidnapping.
The catcalls were preceeded by chants of "Serrano will save the motherland", in support of the no-nonsense chief of National Police, who heads the fight against kidnapping and drug-trafficking.
Leaders of Colombia's three largest labour federations said on Monday they would not sign a new wage and price control pact with bosses and the government, and warned 1997 could be a year of serious social unrest.
They condemned the annual social pact, first introduced by President Ernesto Samper in 1995, as a way of forging ahead with neoliberal policies at the expense of workers, and said such a model would fuel political polarisation in 1997.
"The social pact reflects neoliberal logic and aims to pay workers less in order to make industry more competitive. The pact is a corporatist tactic that does not serve the interests of the people," said Luis Eduardo Garzon, chairman of the Unitary Workers' Confederation (CUT), the country's largest labour organisation.
Following internal elections in November, left-wingers led by Communist Party members like Garzon seized overall control of the CUT from Liberal and Conservative Party moderates, who had bowed to previous government demands to sign a pact.
This year's pact agreed to a 19.5 percent wage hike for workers based on an inflation target of 17 percent. But while salaries were kept within strict limits, the cost of goods and services spiralled, pushing inflation to almost 21 percent in the first 11 months of 1996 -- a 1.5 percent drop in real wages in the year to date.
The central bank last week set a 1997 inflation target of 18 percent. The government, employers and union leaders were due to meet on Wednesday for another round of discussions on the 1997 social pact.
"The government has put the economy on a war footing to combat crime and subversion. If that continues I think there's a grave risk of further polarisation of political forces in 1997 and we will be in for a very difficult time," Garzon said.
Cervulo Bautista, of the general secretariat of the Christian Democrat-influenced General Confederation of Democratic Workers (CGTD), also warned of worsening labour relations in 1997.
"We don't want to be accused of trying to bring down Samper's governmment but if the situation doesn't change we could be calling on the working classes for a nationwide stoppage," he said.
The CUT, with 600,000 affiliates, and the CGTD, with about 300,000 members, said they would be looking for minimum wage increases of 27 percent to make up for the real term erosion of salaries this year coupled with a productivity premium.
The 200,000-strong Confederation of Colombian Workers (CTC), normally loyal to Samper's Liberal Party, said it would be looking for wage rises of close to 30 percent.
Labour Minister Orlando Obregon was confident a social pact will be signed by Jan. 1, a spokeswoman said. About 35 percent of the Colombian labour force is unionized.
At least 23 people were murdered in attacks in central and northern Colombia, including an entire family hacked to death with machetes, police said on Thursday.
Unidentified axe and machete-wielding assailants killed three children, their mother and grandparents early on Thursday in San Miguel de Sema, in central Boyaca province, police chief Col. Humberto Prieto said.
"We're investigating to see if these killings are related to the death of two other relatives several years ago. Early indications suggest they were murdered for personal reasons -- a revenge attack," Prieto said.
Boyoca is known as a stronghold of right-wing paramilitary groups but Prieto said San Miguel was not affected by right-wing or leftist political violence.
In northern Sucre province, the bullet-ridden bodies of 17 peasants were found scattered in four isolated areas near the town of Tolu Viejo on Thursday morning, police said.
"We're still looking at all the facts. The province has been hard hit by subversion," said Benjamin Irragori, regional head of the state security service DAS.
He said two fronts of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) were active in the area.
Sucre has seen a recent rash of attacks by right-wing paramilitary death squads. One television report, which quoted a police source as saying the leading suspects in the massacre were rightists, showed some of the dead with their hands tied behind their backs.
Almost 40 people died in a wave of killings, attributed to paramilitary groups, across northern Colombia two weeks ago. Last month, the country's paramilitary forces held a summit in which they pledged to step up their war against leftist guerrillas and rebel sympathisers.
In a separate attack in the city of Cucuta, in northeast Norte de Santander province, a Roman Catholic priest was gunned down by two unidentified killers on Wednesday evening, police said.
He was the third priest killed in two months -- a sign, some clergymen say, that they are increasingly caught in the crossfire of guerrilla and paramilitary violence, which has surged in recent months.
"The basic problem is not the lack of respect for priests but the total disregard for the value of human life," said Monsignor Juan Francisco Sarasti, vice president of Colombia's Episcopal Conference.
Colombia's largest guerrilla army said on Wednesday it would not free 60 captive government troops unless a huge swathe of southern jungle was demilitarized.
President Ernesto Samper said on Monday he would honour his pledge to clear 5,400 square miles (14,000 sq km) of Caqueta province but rejected demands by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) to clear three military bases in the zone.
He urged the rebels to make a goodwill gesture and release their prisoners before Christmas under terms he set last week.
The FARC decision, relayed in a communique from Mexico City, is a new hitch in the process to secure the release of the soldiers, who were captured three months ago when guerrillas overran a base in neighbouring Putumayo province.
"The FARC southern bloc maintains unchanged its original proposal (for the demilitarized zone) with the aim of offering adequate conditions to protect the lives of the 60 compatriots," the communique said.
The FARC's Aug. 30 attack on the Putumayo base, in which 27 soldiers died in addition to those taken prisoner, signalled the start of one of the bloodiest guerrilla offensives in decades.
Army commanders, already humiliated by the initial military defeat, have been loath to allow the FARC to score political points by dictating its own terms for the troop handover, military analysts said.
Samper pressured top brass into accepting a deal to clear a 5,400-square-mile (14,000 sq km) area of Caqueta for 10 days starting on Friday to make way for the troop handover, but was unlikely to be able to wring further concessions out of them, the analysts said.
The president and the military said they would not pull troops out of barracks in Montanitas, Cartagena del Chaira and Remolinos del Caguan for fear of losing grip on rampant drug trafficking operations in the region.
The FARC said the towns lie on strategic entry routes into and out of the proposed demilitarized zone.
Another member of Colombia's main oil workers' union was arrested on terrorist charges, a union leader said Sunday on the eve a meeting to set the start date for a strike that could paralyze the industry.
The capture of Edgar Riano in Huila province Saturday came after the arrest of 12 others Thursday -- 10 of them from the USO oil union.
All are accused of carrying out dynamite attacks on the country's oil pipelines and of links to the National Liberation Army (ELN), the country's second largest guerrilla force. The chief prosecutor's office was unavailable for comment on the latest detention.
USO head Hernando Hernandez said last Thursday the union would fix the "zero hour" for the start of an indefinite strike to protest the wave of arrests at an extraordinary assembly Monday. The action is also to oppose government plans for what the union sees as the creeping privatization of state-run oil company Ecopetrol, Hernandez said.
Following a merger between the 5,700-strong USO and smaller oil workers' associations, the strike could spread to the private sector, including foreign multinationals operating in Colombia.
USO leaders were due to meet Colombian Interior Minister Horacio Serpa Sunday evening to discuss the arrest of members and the planned walkout. The government seems likely to declare an oil workers' strike illegal on the grounds that it is affecting a key sector of the economy.
Mines and Energy Minister Rodrigo Villamizar said Friday that Ecopetrol had enough fuel reserves to meet demand for 19 days and said any shortfalls in domestic supply could be made up by increasing imports in the event of a USO strike.
A 24-hour stoppage by USO workers in mid-October paralyzed pumping -- 350,000 barrels a day -- along the country's two main oil pipelines for the first time ever.
In a separate incident in the oil town of Barrancabermeja, two unidentified assailants blasted local USO official Gilberto Carreno at close range with a shotgun and wounded as he left a bar Saturday morning.
USO social services secretary Gustavo Triana the motives for the attack were unclear. Members of USO, known for its fiercely nationalistic stance, have frequently been targeted by right-wing paramilitaries who accuse the union of backing the ELN.
Colombia's main oil union postponed a decision to launch an indefinite strike in protest against the arrest of 11 members on terrorism charges after top-level talks with the government Sunday night, leaders said.
The 5,700-strong USO union, known for its fiercely nationalistic stance, had been due to set a start date for a crippling stoppage at a general assembly Monday. Industrial action would have begun "soon after" Monday's meeting, union head Hernando Hern ndez said last week.
Colombian lawmakers met on Thursday in an 11th hour bid to rescue a bill that would strip drug barons of their fortunes and help avoid U.S. economic sanctions.
An 11-member conference committee was debating whether to override the lower house of Congress and empower the government to seize drug-related assets accumulated over the last 20 years.
In a narrow 59-57 vote late Tuesday, the House of Representatives rejected the 20-year time limit, previously approved by the Senate, ruling instead that criminal assets could only be seized if they had been amassed after 1991.
The conference committee meeting was convened under intense pressure from President Ernesto Samper and senior ministers. They condemned the lower house's decision as a "virtual amnesty" and raised fears that the United States would impose economic sanctions on Colombia in retaliation for its failure to crack down on billionaire drug lords.
The committee is widely expected to toe the government line and send the bill back to a plenary session of Congress, recommending that the 20-year time limit be reincorporated.
Colombia's business community has taken an unusually outspoken approach and been vociferous in calls to Congress to approve an asset forfeiture law with a 20-year clause.
The United States decertified Colombia as an ally in the drug war last March. Four months later, it withdrew Samper's U.S. entry visa, citing allegations that he financed his 1994 election campaign with drug cartel cash. Foreign Relations Minister Maria Emma Mejia said earlier this week there is a very real prospect of U.S. economic sanctions starting next year.
Other anti-drug legislation that the United States has demanded, such as stiffer sentencing and the reintroduction extradition, has been watered down or sunk in Congress in recent weeks.
Colombian lawmakers bowed to intense government pressure on Thursday and put the bite back into a bill to strip drug barons of their ill-gotten gains.
If the legislation survives a congressional plenary vote -- likely to be plain sailing after a stormy passage -- it could go some way to appeasing the United States, which has threatened to slap economic sanctions on Colombia for its perceived failure to crack down on billionaire drug barons.
A conference committee hauled the asset forfeiture bill back from the brink by reversing a decision by the lower house which would have taken the teeth out of the law.
In a narrow vote on Tuesday, the House of Representatives rejected the provision, previously approved in the Senate, that would empower the government to seize drug-related assets accumulated over the last 20 years.  The House ruled the law could only be retroactive to 1991, leaving much of the property amassed by the jailed Cali Cartel kingpins, estimated at more than $50 billion, untouched.
Justice Minister Carlos Medellin, who like a handful of other top ministers spent much of the day lobbying key lawmakers in the halls of Congress, was buoyed by the committee's decision.
"Now we just have to see if the plenary session of the Senate and Chamber of Representatives approves the decision. But I don't think there will be any problem," he said.
Colombia's business community also heaved a sigh of relief. It had campaigned for Congress to approve the 20-year time limit in a series of pleas over the last two days. Key export sectors of the economy are likely to be hardest hit if U.S. sanctions are imposed.
Even though the asset forfeiture law now seems to have reached high ground, the road back into the good books of the United States still promises to be rocky.
Political analysts agree there is little chance of Colombia regaining certification as a U.S. ally in the drug war, which it lost last March, even if it escapes threatened sanctions.
Other anti-drug legislation which the United States has demanded, such as stiffer sentencing and the reintroduction extradition, have been watered down or sunk in Congress in recent weeks.
British Petroleum Co Plc considers its Piedemonte prospect in eastern Colombia "fundamental" to its worldwide operations despite drilling problems and wrangles over the exploitation contract, a top company official said Thursday.
John Doust, executive director of BP's local subsidiary, British Petroleum Exploration (Colombia) Ltd, predicted the field, still at the test stage, could come on stream by the end of 1999.
He estimated the total cost of developing the field, estimated to contain between 600 million and one billion barrels of crude and condensates, could run to about $2.2 billion, some of which would be shared by state oil company Ecopetrol.
"The oil project currently under way in the Piedemonte is fundamental for the worldwide organisation of the BP group," Doust said in a speech to journalists.
His recognition of the strategic importance of the 287,000 hectare block, in which BP has pinpointed three promising hydrocarbon formations after exploring just 15 percent of the total area, once again raises the question how BP will push the Colombian government for sweeter contract terms.
BP, Colombia's single largest foreign investor, argues that given tough drilling conditions, the terms of its so-called sliding scale association contract with Ecopetrol makes it unprofitable to exploit the field.
Under the existing contract, Ecopetrol's share of the profits rise as production increases from 50 percent to a maximum 76 percent.
BP has been pushing for a so-called R Factor contract -- which the Colombian government has so far denied -- which would take account of investment and operating costs to ensure adequate profit margins.
"We understand the uncertainty of the (Piedemonte) issue and the nature of the debate have caused uneasiness amongst many people... Let us keep in mind that we are truly seeking to achieve a break-even point and a platform of confidence for BP so that we can operate in an internationally competitive economic position," Doust said.
Last month, Colombia's Mines and Energy Minister Rodrigo Villamizar proposed BP should hand back rights to the 85 percent of the block that is virtually unexplored with the guarantee that Ecopetrol would re-award BP half that area under R Factor conditions at a later date and contract out the remainder to other companies.
Doust said BP was "seriously considering" the proposal. It is understood, however, that BP would be loath to surrender the rights to almost 50 percent of a block with huge potential under the current offer on the table.
BP has recently been hit by allegations of indirect links to right-wing paramilitary death squads that have assassinated social leaders close to its operations in eastern Colombia.
Doust blamed the accusations on a campaign to discredit the company and repeated earlier statements that he had invited the country's chief prosecutor to carry out an in-depth investigation into the claims.
A powerful car bomb exploded in the northwest city of Medellin early on Monday, killing one woman and injuring at least 15 other people, police chief Gen. Alfredo Salgado said.
About 120 pounds (50 kg) of dynamite was packed into a minibus and detonated outside the house of Juan Gomez Martinez, a regional newspaper editor and former provincial governor.
Four unidentified gunmen opened fire on private security guards near Gomez's home before the bomb went off about 5:30 a.m. (1030 GMT), Salgado said.
The dead woman was named as Lucia Bernal, 60, the wife of a civil engineer, who lived close to the site of the blast. Gomez was not home at the time but one of his three sons, Juan Camilo, was injured.
"We don't know the motive for this attack. It is too early to say who was behind it. We don't know if it was leftist guerrillas, drug traffickers or right-wing paramilitaries. We're looking at all the possibilities," Salgado said.
Gomez, a member of the opposition Conservative Party, is head of the regional El Colombiano newspaper, which has its headquarters in the industrial city of Medellin, the main city of Antioquia province.
In recent days it has been serializing an extensive interview with Carlos Castano, leader of the country's most-feared right-wing death squad, whose main target is leftist rebels and their suspected supporters.
A few hours after the bomb blast a hitherto unknown group, calling itself the Special Anti-Paramiltary Commando, issued a communique, a copy of which was obtained by Reuters, declaring war on paramilitary groups in Antioquia.
The organisation, claiming to be made up of ex-guerrillas who had laid down their arms, accused serving state governor Alvaro Uribe, of the Liberal Party's right wing, of sponsoring the paramilitaries. Uribe lives close to the site of Monday's blast but it was not clear whether the communique and the attack on Gomez's house were linked.
Medellin has in the past seen some of the worst violence unleashed by the country's powerful drug cartels. It was the scene of multiple attacks by the notorious drug mafia led by the late Pablo Escobar in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The cocaine kingpin waged war against the state in a successful bid to force Congress to ban the extradition of Colombians to the United States.
Last week Congress approved a tough new law designed to strip drug lords of their illicit billion dollar fortunes. More measures including stiffer jail terms are due to be debated in an extended session of Congress this week.
At least four people were killed and scores more injured on Tuesday afternoon when a powerful bomb ripped through a building in Monteria, the main town of Colombia's northwest Cordoba province, police said.
The blast occurred at 3:15 p.m. (2015 GMT) at the headquarters of the Fondo Ganadero, a fund set up to promote cattle-ranching in the province. Police said they did not know the motive behind the attack.
The explosion came a day after a 120-pound (50-kg) car bomb went off in Medellin, killing a woman and injuring 48 people. Authorities blamed that attack on drug traffickers in league with leftist guerrillas.
Armed left and right-wing groups are waging a fierce battle in northwest Colombia where both blasts occurred.
"I cannot say yet who was responsible for this attack," provincial governor Carlos Buelvas told reporters. "Everybody must be on their guard."
He said an emergency meeting of the provincial security council, which includes the military and the police, would be called to analyse the situation.
The blast in the downtown area of the small town was the second in Monteria in the last two months. An 88 pound (40 kg) bomb, hidden in a street vendor's cart, exploded outside the town's police headquarters on Oct. 21, injuring 10 people in an attack that was blamed on the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), the largest guerrilla movement.
It is not clear whether Tuesday's bomb was linked to a communique issued Monday by a hitherto unknown group calling itself the Special Anti-paramilitary Commando.
The group, claiming to be made up of ex-rebels who had previously given up armed struggle, declared war on the country's burgeoning right-wing paramilitary gangs. Human rights groups accuse cattle ranchers of backing them.
Defence Minister Juan Carlos Esguerra said, however, that he believed Monday's attack in Medellin was retaliation for approval last week by Congress of a new law to strip drug lords of their billion-dollar fortunes.
Colombia's main cities, and particularly Medellin, were scarred by a drug-fuelled campaign of bombings, assassinations and kidnappings in the late 1980s when cocaine kingpin Pablo Escobar waged war on the state in a successful bid to ban the extradition of Colombians to the United States.
A powerful car bomb rocked a residential district of Medellin early on Monday, killing a woman and injuring at least 48 other people, police said.
About 120 pounds (50 kg) of dynamite packed into a minibus blew up outside the house of Juan Gomez Martinez, a regional newspaper editor, politician and former provincial governor.
The Colombian government said it suspected drug cartels were behind the massive blast. President Ernesto Samper vowed not to bow to terrorist violence from drug traffickers.
"We will not allow the specter of narco-terrorism to return to this country and intimidate us," he told reporters. "The state will combat these acts of violnce head-on."
Five unidentified gunmen, one of them a woman, opened fire on private security guards near Gomez's home before the bomb went off, Medellin police chief Gen. Alfredo Salgado said.
He said three houses were virtually destroyed and 15 others seriously damaged by the explosion.
The dead woman was identified as Lucia Cevallos de Bernal, 60, who lived near the site of the blast. Gomez was not home at the time but one of his three sons was injured.
Authorities offered a $150,000 reward for information leading to the capture of those responsible.
"This is a savage act. The first indications point to drug traffickers but I don't want to draw premature conclusions," said Defence Minister Juan Carlos Esguerra.
The attack came three days after the Colombian Congress approved a tough new law to strip Colombia's cocaine barons of their multi-billion dollar fortunes. Another bill to introduce stiffer jail terms for drug traffickers is due to come up for discussion in a special session of Congress later this week.
But it was not clear why Gomez, who is not a congressman, should have been targeted.
Gomez is a member of the opposition Conservative Party and head of the regional El Colombiano newspaper, which has its headquarters in Medellin, once home to the world's most powerful cocaine cartel.
His newspaper recently printed an interview with Carlos Castano, leader of a feared right-wing death squad, whose main target is leftist rebels and their supporters.
A few hours after the blast an unknown group calling itself the Special Anti-Paramilitary Commando issued a communique, a copy of which was obtained by Reuters, declaring war on paramilitary groups. The group claimed to be made up of ex-guerrillas who had previously laid down their arms and accused the state of sponsoring paramilitary groups.
Medellin was scarred by violence in the late 1980s and early 1990s when drug lord Pablo Escobar waged a successful war to force Colombia's Congress to ban the extradition of Colombians to the United States.
In June last year a bomb killed 28 people in the city centre. Nobody claimed responsibility for that blast.
Four people were killed and at least 33 injured on Tuesday when a powerful bomb ripped through a building in Monteria, the main town of Colombia's northwest Cordoba province, police said.
The blast occurred in the afternoon at the headquarters of the Fondo Ganadero, a fund set up to promote cattle-ranching in the province. Police chief Col. Gabriel Carrero blamed the attack on leftist guerrillas.
The explosion came a day after a 120 pound (50 kg) car bomb went off in Medellin, killing a woman and injuring 48 people. Authorities blamed that attack on drug traffickers in league with leftist guerrillas.
Marxist rebels and right-wing paramilitary groups have been waging a fierce battle for years in northwest Colombia where both blasts occurred.
"Nobody has officially claimed responsibility for this (latest) attack but we know it is the work of subversives, terrorists and vandals," Monteria police chief Carrero said.
The blast in the downtown area of the small provincial town was the second explosion Monteria has suffered in the last two months. An 88 pound (40 kg) bomb, hidden in a street vendor's cart, exploded outside the town's police headquarters on Oct. 21, injuring 10 people in an attack that was  blamed on the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), the country's largest guerrilla movement.
It is not yet clear whether Tuesday's bomb may be linked to a communique issued on Monday by a hitherto unknown group calling itself the Special Anti-paramilitary Commando.
The group, claiming to be made up of ex-rebels who had previously given up the armed struggle, declared war on the country's burgeoning paramilitary gangs. Human rights groups accuse cattle ranchers of backing the paramilitaries.
Defence Minister Juan Carlos Esguerra said he believed Monday's attack in Medellin was in retaliation for approval last week by Congress of a new law to strip drug lords of their illict billion-dollar fortunes.
Colombia's major cities, and particularly Medellin, was scarred by a drug-fuelled campaign of bombings, assassinations and kidnappings in the late 1980s as the late cocaine kingpin Pablo Escobar waged war on the state in a successful bid to force Congress to ban the extradition of Colombians to the United States.
A former Colombian rebel leader who masterminded a 61-day takeover of an embassy in Bogota in 1980 on Wednesday urged Peruvian guerrillas holding hostages in the Japanese embassy residence in Lima to keep cool.
Rosemberg Pavon, alias "Comandante Uno" of the now defunct M-19 group, urged the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA) gunmen to avoid bloodshed.
He said the crisis in Lima, where MRTA guerrillas took up to 490 hostages in the residence on Tuesday evening, hung by a thread and one false move by the rebels or security forces could spark a bloodbath.
Pavon headed an occupation of the Dominican embassy in Bogota which began in February 1980. A 15-strong commando of the M-19 held 57 hostages, including 19 diplomats, for 61 days before mediation by Cuban leader Fidel Castro ended the crisis and the guerrillas took refuge in Cuba.
"These situations are moments of high tension, great uncertainty and intense panic. The MRTA must try to keep as calm as possible," Pavon told Reuters in a telephone interview from the southwestern city of Cali.
"At any second there could be a tragedy because the whole rebel operation hangs by a thread between success and failure," he said. "Both sides must work towards a rapid solution and keep a cold head in any negotiations."
Pavon said that the MRTA, like the M-19 which laid down its arms in 1990, was fighting for social justice.
"We shouldn't fall into the trap of generalizing the MRTA as a pro-Cuban force. Like us it is fighting for a Latin American process of democracy," Pavon said.
He said he would be ready to travel to Peru to help negotiate an end to the crisis based on his experiences of 1980.
"I would say to the Peruvians that these situations can only be resolved with patience and with the desire for dialogue," he said in a separate interview with Colombia's Caracol radio.
In 1985, M-19 guerrillas seized the Palace of Justice in Bogota and held more than 200 hostages for two days before the army stormed the building. About 100 people were killed, including rebels and judges.
"The Peruvian government must at all costs avoid any repeat of a Palace of Justice scenario. The Colombian people have still not recovered from the scars of that incident," he said.
A leading Colombian coffee official on Wednesday played down a potential rift with Brazil over a call to expand the Association of Coffee Producing Countries' (ACPC) export retention plan.
John Naranjo, commercial manager of Colombia's national Coffee Growers' Federation said no decision would be taken on the plan, put forward by African producers earlier this month, until an emergency ACPC meeting in Brazil in January.
So far Brazilian traders have been cool in their reaction to the suggestion. One Brazilian exporter, who did not wish to be named, has even said it may be part of a bluff by Colombia which, he added, "was showing signs of not having the coffee it says it has".
Under the terms of the retention plan -- designed to reduce inventories in consumer countries, thereby increasing the bargaining power of exporters -- ACPC members agreed in May to limit green coffee exports to June 1997 to 53.5 million 60-kg sacks.  
But during their December 11 visit to Colombia, Ivory Coast Commodities Minister Guy-Alain Gauza and Abel Rwendeire of Uganda called for an additional cut of 2.5 million 60-kg sacks in the first half of next year -- a call backed by Colombia.
"I don't think our suggestion is unreasonable. There's a meeting towards the end of January and at that we will take a final decision. This will give the Brazilians a little more time to understand what the Colombian proposal is," Naranjo told Reuters in a telephone interview.
Colombia is forecast to export 11.5 million 60-kg sacks in the 1996-97 coffee year, according to the National Coffee Growers' Federation head Jorge Cardenas.
It is not fully clear what impact an increase in the ACPC export retention plan would have on Colombia's exports in the first half of 1997.
"The retention will not be proportional across ACPC member nations. It is more directed at coffee quality and will affect Robusta most. We cannot say how much Colombia would have to retain until we work out the exact division in January. But of course we would have no difficulty meeting our export commitments whether this measure was finally approved or not," Naranjo said.  
On the home front, meanwhile, 1997 is predicted to be a year of "profound transition and adjustments" in Colombia's embattled coffee sector, according to Armando Montenegro, head of the National Association of Financial Institutions (ANIF).
"There will be many coffee growers who quit the sector, which is in a transition from a large sector to a smaller and more competitive sector which is not easy," Montenegro said.
Throughout 1996, Colombia's coffee growers have been hard hit by the strengthening peso, their continuing battle against the coffee borer bug and high interest rates.
Those problems could worsen in 1997 after the National Coffee Growers' Federation announced on December 5 it would cut immediately the internal coffee price by 14,000 pesos per 125-kg load in a move designed to save the Coffee Fund it administers an estimated $70 million.
The fund, which guarantees to buy all Colombia's coffee crop at a fixed price, is nevertheless expected to rack up deficits of almost $400 million by next September.
The government has accepted that many coffee growers may be forced out of business and labourers will be left without work. It has said it will back a restructuring programme but has not yet announced a budget for the programme.
Latin America's oldest and largest guerrilla army on Wednesday hailed a Peruvian rebel group's storming of the Japanese ambassador's residence in Lima as a "spectacular and well-planned" attack.
Marco Leon Calarca, the international spokesman, based in Mexico City, of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), defended the actions of Peru's Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA), which launched the raid on Tuesday night.
He said armed struggle was often the only way to break the bonds of poverty imposed by an oligarchic system.
The Colombian authorities say the formerly pro-Soviet FARC numbers about 12,000 fighters. Independent political analysts say it has more than 18,000. The Cuban-inspired MRTA is thought to have no more than about 2,000 insurgents.
"The MRTA attack was spectacular and well-planned, which suggests it does have popular support. The MRTA, like all peoples of the world, has every right to fight by all means for basic rights," Calarca told Reuters in a phone interview from Mexico.
"People cannot be driven into extreme poverty without putting up a fight. They must defend themselves from the aggression of neoliberalism. The oligarchy is not simply going to hand over those rights," he added.
Members of the MRTA travelled to Colombia in the mid-1980s to fight in the so-called America Battalion, which also consisted of Colombia's leftist M-19 rebel group and Ecuador's Alfaro Vive Carajo! The battalion launched a failed attempt to create rebel liberated zones in Colombia, starting with the southwestern city of Cali. The FARC never joined the battalion because of military and political differences.
The FARC was set up in 1964 by Communists who had fought with self-defence forces set up by the Liberal Party during 10 years of virtual civil war that started in 1948. The government now accuses it of living off a vast fortune gleaned from kidnapping, extortion and drug trafficking.
It launched one of its bloodiest offensives in August, when it killed 27 soldiers and captured 60 in an attack on a jungle base in southern Colombia. It still has not released those captives.
The general who led a bloody assault on Colombia's Supreme Court to quell leftist rebels holding 300 hostages in 1985 said on Friday that an attack was an option to end the Japanese embassy residence siege in Lima.
Gen. Jesus Armando Arias said Peru's President Alberto Fujimori should not cave in to the demands of the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA) to free jailed comrades.
Elite forces from the United States, Israel or Britain could flush out the rebels with a "minimum of bloodshed" if they refused to negotiate, Arias told Reuters.
More than 100 people, mostly hostages and including 11 top judges, died in the 27-hour battle Arias led to dislodge M-19 guerrillas from Bogota's Palace of Justice in Nov. 1985.
"Training techniques have progressed rapidly and there are elite forces that have the ability to seize back the (Japanese embassy residence in Lima) with the minimum of blood and damage," Arias said in a phone interview.
"But given the strong international interests in this case the Peruvian government should try to negotiate and reach an agreement. Bowing to the MRTA's demands on releasing prisoners would, however, set a dangerous legal precedent," he said.
Arias, who now teaches at a military academy, said he still believed the assault he led was the correct tactic. "The M-19 broke in killing people right, left and centre. We could only respond in kind to that type of violence," he said.
Television images showed tanks firing 90mm shells into the courts building before smashing down the steel entrance doors remain vivid. Dynamite and automatic weapons fire reduced the interior of the building to rubble. More than 11 years later it has still not been fully reconstructed.
Another official involved in that incident, former Justice Minister Enrique Parejo, said the Colombian military ignored the government's orders and went ahead with the assault. He said Fujimori must keep a tight control on Peru's military if he wanted to avoid another bloodbath.
Five years before the Palace of Justice attack, the M-19 stormed the Dominican embassy in Bogota. It held 57 hostages, including 19 diplomats, for 61 days before Fidel Castro intervened and negotiated the rebels' safe passage to Cuba.
The M-19 leader who led the Dominican embassy siege, Rosemberg Pavon, called on the MRTA earlier this week to keep its cool and offered to act as go-between in the Lima drama.
Colombia's military and leftist rebels are oiling their guns for 1997, a year both sides predict will see Latin America's longest-running guerrilla war finally reach boiling point.
Military experts and human rights activists warn that the simmering conflict is ready to explode as the government and the insurgents harden their positions and resort to increasingly violent strikes against each other.
"1997 will be a year of greater struggles to achieve a more dignified motherland for all," the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), the country's largest guerrilla force, said in a communique obtained by Reuters on Monday.
"We call on all those at odds with this terrorist, despotic regime to hoist high the flags of social justice and the struggle for our rights."
That struggle, blamed for many of Colombia's 25,000 murders in 1996, put more than half the country under emergency rule after the government granted special powers to combat leftist subversion midway through the year.
But the FARC and Colombia's second-largest rebel force, the National Liberation Army (ELN), have demonstrated increasing ease in destroying key infrastructure and launching devastating attacks on military strongholds.
"Preparations are under way for a longer, harder war on all sides. The guerrillas have shown their intention to step up the armed confrontation. The military line seems to be triumphing in the government. There's no desire for peace," said human rights attorney Carlos Rodriguez, member of the Colombian Commission of Jurists.
The guerrillas' growing strength was highlighted by the FARC's Aug. 30 raid on a jungle base at Las Delicias in southern Putumayo province. The guerrilla force killed 27 soldiers and is still holding 60 others prisoner -- one of the most humiliating blows dealt against the army in more than three decades of armed uprising, according to military analysts.
In an effort to regain the upper hand, the government has announced it will spend more than $900 million on defence in 1997, including the purchase of scores of Russian and U.S.-made combat helicopters -- equivalent to its total military expenditure for the last four years.
The military currently estimates the combined force of the FARC, set up as a pro-Soviet guerrilla force in 1964, and the ELN, a pro-Cuban force created by radical Roman Catholic priests in the mid-1960s, at no more than 12,000 fighters. The much smaller Maoist People's Liberation Army (EPL) was virtually decimated by a wave of desertions in the latter half of the year.
But political analyst Antonio Caballero, columnist with the influential weekly political magazine Semana, calculates the rebels' true strength at between 18,000 and 30,000.
The guerrilla forces, he says, have been able to buy ever more sophisticated weapons with money from extortion and their alleged links with the drug trade.
Meanwhile, the army's inefficiency and the crisis sparked by accusations that President Ernesto Samper financed his 1994 election campaign with drug money created a power vacuum that the rebels have stepped in to fill, Caballero said.
One Western defence attache believes at least 40 percent of Colombia is now under the de facto political and economic control of the guerrillas. He argued the conflict was not just a military problem.
"The seedbed of revolution is caused by the great social injustice which prevails. More military equipment will be of no use if there's not better coordination in the armed forces," he said.
Rescuers struggled on Saturday to recover scores of bodies from the wreckage of a bus that plunged down a deep ravine in the Colombian Andes.
Red Cross officials said 37 people -- all members of a single extended family -- died in the crash and just three passengers survived, including a nine-month-old baby.
The bus ran off the road and plunged into a 1,500-foot (500-metre) chasm in a remote area of Narino province on Friday morning.
More than 50 volunteers took part in the rescue, which was made difficult by the extreme mountain conditions and hampered by thick fog and intermittent rain.
Rescuers were taking at least two hours to recover each body and Red Cross spokesman Mario Arias said it could take three more days to pull all the victims out of the ravine.
"The conditions are very dangerous and rescue work had to be suspended overnight and could only begin again at first light," Arias told Reuters in a phone interview from Narino, on Colombia's southern border with Ecuador.
"Rescue workers are having to abseil or scramble down into the ravine with the aid of ropes. The situation is just atrocious. It's taking us roughly two hours to bring each body out," he added.
The accident occurred near the town of Ricaurte as the bus travelled from Cali, the country's second-largest city, to Tumaco, a small port on the Pacific coast.
Arias said one of the survivors, Ana Maria Arboleda, 16, told him the vehicle swerved off the road when the driver, who died in the crash, tried to avoid rocks that had fallen on the highway.
Arboleda, her uncle Ambrosio Arboleda, 44, and nine-month-old Brian Montenegro were flung out of the bus as it rolled into the chasm. She suffered a broken arm and a cracked rib, and her uncle was only slightly scratched, Arias said. The baby has a cracked skull and is undergoing a series of emergency operations, Arias said.
Relatives and neighbours of the dead mourned the victims in their home city of Cali.
"This a tragedy. All these people were part of the same family," neighbour Eduardo Quinceno told the NTC TV news programme. All the dead worked in a small, family-run shoe factory, according to the Red Cross.
The fatal bus crash is the second in 10 days in Narino. Fifteen people died and 18 others were injured when a local bus flipped over and dropped into a ravine on Dec. 23. The latest accident is one of the worst in recent memory.
The Colombian authorities hailed Wednesday the U.S. pilot who was killed during an anti-drug mission over guerrilla-infested jungles of southeast Colombia as a "hero fighting the scourge of narco-trafficking."
Robert Martin, 35, of Lubbock, Texas, died when his Turbo Thrush T-65 crop dusting plane crashed in Guaviare province Tuesday. He had been fumigating illicit plantations of coca leaf, the raw material for cocaine.
Colombian Defence Minister Juan Carlos Esguerra, police chief Gen. Rosso Jose Serrano and U.S. ambassador Myles Frechette were among mourners at a religious service in Bogota to honour Martin. A lone bugler played the "Last Post" and the U.S. flag was draped over Martin's coffin.
"We're not here to bid farewell to a pilot or to a U.S. citizen. We're here to say goodbye to a hero who decided to join us in combatting one of the worst scourges known to mankind -- narco-trafficking," Serrano said.
Police said Martin, one of six U.S. civilian pilots working in Colombia under contract with the U.S. State Department, was killed on the first day of his contract. Frechette said he was the first U.S. aviator to die on such a mission.
As police cadets mounted a guard of honour for Martin and three police helicopters flew in formation overhead, Frechette pledged the fatality would not affect U.S.-Colombian cooperation in the drug war.
The question of U.S. personnel taking a direct role in drug or counterinsurgency operations is a traditionally thorny issue because of what Colombian politicians see as the possible infringement of national sovereignty.
Crop-dusting planes come under frequent attack from armed gangs and leftist guerrillas who guard the clandestine drug plantations.
Police chief Gen. Rosso Jose Serrano said Tuesday there was a heavy rebel presence in the area but said there was no indication the aircraft had come under fire. He said a full investigation was under way, adding the most likely cause of the crash was human error or mechanical failure.
A U.S. pilot flying his first anti-drug mission in Colombia was killed when his plane crashed in a jungle area of southeast Colombia on Tuesday, police said.
The pilot was identified by police chief Gen. Rosso Jose Serrano as Robert Martin, 35. He was flying a U.S.-registered Turbo Thrush T-65 crop-dusting plane and had been fumigating illicit plantations of coca leaf, the raw material for cocaine. His hometown was not released.
U.S. ambassador Myles Frechette confirmed the aviator's death and said he was the first U.S. pilot, sent to the country under the terms of a U.S. State Department contract with the Colombian government, to die on such a mission.
He said Martin's body had been recovered and said the cause of the accident would be fully investigated.
"The most likely cause of the crash was human error or mechanical failure. Leftist guerrillas are present in the zone but this plantation was very remote and I doubt the rebels could have shot down the plane," Serrano said.
Police said it was the first day of the pilot's contract.
The crash occurred in a remote area of Guaviare province, one of Colombia's main coca producing regions. Martin was flying one of four planes on the spraying mission and was one of six U.S. pilots assisting Colombia's drug crop eradication programme.
Illicit plantations are often guarded by heavily armed gangs and sometimes by leftist guerrillas, which the government accuses of being involved in drug trafficking. It was not clear whether the plane had come under fire.
"Unfortunately narco-terrorists frequently fire at these (crop-dusting) planes. They don't know whether Colombians or Americans are flying them," Col. Luis Carlos Ortiz, second-in- command of the Colombian anti-narcotics police, told Reuters.
The U.S. pilots were originally only permitted to train Colombian pilots. But since October the Colombian authorities gave them the green light to fly live missions to eradicate coca leaf and opium poppy plantations.
All the pilots are civilians, employed by Texas-based aviation company Dyncorp, but a State Department spokesman told Reuters that some were former U.S. servicemen. Dyncorp declined to comment on the accident.
Last year Colombia's U.S.-backed drug crop eradication programme destroyed about 14,000 acres (6,500 hectares) of poppy and more than 44,500 acres (18,000 hectares) of coca leaf.
President Ernesto Samper sent a message of condolences to U.S. President Bill Clinton on Wednesday after a U.S. pilot was killed during an anti-drug mission in southeast Colombia.
Robert Martin, 35, died when his Turbo Thrush T-65 crop-dusting plane crashed into dense jungle in Guaviare province Tuesday while he was fumigating illicit plantations of coca leaf, the raw material for cocaine.
"In the name of the Colombian people and that of my government, I offer sincere condolences for the tragic death of Robert Martin," Samper wrote to Clinton.
"His death is added to all those others that have occurred in recent years during our bitter fight against the poison of drugs. The memory of Martin, and that of our policemen and soldiers, will give us additional motivation to continue the fight," he said.
Police said Martin, one of six civilian pilots working in Colombia under contract with the U.S. State Department, was killed on the first day of his contract.
U.S. ambassador Myles Frechette said he was the first U.S. aviator to die on such a mission.
The question of U.S. personnel taking a direct role in drug or counterinsurgency operations is a thorny issue because of what some Colombian politicians see as the possible infringement of national sovereignty.
Samper said in his letter that Martin had been "training Colombian pilots in illicit crop fumigation."
But since October such "training" functions have extended to frontline operations, including flying live missions to spray coca leaf and opium poppy plantations, State Department officials told Reuters.
Crop-dusting planes come under frequent attack from armed gangs and leftist guerrillas who guard the clandestine drug plantations.
But police chief Gen. Rosso Jose Serrano said Tuesday there was no indication Martin's plane had come under fire despite a heavy rebel presence in the area. He said the most likely cause of the crash was human error or mechanical failure.
An accident investigation was under way and Martin's body was scheduled to be flown back to the United States Wednesday afternoon. He was employed by Texas-based aviation company Dyncorp, but authorities have not said where he was from.
Colombia's U.S.-backed drug crop eradication programme is the most ambitious in Latin America. Last year the Colombians destroyed about 14,000 acres (6,500 hectares) of poppy and more than 44,500 acres (18,000 hectares) of coca leaf.
Icy relations with Washington appear to be thawing and Colombia has its eyes firmly fixed on overturning its status as an international drug pariah by this spring, diplomats and government officials say.
Colombia spent most of last year smarting at the U.S. decision to "decertify" it -- strike it off its list of allies in the drug war -- citing lax anti-narcotics laws and President Ernesto Samper's alleged ties with drug lords. That led to a cut in U.S. aid and sparked angry protests by Bogota.
But, in an about-turn from his normally hostile stance, U.S. Ambassador Myles Frechette had glowing words of praise for the Colombian government on Wednesday.
"We're very impressed by the teamwork demonstrated by the foreign relations, defence and justice ministers (in anti-drug matters). I have now sent my report and that will have to be reviewed and evaluated in Washington," he said.
His comments, at a funeral service for a U.S. civilian pilot killed on an anti-drug mission in Colombia, contrasted with his criticism of anti-drug legislation in Colombia's Congress late last year, which caused a political storm.
Now Colombian authorities are hoping the appointment of outgoing Defence Minister Juan Carlos Esguerra as ambassador to Washington, a successful drug crop eradication programme and a new law to strip cocaine kingpins of their assets will convince the United States to recertify Colombia.
"We continue showing great political willpower to combat narco-trafficking and contribute to an efficient international struggle. Colombia deserves to be recognised and re-evaluated for the fight it has been waging on drugs," Col. Leonardo Gallego, head of the police anti-narcotics division, said.
Esguerra will take up his diplomatic post on Jan. 20 and has pledged to "hammer on all the relevant doors" in a bid to win back certification and the U.S. aid that would entail.
Former Justice Minister Enrique Parejo, an anti-drug crusader who survived an assassination attempt ordered by the late drug lord Pablo Escobar in the late 1980s, told Reuters on Thursday he thought it was likely Colombia would regain certification in March, but he still questioned Bogota's commitment to fighting the drug cartels head on.
"The jailed kingpins of the Cali drug cartel continue running their criminal empires from behind bars and in the short term I don't see the political will or the operational efficiency to be able to launch a frontal assault on drug trafficking," Parejo said.
"Colombia has been pressured by the United States into toughening its stance but I think Samper is looking to do just the bare minimum to regain certification," he added.
The United States annually certifies about 30 countries based on their cooperation in the international fight against drug production and trafficking. Decertification leads to a cut in most U.S. aid not linked to the fight against drugs.
In practical terms, Colombia has not suffered greatly from the reduction in aid because most of the U.S. financial help it receives is aimed at anti-drug programmes. Colombia is due to take delivery of 18 helicopters from the United States this year, enabling police to step up its drug crop eradication programme, seen as one of the most ambitious in Latin America.
Colombia's President Ernesto Samper announced Tuesday plans to boost revenues by broadening the tax base, and said the 1997 budget would be cut by over a trillion pesos -- a figure higher than the 900 billion pesos previously approved by Congress.
The measures are part of an emergency plan to rein in the yawning fiscal deficit.
Samper said the overall rates of income tax and the 14 percent value added tax would not be raised, but he pledged to expand the tax base and combat tax evasion.  
Below-inflation wage rises for public sector workers, announced last week as part of a separate austerity law, and the merger or closure of inefficient government offices will help stem public spending, Samper said.
Earlier in the day, Finance Minister Jose Antonio Ocampo said, "Everybody would be affected by draconian measures," but so far many of the proposals put forward have not yet been fleshed out.
The economic emergency has been decreed for an initial period of 20 days and allows the president to rule by decree without consulting Congress.  
"If we go on increasing the levels of public debt, we will be creating elements of instability in our fiscal system. We will be laying landmines in the path of the state's finances," Samper said in a speech at the presidential palace.
The fiscal deficit rose to 4 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 1996 from 0.2 percent in 1995. Ocampo said Monday that the effects of the emergency measures, coupled with income from a recent spate of power plant privatizations, could cut that shortfall to 2.5 percent of GDP this year, compared to the 3.4 percent originally forecast.  
Samper said that the Expenditure Rationalization Law, which was approved at the end of last year and which included provision for a weighted 13.5 percent pay rise for public sector workers, would mean budget savings of 900 billion pesos.
He added that under the terms of the economic emergency decree, public officials had been ordered to look for ways to cut an additional 300 billion pesos from the overall national budget. This he said would lead to total savings of about 1.2 trillion pesos on a budget originally set last year at 30.3 trillion pesos.  
Although Samper gave a broad outline of the crisis measures, his speech was short on specifics.
Wilson Borja, head of the main public sector union FENALTRASE, said he feared as many as 19,000 state jobs could be slashed in the cost-cutting drive.
Although Samper talked of closing government departments, he failed to spell out the impact this could have on jobs.
The president spoke of the drain imposed on central government coffers by provincial authorities, raising the specter of funding cuts to the regions, already suffering from chronic lack of resources and social injustice.
He also said he would cut the government's external consultancy services by 50 percent and reduce official trips abroad. He did not, however, give an estimate of what saving that represented.
((-- Bogota newsroom, 571 610 7944))
Colombian President Ernesto Samper decreed an economic emergency on Monday, warning that the "economic and social stability of the country" was under threat.
In a televised speech to the nation, Samper called for urgent belt-tightening measures to cut the central government's yawning fiscal deficit.
The economic emergency, the first in five years, has been decreed for 20 days but could be extended for a maximum of 90 days, presidential sources said. All measures in that period can be introduced without the approval of Congress.
Further austerity measures are scheduled to be announced on Tuesday, government sources said.
Finance Minister Jose Antonio Ocampo later announced the first series of concrete measures aimed at slashing Colombia's foreign debt by more than $800 million this year.
Wilson Borja, head of the 800,000-strong FENALTRASE public sector union, said he feared the government could use crisis powers to cut as many as 19,000 state jobs in the coming days. The union was protesting against a 13.5 percent weighted pay increase, well below annual inflation, announced last week.
"We had initially been planning to launch a stoppage around mid-February but this decree could force us to bring those plans radically forward. We could start a strike as early as next week," Borja said.
Anticipating the unions' reaction, Samper said in his televised speech: "I want to warn you once and for all. Protests and strikes will lead nowhere -- quite simply because although the government has all the goodwill in the world, it is short of money."
"If the fiscal, exchange rate and unemployment situation continue to deteriorate, the social and economic order will seriously and ostensibly worsen... The economic stability of the country will be severely affected," the decree signed by Samper and his cabinet said.
The crisis measure comes against the backdrop of a sharp economic slowdown in 1996, coupled with a steady strengthening of the country's peso currency, which has undermined export activities. The government fiscal deficit has burgeoned and hit 4.0 percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 1996 up from 0.2 percent in 1995.
In the first of the specific emergency measures, finance chief Ocampo said the planned issuance of $1.8 billion in foreign debt bonds would be reduced by about $800 million.
He announced an overall cut in the national debt programme and unveiled a new tax on private and public companies which looked abroad for fresh loans.
Ocampo said the emergency measures, coupled with income from a recent wave of power plant privatisations, would help to cut the government deficit to 2.5 percent of gross domestic product in 1997, compared to an initial forecast of 3.4 percent.
Colombian stocks have shaken off three years of stagnation to stage a meteoric rise in 1997, but bourse chiefs warn deep-rooted structural problems cloud the outlook for one of the world's best-performing markets so far this year.
The country's two major indices, Bogota's IBB and Medellin's IBOMED, have gained more than 22 percent in the 10 sessions of the year to Thursday, Jan. 16, grabbing international attention and sending investors reeling with surprise.  
Brokers are convinced that bigger gains are still to come in the course of the year and that Colombian stocks continue to be undervalued by as much as 25 percent.
But the chairmen of the Bogota and Medellin exchanges believe the traditional "marriage" between industrialists and bankers will hamper the transformation of Colombia's markets into sophisticated, modern bourses.
"Market performance has been pretty good in the year so far and we've seen gains that nobody really dared foresee," said Luis Fernando Uribe, head of the Medellin exchange.  
Bogota's IBB has gained about 22.5 percent -- despite small falls on profit-taking Wednesday and Thursday after 18 days straight gains.  It rose just 11.8 percent in peso terms in 1996 -- a real-term loss when set against 21.63 percent inflation.
Medellin's IBOMED index has leapt more than 23 percent after losing 3.68 percent in nominal terms in 1996.
Trading volume is extremely thin, however.  Volume on all three of the country's exchanges, including Cali's tiny Bolsa de Occidente, totalled just $2.3 billon in 1996.  
Market perception that Colombian shares are well below book price, a fall in deposit rates from above 30 percent for most of 1996 to about 27 percent, and optimism that the economy is about to rebound from the sharp slowdown last year are underpinning the rally.  And a new tax on fixed income papers has also put a premium on equities, many brokers say.
"Once the market caught fire everybody piled in. There was not too much differentiation between shares, which shows these are still somewhat immature markets," said market analyst Stephen Edkins.  
"We're bullish about the year and think shares will rise between about 40 percent and 45 percent overall," he added. Inflation is forecast to hit 18 percent this year, which would mean real-term yields of up to 27 percent.
Edkins expected to see downward corrections of between five percent and 10 percent in the coming weeks, with new gains from the start of the second quarter as companies turn in 1996 year-end results, followed by first quarter results.
Domestic political factors, including the country's simmering guerrilla war, which some military experts predict will intensify in 1997, seem unlikely to cause concern.  
"We've got this crazy equilibrium where there's quite a solid macroeconomic management and then this element of chaos," said Edkins.  But amid the optimism, bourse chiefs Caballero and Uribe sounded a warning.
"The main underlying problem is that there are a lack of shares.  That's a structural problem and cannot be resolved overnight," said Caballero.
"There are favorable terms for companies to raise capital in the stock market but the traditional marriage between industry and the financial sector is not going to be easy to break up," said Uribe.
Colombian entrepreneurs still prefer to contract debt with the banks rather than risk losing overall control of their businesses by issuing shares.
Of all the country's major conglomerates only the Sindicato Antioqueno has more than one of its companies quoted on the stock market -- but less than one-third of the shares are in free float, outside the direct control of the companies themselves.
((--Bogota newsroom, 571 610 7944))
Colombia's cocaine kings, Gilberto and Miguel Rodriguez Orejuela, were sentenced to 21 and 18 years in prison respectively on Friday, but had their terms halved for pleading guilty, bringing a swift rebuke from the United States.
Gilberto Rodriguez, who also was fined $8 million, and his brother -- fined $4.4 million -- will be eligible for extra sentence reductions for working and studying in prison.
The sentences were called "totally unacceptable" by U.S. Ambassador Myles Frechette, whose government unsuccessfully called for the extradition of the Rodriguez brothers in July.
The public prosecutor's office said it would appeal the terms, but under Colombia's lenient anti-drug laws this would add little additional jail time.
"The U.S. government and American public opinion will be shocked by these low sentences," Frechette told reporters. "These sentences are totally unacceptable," he said.
Gilberto, nicknamed the Chess Player for his cunning criminal mind, headed the powerful Cali drug cartel until his capture in June 1995.
Together with his brother Miguel, the pair masterminded a huge drug trafficking empire, supplying an estimated 80 percent of the world's cocaine and building up a multi-billion dollar fortune in the process.
U.S. officials have said repeatedly that the brothers continue to run their criminal empire from behind the walls of Bogota's La Picota prison.
That allegation, coupled with Friday's ruling by a judge in the city of Cali, could strike a fatal blow to Colombia's hopes of averting more U.S. trade sanctions in March when Washington will decide whether it should remain on a list of pariah states that have failed to cooperate in ther global fight against drugs.
A so-called "faceless" judge sentenced Gilberto Rodriguez, 57, to 21 years for drug-trafficking, conspiracy, illicit enrichment, falsification of documents and the illegal possession of weapons.
That term was immediately cut to 10-1/2 years, in return for his plea and prompt confession, and with extra reductions for working and studying in jail he will likely spend about six years in prison. With time already served in custody awaiting trial, Gilberto Rodriguez could be a free in 2002.
His brother Miguel, 53, was sentenced to 18 years, halved for his guilty plea and full confession. He will also be eligible for extra reductions.
The respected Colombian political magazine Semana recently estimated the combined fortune of the Rodriguez Orejuela brothers and two other top traffickers at $50 billion. The brothers may lose part of their fortune under the terms of the new asset forfeiture law passed by Congress in December.
The office of Prosecutor-General Alfonso Valdivieso, an anti-drug crusader and close ally of Washington, said it would use all legal resources to appeal the sentences and see that "just penalties" are eventually imposed on the Cali kingpins.
Under current legislation, the brothers faced a maximum of no more than 24 years imprisonment.
National Police chief Gen. Rosso Jose Serrano, who oversaw the arrests of the Rodriguez brothers in June and August of 1995, called Friday's sentences "a disgrace" and said they might just as well have been left free.
"I'm not going to continue jailing drug traffickers so they can get out in three years. It's a disgrace," he said.
Mexican Foreign Minister Jose Angel Gurria on Thursday criticised the United States for its policy of rewarding or punishing countries based on their measures to fight drug trafficking.
During a visit to Colombia, Gurria said the so-called certification process was a barrier to cooperation in the war on drugs and renewed calls for scrapping the system, saying decisions were often based on ulterior motives.
"The process of certification inhibits cooperation and puts the country under scrutiny in a very difficult position. I believe there are much better ways of promoting cooperation," Gurria said at a news conference. He added that "the decision is often based on criteria other than those that one would rationally take into consideration."
Last year, Colombia was struck off the United States' list of allies in the drug war. Mexico came under severe criticism but managed to get certification and escape sanctions.
Mexico has since set up a ministerial contact group to address the issue with Washington, and that has led to an improved climate between the two governments, Gurria said.
Colombia has continued to come under heavy criticism from the United States for its perceived failure to crack down hard enough on drug trafficking.
Politicians and political analysts were divided on whether Colombia would regain certification this March in the wake of of a new law to strip drug kingpins of narcotics profits.
The U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration estimates that 80 percent of the world's cocaine is supplied by Colombia while more than half that on the streets of U.S. cities has been transported through Mexico.
Colombian police said on Sunday they discovered a second multimillion-dollar drug stash aboard a yacht owned by three Britons being held on cocaine smuggling charges stemming from a bust on the yacht in December.
The three men Michael Hayne, 50, of Egham, Surrey, his son Stephen Alan Hayne, 27, of Ashford, Kent, and David Maurice Shaw, 49, of Oldham, Lancashire, were arrested on Dec. 13 in the Caribbean coast port of Barranquilla and were being held on cocaine smuggling charges.
At the time, officials of the state security force DAS discovered more than 425 pounds (194 kg) of highly pure cocaine aboard their U.S.-registered boat Perla del Mar (Sea Pearl). In a more exhaustive search, conducted over the weekend, police turned up another 326 pounds (148 kg) of cocaine -- stowed away in the vessel's waste water tanks.
A DAS chief estimated the street value of the first haul at $50 million. Police declined on Sunday to speculate on the overall value of the illicit consignment.
"The drugs were coated with a mixture of burned oil and coffee, which masks the smell and makes it more difficult for sniffer dogs to detect," a Barranquilla police spokesman said.
The Britons were being held in custody in Barranquilla's El Modelo jail. They could not be contacted on Sunday.
In a phone conversation in December, Michael Hayne told Reuters the situation had been a "huge mix-up" and hoped everything would be "straightened out soon."
DAS officials said Hayne, whose passport was issued by the British Embassy in Spain, and his son had entered Colombia illegally from Venezuela. Shaw entered Colombia legally -- his passport had been issued by the British High Commission in Trinidad.
A spokeswoman for the regional prosecutor's office said the men could face between four and 12 years behind bars if convicted of the smuggling charges.
Colombian laws on drug trafficking are frequently seen as lax compared to standards in Britain and the United States.
The country's cocaine kings Gilberto and Miguel Rodriguez Orejuela, heads of the once-mighty Cali drug cartel were sentenced 10 days ago.
The brothers admitted running a vast international criminal empire for more than 20 years and arranging the shipment of almost 40 tonnes of cocaine into the United States -- thought to be just a fraction of the real amount they sent. They received jail terms that could in practice let them walk free in just five years.
Police arrested a U.S. pilot carrying a suitcase packed with at least 13.5 pounds (6.2 kg) of high grade heroin at Bogota's international airport on Sunday evening, a prosecutor said.
Bradley Dale Brandt, 40, originally of North Dakota but now living in southern California, was detained as he made his way to board one of the Colombian airline's ACES flights to Panama City, said the prosecutor, who cannot be named for security reasons.
Brandt told Reuters he had been framed and the suitcase was not his. He was to have travelled on the flight to Panama as a passenger but was wearing a commercial aviator's uniform when arrested. He declined to say exactly where in southern California he lived but his passport was issued in Los Angeles.
"I was carrying the suitcase but it was not mine. I was totally surprised when the police opened it up. The clothes inside were mine but nothing else was. I'll kill the person who switched my bag if I ever find them," Brandt said.
"I just wouldn't do a thing like that. This has put my career and my family in jeopardy. I've worked too hard just to blow it on something stupid like this," he added.
Brandt declined to say which airline he worked for. No airline insignia were visible on his uniform or his pilot's overcoat.
A police spokeswoman said the heroin was discovered when the bag Brandt was carrying was put through an x-ray machine -- one of the multiple routine checks that international passengers have to undergo when leaving Bogota.
"Brandt was arrested with a suitcase stuffed with clothes and high quality heroin," the spokeswoman said.
The prosecutor said Brandt would be interviewed further in the presence of a lawyer and an interpreter on Monday.
Earlier in the day airport police seized a Mexican passenger as he tried to board a flight to Mexico City with false-bottomed suitcases packed with 93 pounds (42 kg) of cocaine.
The U.S Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) estimates Colombian drug cartels supply at least 80 percent of the world's cocaine. And in a report late last year, it said Colombia had edged out the Golden Triangle of southeast Asia as the No. 1 supplier of high grade heroin to the United States.
Colombia will announce cuts in coffee exports next week under the terms of a beefed up retention plan recently agreed by members of the Association of Coffee Producing Countries (ACPC), coffee czar Jorge Cardenas said on Thursday.
The head of the National Coffee Growers' Federation also said Colombia's internal coffee price would be raised in view of recent gains in international markets. He did not, however, say when the hike would take effect nor what the percentage rise would be.
In the provinces, meanwhile, coffee growers are becoming increasingly worried about potential crop damage caused by recent torrential downpours, which meteorologists say have pushed rainfall levels up to 160 percent higher than the seasonal average. Weather forecasters say the outlook for February is just as bad.
Under terms of the ACPC deal hammered out in Rio de Janeiro on Jan. 23, member nations will slash back total exports by 1.3 million bags in the first half of 1997 from the original target of 26.28 million bags set in May.
One million bags of that will be robusta but arabica- producing countries, like Colombia, agreed to rein back 300,000 bags of exports in solidarity. Cardenas declined to specify what proportion of the cut would correspond to Colombia.
"The cuts will respond to production conditions and the export situation in each individual country. We will be announcing the cuts this will imply for Colombia next week," Cardenas told Reuters.
As speculation grew this week that the federation would announce the rise in internal coffee prices at its first meeting of the year Friday, Jan. 31, private exporters complained of short supplies.
"Intermediaries and producers have increased prices to scandalous levels in anticipation of a rise in the internal coffee price. Some are just holding on and won't even sell. In some cases prices are up by as much as 10 percent," said Alvaro Ramirez of Cargill exporters.
"In view of the situation in external markets, we will of course have to raise the internal price of coffee," Cardenas said. "We will do the projections and take the decision on the basis of that," he said.
The federation cut internal coffee prices by 14,000 pesos per 125-kg load to 221,500 after a turbulent coffee growers' congress on Dec. 5. The move aimed to reduce the deficit of the Coffee Fund, an organization administered by the federation which buys all Colombian coffee at a pre-agreed support price.
The cut was achieved by withdrawing a 14,000 peso premium, paid in the form of a bond instead of cash, which had been introduced to compensate for the poor outlook for coffee in the 1996 calendar year.
The good news on the internal price front, however, is taking a back seat to the recent weather problems.
"In the southwest and Andean regions, and particularly the coffee growing region, rainfall has been as much as 160 percent higher than normal," said Leonardo Rivera, meteorologist at the national weather center IDEAM.
"These conditions will be prolonged and we're likely to see similar levels of rainfall through February," he added.
January and February are normally dry months in Colombia. But the torrential rains this year have been caused by a cooling in the surface temperature of the Pacific ocean, known as the La Nina effect -- conditions not seen for at least the last 10 years.
Coffee growers say the rains are delaying the flowering period and fear the main harvest, which normally begins in October, could either be very late or that a part could be lost entirely.
Cardenas said it was too early to predict what the impact of the weather could be on crop levels but said federation technicians were drawing up a detailed report, which they hoped to issue in mid-February.
((--Bogota newsroom, 571 610 7944))
Plans are being drawn up for new peace talks between the government and leftist rebels in a bid to end Latin America's longest-running conflict, a spokesman for Colombia's Conciliation Commission said on Sunday.
Diego Vargas Uribe, a member of the semi-autonomous body of former ministers and Church representatives, said details would not be released for a few more weeks, but that all sides in the four-decade old war had been consulted about talks.
"The Conciliation Commission has carried out a consultation with different sectors about the basis for a negotiated peace. We are drawing up a document and will present that to the government and the armed groups before making it public," Uribe told Radionet radio network.
Political analysts warn that the prospect of peace is slight. The armed forces said two weeks ago they would step up their counterinsurgency campaign and Marxist rebels have escalated their attacks this year.
Spokesmen for the FARC, Colombia's largest guerrilla army set up as a pro-Soviet group in 1964, were not available for comment on Sunday. But in the latest copy of their magazine Resistencia, FARC leader Manuel Marulanda wrote: "I reiterate the will that the (FARC) has always expressed to find a political solution to the social and armed conflict."
He stressed any peace deal would have to resolve "political, social and economic inequalities" and not simply map out a timetable for the demobilization of rebel forces.
The National Liberation Army (ELN), the second largest rebel force founded by radical Roman Catholic priests in the mid-1960s, began tentative moves last year toward German governmment-brokered peace talks with President Ernesto Samper's administration.
Efforts broke down in November with the much-publicised arrest of Werner Mauss, a German private eye who was acting as a go-between in the talks.
The last peace process between the Colombian government and rebels collapsed without agreement in Mexico in 1992. The FARC accused the authorities of trying to force the guerrillas to surrender unilaterally.
Unlike Colombia's M-19 rebel group, which laid down its arms in the late 1980s, neither the FARC nor the ELN have been defeated militarily.
The FARC still holds prisoner 60 troops it captured in southern Colombia last August. In a statement on Sunday, the FARC confirmed it was holding 10 marines seized in an ambush in western Choco province in mid-January. It said the men would be held with the other 60 soldiers until terms for a handover were agreed with the government.
