Tottenham Hotspur chairman Alan Sugar said on Thursday that English soccer clubs could face financial ruin if they follow the example of big spenders such as Newcastle United.
Sugar was speaking after Premier League club Tottenham posted a record pre-exceptional profit of 10.2 million pounds ($16 million) for the 14 months to July 31. The club increased its total dividend to 5p from 3p.
English soccer is booming as television revenue helps to fund an influx of top foreign talents and the sector is seen as increasingly attractive for investors.
English champions Manchester United, listed along with Tottenham on the London Stock Exchange, this week announced an annual profit of 15 million pounds.
But Sugar warned that the Bosman Ruling under which players effectively become free agents at the end of their of their contracts was "a devastating blow to the football industry".
Sugar said he could not see the sense in deals such as privately-owned Newcastle's recent signing of England captain Alan Shearer from Blackburn Rovers for 15 million pounds.
"Even if you win everything in sight there is no way to make it pay," he said, noting that Newcastle would not be able to recoup any of their outlay on Shearer once his contract was up.
Tottenham, who reported 14-month figures because of a change in their financial year, took an exceptional charge of 7.3 million pounds to reflect a drop in the value of their squad.
The value fell after Belgian Jean-Marc Bosman won a landmark case at the European Court of Justice which ended the transfer fee system for players who were out of contract.
Sugar, who has a 40 percent stake in Tottenham, acknowledged that profit figures were meaningless to fans clamouring for new signings following the injury-hit team's indifferent start to the season.
He said funds were available to team manager Gerry Francis to strenghten the squad but declined to say how much.
"I would hope in the next two to three weeks that we will see some signings at the club," he added, saying that the club's aim was to sign promising young players on long-term contracts.
The head of consumer electronics group Amstrad, Sugar saved Tottenham from the verge of bankruptcy five years ago when he and former England coach Terry Venables took over the club.
But the two, both working-class London boys made good, fell out spectacularly and have become locked in a series of legal battles since Sugar forced Venables to leave the club in 1993. ($1=.6395 Pound)
Shares in English soccer champions Manchester United powered to record highs on Friday after the club's chief executive said the club was a likely bid target.
"Any successful company is an attractive takeover prospect. People are going to look at it, so it could well be the subject of more takeover proposals," chief executive Martin Edwards was quoted as telling The Times.
Britain's Press Association quoted Edwards as saying that any proposals would be given serious consideration.
"...If it arises, then we would have to look at it as and when. We would have a responsibility to talk. But it would have to be in the best interests of the shareholders and the supporters."
The speculation sent United shares soaring to record highs of over 5.0 pounds -- valuing the club in excess of 300 million pounds ($470 million).
The club responded to the swirl of speculation with a statement that its board was not aware of any bid approaches.
"...we have noted the recent media coverage suggesting that Manchester United have received an approach which may lead to an offer being made for the Company. The Board is not aware of any proposals," the club said.
The shares came off their highs after the statement but were still 42 1/2p firmer at 495p at around midday.
United shares have jumped from under two pounds at the end of January as the club won the coveted English league and F.A. Cup double.
The rise has also been fuelled by a lucrative new television deal signed by the Premier League with satellite broadcaster BSkyB which will virtually treble television income for top English soccer clubs..
United are reported earlier this year to have rejected a takeover bid from publishing group VCI which valued the club at 300 million pounds. VCI did a deal with United in January to buy the publishing rights to club videos and books.
The Times article named brewer Whitbread and media and leisure group Granada as potential bidders.
It reported that Edwards, who has a stake of around 17 percent in United, has said privately that it would require a bid of over 400 million pounds to buy the club.
Granada has strong ties with the Manchester area, operating the ITV commercial television franchise for north-west England. It is also known to be interested in developing a Manchester United magazine TV channel with the club.
But sources close to Granada effectively ruled out a takeover bid, saying that the company remained focused on digesting its acqusition of leading British hotel group Forte earlier this year.
Whitbread poured scorn on the suggestion.
"We would love to buy the club but there are as many beer drinkers in Liverpool, Newcastle and Chelsea," a Whitbread spokeswoman said, adding that Whitbread would not want to do anything to upset customers who were fans of other clubs. "The report is complete rubbish."
Share analysts say that the huge interest in soccer and the potential growth in revenue from pay-per-view television deals make a bid likely for United at some stage in the near future.
Pay-per-view is expected to be introduced before the end of the century following the planned launch of digital satellite television by BSkyB late next year. It could generate tens of millions of pounds for clubs like United, the best-supported team in the country. ($1=.6350 Pound)
British-based exhibitions group Blenheim is seen as an ideal fit with rumoured suitor United News &amp; Media, share analysts said on Monday.
United News &amp; Media and Anglo-Dutch group Reed Elsevier have long been seen as rivals for the hand of Blenheim. However, industry sources said Reed was thought to be out of the running.
"Blenheim's strength in Europe and France in particular mean it would be a good fit (for United)," said one analyst. "The exhibitions business is also doing quite well at this stage in the cycle."
Dutch publisher VNU stirred the waters last week when it paid 500 pence a share to take a 15 percent stake in Blenheim. VNU declined comment on reports on Monday that it was set to increase its stake to 25 percent.
It said last week its 15 percent holding in Blenheim was a strategic long-term investment and said it had no intention of making an offer for the whole company unless rival offers emerged.
Its move is certain to have concentrated the mind of United News chief executive Clive Hollick, who is now reported to be weighing a bid of up to 520p per share, valuing Blenheim at some 480 million pounds ($757 million).
Blenheim shares closed 6 1/2p lower at 477 1/2p on Monday.
United News has so far refused to declare its hand. Analysts said a complicating factor was the continuing reorganisation of its businesses following its merger earlier this year with television and financial services group MAI. United News also publishes two British national newspapers.
"A bid makes a lot of sense but the timing is not good for United News," said media analyst Nick Ward of Credit Lyonnais Laing.
Blenheim, in which French utilities company Generale des Eaux has a 15 percent stake, posted pre-tax profits of 35.6 million pounds in 1995 on turnover of 202.5 million.
France was its largest source of revenue, accounting for 37 percent of earnings, followed by 26 percent from the U.S., 20 percent from Britain, 11 percent from Germany and six percent from the rest of the world.
Miller Freeman is the business magazines and exhibitions arm of United News. It operates in the U.S., Europe and Asia but analysts regard the American market as its main strength.
Analyst Anthony de Larrinaga of Panmure Gordon said a bid of around five pounds per share would represent an attractive deal for investors in both United and Blenheim.
He said that United was likely to be considering a bid between 480p and 530p per share. ($1=.6337 Pound)
English football champions Manchester United extended their outstanding recent stock market form on Monday as renewed bid speculation sent the share price soaring by over 10 percent for the second straight session.
The latest gains were by a weekend report in the Sunday Express that American Mark McCormack's IMG marketing agency was considering a bid for United.
"We never make comments on unsubstantiated press stories," said an official at IMG's London office. But he said that IMG, most active in sports such as tennis and golf, was interested in increasing its involvement in football.
Earlier this year IMG lost out to sportwear company Adidas in a battle for control of former French football champions Olympique Marseille.
The Express report said that any credible bid for United would have to be pitched at around 650-700 pence per share, valuing the club at around 430 million pounds ($678 million).
United shares rocketed again on Monday, rising 54.5p to 568p, valuing the club at around 350 million pounds.
The share price has virtually trebled since the start of the year and added almost 25 percent in the last two sessions alone.
The latest winning run was triggered when chief executive Martin Edwards said last week that United's status as Britain's most profitable soccer club made it a likely bid target.
Publishing group VCI is reported to have made a 300 million pound bid for United earlier this year which was rejected.
Analysts say that United would be an attractive target for media companies, citing the U.S example of television mogul Ted Turner who owns the Atlanta Braves baseball team.
The potential income from pay-per-view television deals is also helping to drive the share price and may make United's main shareholders think twice about selling now.
"The directors own 22 percent of the club...They can sit back for five years and enjoy the football and then enjoy the benefits when the really big money comes in from pay-per-view," said Vinay Bedi of brokerage Wise Speke.
Pay-per-view is expected to be introduced by the end of the century and could allow leading clubs such as United to earn tens of millions of pounds annually from television.
Focus on such juicy future pickings also lifted shares in Tottenham Hotspur, the other Premier League club with a full London Stock Exchange listing. They added 11p to 461p.
United, who last season won the coveted English league and F.A. Cup double, had television income of 5.7 million pounds in 1995-96 when the club made a profit of 15.4 million before tax.
A new contract between the Premier League and satellite broadcaster BSkyB will mean that United's television income should treble to around 15 million pounds from next year. ($1=.6337 Pound)
Shares in Premier Farnell dipped on Monday after the newly enlarged electronic components distributor posted half-year profits slightly below expectations.
Premier Farnell was created in April when Britain's Farnell Electronics completed a $2.8 billion takeover of America's Premier Industrial Corp -- a company twice its size.
Pre-tax profit for the six months to July 28 totalled 56.1 million pounds ($88.4 million). That was down on the pre-tax figure of 71.3 million pounds a year earlier but that had been flattered by a large one-off gain.
More pertinently, analysts had forecast profit in a range of 57.5 to 61.6 million pounds and the failure to reach that level was reflected in a 10.5p decline in the share price to 670p.
The company said that the market for electronic components has shown much lower levels of growth in 1996 than in recent years and added it did not expect any major change in conditions for the rest of the year.
"I think the evidence is we've bottomed the cycle and the signs at the moment are positive. But we are planning on a more conservative basis at this moment in time," chief executive Howard Poulson told Reuters.
Premier said its priorities were the development and international expansion of the catalogue business and further exploitation of synergies between its transatlantic operations.
Poulson said he was delighted with progress on integration following an acquisition which had transformed the company, based in the northern English town of Wetherby, into the third largest electronic components distributor in the world.
"The integration is going superbly..I am very pleased with what people have done on both sides of the Atlantic," he said.
He said he did not see any further scope for cutting costs following the acquisition.
"I think we've finished with all of the cost-cutting. This was never a deal which was built on reducing overheads and getting rid of people," he said.
"We said we would remove duplication in our two head offices -- we've done that, we've probably dropped about 150 people since we made the acquisition." The company now has some 6,500 staff, 4,000 of whom are in the United States.
"What the business is about now is building sales and building our profits that way," he added.
Premier Farnell said its sales expansion projects were on schedule and should begin to make a contribution in the fourth quarter of the year. REUTER
($1=.6350 Pound)
United News &amp; Media on Tuesday secured victory in a battle for control of international exhibitions group Blenheim with an agreed offer valuing the company at 592.5 million pounds ($935 million).
The deal will create the world's largest trade exhibition group with a turnover of more than 500 million pounds, based on 1995 figures.
Media and financial services group United said it had already secured acceptances for 51 percent of Blenheim after offering five pounds per share.
"The acquisition will be earnings-enhancing in the first full year but the real attraction is the long-term growth we can get out by combining these businesses into one group," United chief executive Clive Hollick told Reuters.
United News shares added 31 pence to 674-1/2 pence after the announcement, while Blenheim gained 22-1/2 to 496.
Dutch publisher VNU, which last week acquired a 15 percent stake in Blenheim, said it would not make a counter-bid and was likely to sell its stake. That decision effectively removed the threat of a bidding war developing for Blenheim.
Anglo-Dutch media group Reed-Elsevier had been regarded as a rival suitor to United but sources close to the company indicated in the last few days that it had dropped out of the running.
The deal ends an on-off saga that began in June when Blenheim said it had received a bid approach. In August it said that talks with an unnamed party had broken down but then made another statement a few weeks later confirming a new approach.
Based on 1995 figures, combined turnover and operating profit would be 545.5 million pounds and 88 million pounds, respectively.
Analysts said that Blenheim's geographical strength in continental Europe, and France in particular, made it a good fit with United.
United's Miller Freeman subsidiary operates more than 100 exhibitions in the United States, Europe and Asia but the American market is seen as its main strength. These exhibitions are supported by a range of trade publications.
Blenheim operates more than 170 exhibitions worldwide but does not have a significant publishing portfolio.
"The directors of United believe that the Miller Freeman and Blenheim trade show portfolios are highly complementary geographically, by market sector, and in terms of operational management," United said in a statement.
The acquisition is the first major move by United since the national newspaper group merged with television and financial services group MAI earlier this year.
That merger doubled the size of the company, creating a British media major with a market capitalisation of more than three billion pounds.
United News &amp; Media on Tuesday emerged with the winning hand after a lengthy poker game over the future of international exhibitions group Blenheim.
United, which has interests in British national newspapers and commercial television, trumped its rivals with an agreed offer valuing Blenheim at 592.5 million pounds ($935 million).
The deal will create the world's largest trade exhibition group with a turnover of more than 500 million pounds based on 1995 figures.
Media and financial services group United said it had already secured acceptances for 51 percent of Blenheim after offering five pounds per share.
"The acquisition will be earnings-enhancing in the first full year but the real attraction is the long-term growth we can get out by combining these businesses into one group," United chief executive Clive Hollick told Reuters.
United News shares added 30 pence to 683-1/2 pence after the announcement, while Blenheim gained 23 to 496-1/2.
Dutch publisher VNU, which last week acquired a 15 percent stake in Blenheim, said it would not make a counter bid and was likely to sell its stake. That decision effectively removed the threat of a bidding war developing for Blenheim.
Anglo-Dutch media group Reed-Elsevier had been regarded as a rival suitor, but sources close to the company indicated in recent days that it had dropped out of the running.
French utilities group Compagnie Generale des Eaux confirmed on Tuesday that it planned to sell its 15 percent stake in Blenheim following United's offer.
The deal ends an on-off saga that began in June when Blenheim said it had received a bid approach. In August it said that talks with an unnamed party had broken down but then made another statement a few weeks later confirming a new approach.
Analysts said that Blenheim's geographical strength in continental Europe, and France in particular, made it a good fit with United.
"After VNU's move, United have done well to tie it up at five pounds a share," said David Forster of Salomon Brothers.
"In Miller Freeman, United have a substantial established business in this area and Blenheim will fit well into it."
United's Miller Freeman subsidiary operates more than 100 exhibitions in the United States, Europe and Asia but the American market is seen as its main strength. These exhibitions are supported by a range of trade publications.
Blenheim operates more than 170 exhibitions worldwide but does not have a significant publishing portfolio.
"The directors of United believe that the Miller Freeman and Blenheim trade show portfolios are highly complementary geographically, by market sector, and in terms of operational management," United said in a statement.
The acquisition is the first major move by United since the national newspaper group merged with television and financial services group MAI earlier this year.
That merger doubled the size of the company, creating a British media major with a market capitalisation of more than three billion pounds. ($1=.6337 Pound)
United News &amp; Media on Tuesday secured victory in a battle for control of international exhibitions group Blenheim with an agreed offer valuing the company at 592.5 million pounds ($935 million).
The deal will create the world's largest trade exhibition group with a turnover of more than 500 million pounds, based on 1995 figures.
Media and financial services group United said it had already secured acceptances for 51 percent of Blenheim after offering five pounds per share.
"The acquisition will be earnings-enhancing in the first full year but the real attraction is the long-term growth we can get out by combining these businesses into one group," United chief executive Clive Hollick told Reuters.
United News shares added 31p to 674-1/2p after the announcement, while Blenheim gained 22-1/2p to 496p.
Dutch publisher VNU, which last week acquired a 15 percent stake in Blenheim, said it would not make a counter-bid and was likely to sell its stake. That decision effectively removed the threat of a bidding war developing for Blenheim.
Anglo-Dutch media group Reed-Elsevier had been regarded as a rival suitor to United but sources close to the company indicated in the last few days that it had dropped out of the running.
The deal ends an on-off saga that began in June when Blenheim said it had received a bid approach. In August it said that talks with an unnamed party had broken down but then made another statement a few weeks later confirming a new approach.
Based on 1995 figures, combined turnover and operating profit would be 545.5 million pounds and 88 million pounds, respectively.
Analysts said that Blenheim's geographical strength in continental Europe, and France in particular, made it a good fit with United.
United's Miller Freeman subsidiary operates more than 100 exhibitions in the U.S., Europe and Asia but the American market is seen as its main strength. These exhibitions are supported by a range of trade publications.
Blenheim operates more than 170 exhibitions worldwide but does not have a significant publishing portfolio.
"The directors of United believe that the Miller Freeman and Blenheim trade show portfolios are highly complementary geographically, by market sector, and in terms of operational management," United said in a statement.
The acquisition is the first major move by United since the national newspaper group merged with television and financial services group MAI earlier this year.
That merger doubled the size of the company, creating a British media major with a market capitalisation of more than three billion pounds. ($1=.6337 Pound)
Marjorie Scardino, set to become Pearson chief executive in January, rejects the tag of company insider and has vowed to carry out radical change at the British media firm "if needed".
Selecting an American woman to head a top British company was certain to raise a few eyebrows in the City of London. But initial doubts are paradoxically based on the fact that she is seen as part of the Pearson family rather than a newcomer.
"The message that this appointment puts across is that we can expect more of the same from the company. That's not what the market wanted to hear," said one media analyst.
Scardino, 49, is chief executive of business publisher The Economist Group, 50 percent owned by Pearson.
But she said that The Economist is run as an independent operation and she is not part of the Pearson establishment.
"I would like to put that one to rest - I am an outsider to Pearson," the mother-of-three told Reuters.
She said that she had spoken to the members of the Pearson board and had been assured that they were prepared to accept radical change "if needed".
She said she was well aware of press and market criticism of a lack of management focus at Pearson, a company whose activities range from the Financial Times to Australian soap opera "Neighbours".
Pearson has sold off businesses in wine, china and oil services in recent years to concentrate on three media-related areas -- Information, Education and Entertainment.
"I know this company has been broken up and put back together (by journalists and analysts) in all kinds of ways. I think I'm aware of all the possibilities."
There was more bad press on Thursday as the market questioned her qualifications.
"She's apparently been very successful at the Economist but it's not the same as running a major PLc," said one analyst.
But she received a glowing reference from Economist chairman Dominic Cadbury: "I am sure that she will move quickly to assess the Pearson business and define a new strategic direction which she will set about implementing," he said.
Profits at the Economist have more than doubled during her three years as chief executive. Scardino is also a director of U.S. food giant ConAgra Inc and British retailer WH Smith.
Born in Arizona but brought up in Texas, Scardino worked in the 1970s as a lawyer in Savannah, Georgia -- the hometown of her journalist husband.
By night she helped him with his weekly Georgia Gazette newspaper where he won a Pulitzer prize for his work.
She moved to New York in the mid 1980s where she headed the Economist's North American operations for several years.
She lives in the swish west London quarter of Knightsbridge with husband Albert. The couple have three children -- the youngest of whom is making a name for himself as an actor.
Indeed, Hal Scardino, 11, is maybe better known than his high-powered Mum. His films include Marvin's Room with Meryl Streep, Diane Keaton and Robert de Niro and The Indian in the Cupboard, for which he won a best child actor award.
"He's been in a couple of movies but I wouldn't call him a star," she said. Her other son, Will, is 16 while daughter Adelaide, 18, has just returned to the U.S. to study.
Shares in Pearson Plc fell on Thursday as the stock market gave an initial thumbs-down to the appointment of an American woman publishing executive as chief executive of the British media group.
Marjorie Scardino, 49, chief executive of The Economist Group that is half owned by Pearson -- which publishes the Financial Times British business daily -- will succeed Frank Barlow as chief executive at the end of the year.
Her appointment ends a long period of uncertainty over the succession to Barlow, 66, who is retiring.
But market players were dismayed by her close ties with the Pearson group and the fact that a big name executive had not been brought in from outside to knock the business into shape.
"The message that this appointment puts across is that we can expect more of the same from the company. That's not what the market wanted to hear," said one media analyst.
Pearson shares fell to a low of 668 pence after the announcement. They recovered a little but still ended the day 13p lower at 675.
The company also announced that Dennis Stevenson, a non-executive director, becomes deputy chairman now and will take over from Michael Blakenham as chairman next May.
Scardino said that she was not a Pearson insider.
"I would like to put that one to rest -- I am an outsider to Pearson," she told Reuters.
She said that a trust agreement meant that Pearson directors remained in a minority on the Economist board. "We jealously guard our independence, we're not a part of the Pearson group."
Trained as a lawyer, Scardino helped her journalist husband to run the Pulitzer Prize winning local weekly the Georgia Gazette in the 1970s. The couple moved to New York in the 1980s where she headed the Economist's North American operation.
Share analysts say that her main task is to bring focus to Pearson, a sprawling media and leisure company which has a market capitalisation of almost four billion pounds ($6.3 billion).
Barlow has reshaped the company in his six years in charge, selling off the Royal Doulton china business and wine and oil industry interests. The company has focused on three divisions -- Information, Education and Entertainment. Its activities range from Australian soap opera to the Financial Times and analysts say not all pieces of the jigsaw fit.
Scardino, a mother of three, said she was prepared to make radical changes "if needed".
"I know this company has been broken up and put back together (by journalists and analysts) in all kinds of ways. I think I'm aware of all the possibilities."
She won a ringing endorsement from Dominic Cadbury, her colleague as chairman of business publisher the Economist.
"I am sure that she will move quickly to assess the Pearson business and define a new strategic direction which she will set about implementing," he said.
"She has the appropriate experience of publishing and a background as a lawyer, as well as knowing the U.S. and British environments first hand, and has a great record of success in the Economist's growing business and circulation."
Revenue has increased by almost 80 percent in her time at trhe Economist while profit after tax has more than doubled to 17.7 million pounds this year from 7.8 million in 1993. ($1=.6299 Pound)
Shares in Pearson Plc slipped on Thursday as the stock market reacted negatively to the appointment of a relatively little-known insider as chief executive of the British media group.
Marjorie Scardino, currently chief executive of The Economist Group that is half owned by Pearson, will succeed Frank Barlow as chief executive at the end of the year.
Dennis Stevenson, who is a non-executive director, becomes deputy chairman now and will take over from Michael Blakenham as chairman at Pearson's annual meeting next May.
The appointment of Scardino ends a long period of uncertainty over the succession to Barlow, 66, who had said he planned to retire by early next year.
But the market greeted her appointment with scepticism, with market players saying they knew little about her. The shares fell to a low of 668 pence, but later recovered to 678 for a loss of 10 pence.
"The market was looking for a big hitter and she wasn't the big name it was looking for," one market-maker said in reference to Scardino.
The market was also worried by a report in the Independent newspaper that said Pearson had resolved concerns about the tax implications of selling its stake in British satellite broadcaster BSkyB but faced difficulties separating direct and indirect holdings.
The report said Pearson's indirect stake of around four percent was worth 440 million pounds ($697.4 million) at BSkyB's current share price.
Pearson, which has a market capitalisation of almost four billion pounds, is a sprawling media and leisure company with interests ranging from the Financial Times business newspaper to television soap opera.
Analysts have criticised the company for a lack of a clear strategy and it has long been seen as a potential bid target.
Scardino said she was excited to be joining Pearson.
"It is one of the few companies positioned strongly enough to take advantage of the opportunities in the rapidly changing, digital-driven international marketplace."
Blakenham, who has been chairman of Pearson since 1983 following a six year stint as chief executive, said in statement the appointments completed the succession process at Pearson.
Barlow, who has been chief executive for seven years, had agreed to extend his contract for two years after his retirement date in 1995 in order to help implement the group's strategy to focus on the media sector.
"I think Pearson's future is very favourable and Marjorie Scardino is a very good appointment," he told Reuters.
Scardino, 49, has been chief executive of the Economist since 1992, before which she headed its North American operations.
Prior to that, she was partner in a Savannah, Georgia law firm and publisher and founder with her husband of a Pulitzer Prize-winning newspaper, the Georgia Gazette.
Stevenson is chairman of aircraft leasing group GPA and is also a non-executive director of British Sky Broadcasting, J. Rothschild Assurance Plc and Manpower Inc. ($1=.6309 Pound)
The director-general of the BBC called on Friday for an increase in the British television licence fee to protect what he said was "the most successful cultural institution in the world".
Speaking at the Edinburgh International Television Festival, John Birt said the fee -- payable by all television set owners -- had fallen in real terms over the past decade and described the recent financial history of the BBC as "miraculous".
He said an increase was needed to help fund new services as digital technology multiplies the number of channels available.
"The BBC is the most successful cultural institution in the world, one of the great inventions of the 20th century. But it can no longer be taken for granted," Birt said.
"If it (the BBC) is to innovate with high-quality services in the new technologies as it has done again and again ... then at some point in the future -- and for the first time since 1985 -- we shall need a real increase in the licence fee."
A colour television licence costs 89.50 pounds ($139.10) annually. Licence income totals around 1.8 billion pounds each year -- 95 percent of BBC income. The money funds the BBC's five national radio stations as well as its two television channels.
Sources at the BBC said it wanted a modest rise in "low single (percentage) figures over time". The BBC will shortly begin talks with the government to review the licence fee -- currently pegged to inflation.
Any price increase would take effect from April 1, 1997. A general election is due in Britain by next May and the government might be reluctant to saddle viewers with a higher licence fee shortly before it went to the polls.
Birt said the BBC was now towards the bottom of the European licence fee league table. He added that a top-rate subscription to satellite broadcaster BSkyB, the dominant force in British pay television, costs 300 pounds annually.
The BBC says it has achieved cost savings of 100 million pounds in each of the past three years and aims to build on its commercial success as Europe's biggest broadcasting exporter.
But Birt said more licence money was vital.
Digital technology -- which will allow the creation of hundreds of new channels and interactive services such as home shopping -- is set to reach Britain next year.
BSkyB is planning to launch digital satellite services in late 1997 and a terrestrial version is expected to follow within a further 12 months.
The BBC is planning to offer licence-fee payers supplementary programming and a 24-hour news service as it moves into the digital era.
"It (digital) will mean upholding our national role -- and opening new doors wherever we can for licence fee payers," Birt added.
($1=.6436 Pound)
The head of British public television broadcaster Channel 4 urged the government on Monday to reject moves to privatise the service.
Channel 4 chief executive Michael Grade said that privatisation was "on the political agenda" and called on the government to "dispel this nonsense".
"The board of Channel 4 is going to fight this all the way," Grade told a meeting at the Edinburgh International Television Festival.
Free marketeers in the ruling Conservative party have suggested that Channel 4 could be put up for sale but privatisation is not currently part of government policy. Its advocates want it included in the Conservative manifesto for the general election due by next May.
Channel 4, set up in 1982 with a brief to transmit innovative and minority programming, is a statutory, state-controlled, corporation funded by advertising.
Its funding contrasts with state-controlled British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), which is funded by a licence fee payable by everybody who owns a television set.
"We are the nursery for talent without one penny of public subsidy. I defy the Treasury to produce a justification for chucking this achievement down the drain," said Grade.
He said that privatisation would spell the end for Channel 4 in its current form and force it to become more mainstream.
"The only honest approach is to admit that a one-off Treasury "bank raid" can only be executed by making Channel 4 just another commercial network like ITV or Channel 5."
Grade highlighted Channel 4's promotion of the British film industry. Its support and funding has helped to produce recent international box-office hits like "Four Weddings And A Funeral" and "Trainspotting".
Recent reports have suggested that the sale of Channel 4 could raise as much as two billion pounds.
However, Anthony Fry from merchant bank BZW told the conference he was "totally unpersuaded" that Channel 4 was worth anything like as much as that.
Political opposition to the BBC's call for more public funding lent added urgency on Monday to joint venture talks between the corporation and two rival pay television groups.
The two rivals for the BBC's hand are U.S.-controlled cable and satellite programmer Flextech and satellite broadcaster BSkyB, in which Rupert Murdoch's News Corp is the largest shareholder.
Both want to launch new subscription channels based on the BBC's wealth of quality programming.
The BBC is under increased pressure to beef up its commercial activities after politicians criticised its demand for an above-inflation licence fee increase.
BBC Director-General John Birt used a speech at the Edinburgh International Television Festival on Friday to launch the campaign for what he said would be the first real increase in the licence fee since 1985.
The fee, fixed by the government and payable by all television set owners, is 89.50 pounds ($139.1) annually.
Birt argued that more money was needed to ensure the BBC remains "the touchstone of quality" in the digital era.
But politicians from both main political parties appear opposed to his appeal. With a general election due by next May, party strategists believe it would be folly to support a rise.
The BBC is seeking to preserve its place at the heart of the broadcasting world as the industry gears up for a new era.
Digital technology -- in which images are transmitted as a series of binary digits rather than as varying electric signals as under the existing analogue method -- will soon make hundreds of extra channels available.
The BBC, with its huge library and production facilities, is an ideal partner for companies such as Flextech and BSkyB as they seek to compile attractive programme packages.
The BBC plans to offer a 24-hour news channel, supplementary programming and wide-screen tranmission to all licence fee payers in the digital era. Joint-venture subscription channels in areas such as drama and natural history would help fund this expansion.
The BBC reported a net benefit of 77 million pounds from commercial activity last year -- small beer compared with the 1.8 billion pounds generated by the licence fee. It is aiming to treble commercial income over the next few years.
Media industry analysts say that Flextech is in a strong position in talks with the BBC.
The two are already partners in UK Gold, a subscription channel showing vintage shows. British media group Pearson and Cox Communications of the U.S are also partners in UK Gold but Flextech is in talks to buy them out.
It could also unlock the lucrative north American market for the BBC as its parent, Tele-Communications Inc (TCI), is the largest cable television group in the United States.
A report in Sunday's Observer quoted Adam Singer, head of TCI's international division, as saying they would want any new Flextech-BBC channels to be carried on BSkyB's network as it has the widest distribution for pay channels in Britain.
But BSkyB, which is planning to launch digital satellite services offering some 200 channels in late 1997, would clearly prefer to deal directly with the BBC.
It could use its financial muscle to make the cash-strapped BBC an offer which the corporation would find hard to refuse.
($1=.6436 Pound)
Merchant banking and Madame Tussaud's could be deemed surplus to requirements as a new management team at Britain's Pearson Plc mould a media company for the next millennium, analysts said on Wednesday.
The Pearson empire contains prize brands such as the Financial Times newspaper and Penguin books but Marjorie Scardino, who will take over as chief executive in January, has said that overall profit performance is inadequate.
Analysts say Pearson has yet to complete its 1990s journey from industrial conglomerate to focused media enterprise.  
"The definition of their three core business areas -- Information, Education and Entertainment is a little imprecise," said Mark Beilby of Deutsche Morgan Grenfell. "They may have to jettison some high value assets and focus on pinpoint areas."
Analysts cite Anglo-Dutch company Reed Elsevier as an example of a media company which has successfully identified key market areas and built up strong positions in these -- the provision of high-margin business information being Reed's speciality.  
They point out that Pearson, with a market capitalisation of around four billion stg, is not a media giant in global terms and that its capital and management time is being too thinly spread under the current structure.
Pearson's 50 percent stake in London investment bank Lazard Brothers -- which does not fit into one of the three core business areas -- is seen as a likely candidate for disposal.
"At some stage Lazards will go out of the door to make Pearson into more of a genuine media company," said Louise Barton of Henderson Crosthwaite.  
Close boardroom links between Pearson and Lazards could complicate matters. However, analysts say a sale would go a long way towards convincing doubters that Scardino is prepared to shake up the company.
The Tussauds Group, which includes London's famous Madame Tussaud's waxworks museum and a number of theme parks, is also seen as peripheral and a drain on resources for a company which could earn richer pickings from television and publishing.
U.S. consumer software publisher Mindscape is the most glaring weakness, with Pearson forecasting a 46 million stg loss this year from a business it paid $462 million for in 1994.  
"If it doesn't work, they'll have to close it down. But it might provide a positive return in a couple of years," said one analyst. Pearson is forecasting a return to profit for Mindscape in late 1997.
Pearson's uneven record has long made it potential prey for media rivals keen to pounce on its stellar assets and sell off the rest.
Recent newspaper reports suggested BSkyB was lining up a bid but the satellite broadcaster strongly denied them. Media and leisure company Granada and Reed-Elsevier have also been rumoured as possible bidders in recent months.  
"You cannot dismiss the idea that BSkyB would be interested in Pearson's television interests as it tries to build up its content," said Henderson Crosthwaite's Barton.
Pearson's television interests include the Thames and Grundy production houses and a stake in Britain's planned fifth terrestrial station.
Pearson television supremo Greg Dyke is thought to favour a de-merger of the television businesses. But analysts said such a move would almost certainly prompt a bid for that part of the business from any one of BSkyB, Granada, Carlton Communications or United News &amp; Media.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
Glasgow-based Stakis Plc and Saudi billionaire Prince al-Waleed bin Talal are the likely purchasers of the Metropole and Princess hotel chains from Lonrho Plc, analysts said on Wednesday.
British conglomerate Lonrho, in the throes of a demerger, said last month it had received interest from potential buyers of the hotels and shelved plans to float them.
The London daily Financial Times reported on Wednesday that the sale of the chains for more than 650 million pounds ($1 billion) could be completed within the next fortnight. There was no immediate comment from Lonrho on the report.
Stakis, which has some 46 British hotels, has refused to comment on reports it planned to buy the five Metropole properties. But the hotels and casino group remains the clear favourite to clinch a deal.
"It would be an excellent fit for Stakis. It's just the size of the deal that could cause concern," said analyst Fraser Ramzan of Lehman Brothers.
Markets have speculated that Stakis was planning a rights issue to fund the purchase of the Metropole hotels, valued at about 350 million pounds.
The Metropole group comprises five business and conference hotels located in the British cities of London and Birmingham and the seaside towns of Brighton and Blackpool.
Hotelier Millennium &amp; Copthorne, floated in London this year, has effectively ruled itself out of the race. A company spokesman said Millennium had looked at the Metropole hotels but was not in talks to buy them.
Meanwhile. Prince al-Waleed is believed to be negotiating the purchase of the Princess chain, 10 properties of resorts in the United States, the Caribbean and Mexico.
Financial sources in the Gulf told Reuters this month that al-Waleed had exclusive rights to negotiate a deal at a price of $300 million. The prince has major investments in New York's luxury Plaza hotel, the Four Seasons hotel group, in the banking group Citicorp and Disneyland Paris theme park.
The hotel business is in a growth phase as economic recovery on both sides of the Atlantic help drive occupancy rates.
But there have also been a glut of hotel companies coming to Britain's market, with Jarvis Hotels and Thistle following the example of Millennium &amp; Copthorne.
And there are signs of investor indigestion, as witnessed by recent cancellations of stock market floats.
Analysts said investors were now looking much more closely at the merits of individual companies but said they still expected the sector to remain positive into 1997.
"Over the past year, people have become far more discerning about the type of hotel business they become involved in. But that does not mean they are reluctant to invest in the sector," said Greg Feehley of Kleinwort Benson.
And if that is the case, there is also no shortage of property on the market, with British media and leisure group Granada selling 17 luxury hotels in Britain and overseas.  The hotels, known as the Exclusive range, were acquired by Granada as part of the 3.9 billion pound takeover of leading British hotelier Forte last January.
American hotel companies ITT Sheraton and Marriott are reportedly among potential purchasers for the chain. A deal is expected to be concluded around the turn of the year.
Britain's commercial television watchdog on Thursday invited applications to run terrestrial frequencies which will multiply the number of channels available to viewers in the new digital age.
"This is a very important day for U.K. viewers...as many as 35 or 36 channels could be available on digital terrestrial television," said Peter Rogers, chief executive of the Independent Television Commission (ITC).
The ITC is seeking applications to operate four "multiplexes", as the blocks of frequencies are known. Each block can carry as many as six digital channels.
The BBC has already been earmarked its own multiplex and commercial networks ITV and Channel 4 will share one.
The ITC will award the 12-year licences on criteria including speed of roll-out of the service and the appeal of programming but a cash bid will not be required. Licences are expected to be awarded next spring and broadcasting could begin by mid-1998.
Britain is leading the way in the development of digital terrestrial television but some observers question whether it will succeed.
Pay television operator BSkyB, in which Rupert Murdoch's News Corp is the largest shareholder, plans to launch a digital satellite service into Britain in late 1997 -- several months ahead of the terrestrial version.
The satellite version could offer several hundred channels and BSkyB's control of key movie and sporting rights is likely to make it an attractive proposition.
Rogers told a news conference he was confident the terrestrial option would prove attractive to investors.
"I would be surprised and disappointed if we didn't have applications for all of the multiplexes," he said.
His view was shared by Paul Styles, a media expert at consultancy and accounting firm KPMG.
"Most people perceive digital bandwith to be valuable so I think there will be interest in the multiplexes," he said.
"This will not be an overnight sensation but a business to be built," he said, identifying ITV companies, cable groups and BSkyB itself as potential licence applicants.
Digital technology increases the number of channels which can be transmitted and enhances sound and picture quality. it also enables interactive services such as home shopping and home banking to be created.
Digital means converting sound and pictures into binary digits -- a series of noughts and ones -- rather than transmitting them as electric signals as now happens. A set-top box or "decoder" will be required to receive digital services.
This is also a source of controversy, as ITC officials admit that there is no current British or European legislation to enforce a common standard for decoders.
That means that consumers could theoretically have to pay several hundred pounds (dollars) for a set-top box to receive BSkyB's digital services and then have to buy a second box a few months later to receive digital terrestrial.
Britain's commercial television watchdog on Thursday invited applications to run terrestrial frequencies which will multiply the number of channels available to viewers in the new digital age.
"This is a very important day for UK viewers...as many as 35 or 36 channels could be available on digital terrestrial television," said Peter Rogers, chief executive of the Independent Television Commission (ITC).
The ITC is seeking applications to operate four "multiplexes", as the blocks of frequencies are known. Each block can carry as many as six digital channels.
The BBC has already been earmarked its own multiplex, and commercial networks ITV and Channel 4 will share one.
The ITC will award the 12-year licences on critieria including speed of roll-out of the service and the appeal of programming but a cash bid will not be required. Licences are expected to be awarded next spring and broadcasting could begin by mid-1998.
Britain is leading the way in the development of digital terrestrial but some observers question whether it will succeed.
Pay television operator BSkyB, in which Rupert Murdoch's News Corp is the largest shareholder, plans to launch a digital satellite service into Britain in late 1997 -- several months ahead of the terrestrial version.
The satellite version could offer several hundred channels and BSkyB's control of key movie and sporting rights are likely to make it an attractive proposition.
The ITC's Rogers told a news conference he was confident the terrestrial option would prove attractive to investors.
"I would be surprised and disappointed if we didn't have applications for all of the multiplexes," he said.
His view was shared by Paul Styles, a media expert at consultancy and accounting firm KPMG.
"Most people perceive digital bandwith to be valuable so I think there will be interest in the multiplexes," he said.
"This will not be an overnight sensation but a business to be built," he said, identifying ITV companies, cable groups and BSkyB itself as potential licence applicants.
Digital technology increases the number of channels which can be transmitted and enhances sound and picture quality. it also enables interactive services such as home shopping and home banking to be created.
Digital means converting sound and pictures into binary digits -- a series of noughts and ones -- rather than transmitting them as electric signals as now happens. A set-top box or "decoder" will be required to receive digital services.
This is also a source of controversy, as ITC officials admit that there is no current UK or European legislation to enforce a common standard for decoders.
That means that consumers could theoretically have to pay several hundred pounds (dollars) for a set-top box to receive BSkyB's digital services and then have to buy a second box a few months later to receive digital terrestrial.
British Labour Euro MP Carole Tongue on Thursday wrote to European Commissioner Martin Bangemann to demand that all set-top boxes provide a common interface for all broadcasters.
British pay television operator BSkyB said on Friday that it was considering further investment in Germany and would beam its second pay-per-view sports event into Britain later this month.
The satellite broadcaster said pre-tax profit had risen by 31 percent to 66 million pounds ($107.5 million) in the three months to September 30.
The company, in which Rupert Murdoch's News Corp is the leading shareholder, said that total paying subscribers had reached 5.65 million at 30 September, a net increase for the quarter of 146,000.
"The company has performed strongly in the first quarter and has achieved significant growth in both revenue and profits," said BSkyB chief executive Sam Chisholm.
"Our increased investment in all areas of programming and the quality and choice we offer our subscribers will maintain our impetus," he added.
Operating revenues for the three months to September 30 increased to 266 million pounds, a rise of 24 percent on a year earlier. Earnings per share were 3.9 pence, 30 percent up.
BSkyB shares rose 4p to 582-1/2p although analysts said the subscriber growth figures were "unexciting" and the profits in line with expectations.
BSkyB said in July that it would take a stake of up to 49 percent in DF1, the German digital television venture launched by Bavarian media mogul Leo Kirch. BSkyB said on Friday it was considering investments in additional German Pay TV channels.
DF1 has made a slow start but the German pay television market is expected to expand rapidly in coming years.
BSkyB said it would show its second pay-per-view event on November 9 when Mike Tyson and Evander Holyfield meet in Las Vegas for the WBA heavyweight boxing crown.
BSkyB successfully experimented with pay-per-view when Tyson fought Briton Frank Bruno in March. More than 600,000 homes paid some 10 pounds to see that fight.
BSkyB has said it plans to introduce digital satellite broadcasting into Britain late next year. Pay-per-view sports events and movies are likely to be one of the prime sources of income from the extra channels provided by digital.
Niche channels Sky Scottish and The Computer Channel were launched on Friday, bringing the total number of channels available on Sky Television to over forty.
However, Friday's planned launch of WBTV-The Warner Channel was postponed at the 11th hour on Thursday evening.
The Warner Channel -- a mixture of Bugs Bunny cartoons and vintage movies -- was apparently a victim of the legal battle being fought in the United States between Murdoch and the combined might of CNN founder Ted Turner and Time Warner.
That clash of the titans centres on whether Time Warner, the second largest U.S. cable operator, will carry News Corp's 24-hour Fox News Service in New York City. Fox is a major rival to CNN, now part of Time Warner following a recent merger. ($1=.6141 Pound)
A $22 billion deal between British Telecom Plc and MCI Communications Corp that would create the world's second largest telecoms group looked set to be announced on Sunday, sources close to the talks said.
BT said it had scheduled a news conference for 1300 GMT on Sunday at its Central London headquarters following an earlier announcement that it was in merger talks with MCI Communications Corp.
A spokesman said he could not say what the news conference would be about, only that it would be in connection with recent developments.
Executives from BT and MCI were locked in separate board meetings on opposite sides of the Atlantic on Saturday as they and their advisers attempted to stitch together the biggest deal ever in the rapidly expanding telecommunications industry.
MCI, the number two U.S. long-distance phone company, sent shock waves through the global communications industry on Friday when it said it was in talks about a takeover by BT.
BT, the dominant player in the British market, has been building its overseas presence in recent years and already has a 20 percent stake in MCI. The two also operate a joint venture known as Concert which serves customers in more than 50 nations.
Analysts are speculating on a price of $40 a share -- valuing MCI at $28 billion and leaving BT with a bill of about $22.1 billion to pay for the remaining 80 percent of MCI.
The deal would be the second largest involving a U.S. company -- topped only by the buyout of RJR Nabisco by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts &amp; Co.
A BT spokesman confirmed that the BT board was meeting over the weekend to consider an anticipated proposal from MCI.
BT's nine-storey corporate headquarters was a hive of activity on Saturday as bankers, lawyers and advisers worked alongside the BT board. A BT spokesman said that the MCI board was also meeting in Washington.
BT and MCI have both said there are no assurances that an agreement will be reached or that any transaction will be consummated. They have said a further announcement is anticipated before the London stock market opens on Monday.
BT had unsuccessful merger talks earlier this year with British rival Cable &amp; Wireless -- a deal which would have created the world's fifth largest telecoms group by revenue.
Any BT/MCI deal would spawn a massive company with a market capitalisation of some $64 billion, just ahead of AT&amp;T Corp -- the leading, but struggling, U.S. phone company. It would still be some way behind Japanese giant NTT Data Corporation -- the world's largest.
Analysts said a merged company would be a good fit in the ultra-competitive U.S. long-distance phone industry where MCI and number three Sprint have been battling AT&amp;T.
Its critical mass would leave it excellently placed to expand into other international markets and new technologies -- MCI possessing the biggest Internet backbone in the U.S.
"This is AT&amp;T Corp's worst nightmare," said consultant Jeffrey Kagan of Kagan Telecom.
AT&amp;T said late on Friday it was confident any MCI/BT deal would receive proper scrutiny by the U.S. government.
"We would expect that our government would condition any such merger on the complete and unqualified opening of the telecom market in the United Kingdom," it said.
However, analysts regard the British market as broadly open to competition.
For its part, Britain's Trade and Industry Department (DTI) said on Saturday it was too early to say what regulatory hurdles any merger would have to clear.
One potential problem is a media joint venture between MCI and Rupert Murdoch's News Corp. BT would end up with MCI's 13 percent non-voting stake in News Corp and this could cause regulatory difficulties in Britain.
British telecoms watchdog Oftel recently banned a joint advertising campaign between BT and satellite broadcaster BSkyB, a company in which News Corp is the main shareholder.
A $22 billion takeover of MCI Communciations Corp would mark a spectacular end to Sir Peter Bonfield's first year as chief executive of British Telecommunications Plc.
BT was this weekend locked in talks with MCI, the second largest U.S. long-distance phone company, about buying the 80 percent of MCI it does not own.
The deal, if it can be clinched, would be a major coup for the former computer industry executive who took the helm at BT last January when the company split the roles of chairman and chief executive. Sir Iain Vallance, who had been combining the two roles since 1987, became BT chairman.
Bonfield's appointment was cheered by City commentators when it was announced last November.
The influential Financial Times newspaper described it as "one of the most positive events in the group's history".
The newspaper said the appointment marked "a turning point in BT's transition from public sector utility to competitive services group".
Bonfield, 52, had built a reputation for boosting revenue, curbing costs and international expansion during his 10 years in charge of ICL, the British computer company owned by Japan's Fujitsu Ltd.
"His wide international experience, his dedication to quality management and his in-depth knowledge of the computing services industry will be of particular relevance to BT, as we continue our global expansion," Vallance said when Bonfield moved to BT.
Within a few months of his arrival BT was in talks with British rival Cable &amp; Wireless about a merger that would have created a global telecommunications powerhouse.
Those talks ended unsuccessfully in May. But any MCI/BT deal would be bigger than that one that got away.
Bonfield has said he wants BT to be one of the most successful global telecoms companies 20 or 30 years from now. He believes BT's network of continental partners built up in recent years will allow it to become a true pan-European operator.
He has also targeted Asia-Pacific as a region where BT needs to expand, hence the attempt to do a deal with Cable and Wireless, which is very strong there.
Analysts say the critical mass from an MCI deal would provide the power to drive international expansion.
Bonfield also believes BT must become more responsive to its market. One of MCI's strengths is its reputation as an aggressive and fast-moving company.
He grew up in the small town of Hitchin, north of London, where he went to a local state school. He graduated in engineering from Loughborough University in the English Midlands in 1966.
He began his career with Texas Instruments, working in the field of semiconductors and computers in Europe, the Far East and the United States. He became a divisional director of Texas based in the U.S. before joining ICL in the early 1980s.
He became ICL managing director in 1984 and its chief executive and chairman the following year.
Bonfield, a trim, bearded individual, has an informal manner and a reputation for getting on well with colleagues. A married man, he lists his hobbies as sailing, jogging and music.
Executives from British Telecom Plc and MCI Communications Corp were on Saturday attempting to stitch together a $22 billion merger that would turn BT into the world's second largest telecoms group.
MCI, the number two U.S. long-distance phone company, sent shock waves through the global communications industry on Friday when it said it was in talks about a takeover by BT.
BT, the dominant player in the British market, has been building its overseas presence in recent years and already has a 20 percent stake in MCI. The two also operate a joint venture known as Concert which serves customers in more than 50 nations.
Analysts are speculating on a price of $40 a share -- valuing MCI at $28 billion and leaving BT with a bill of about $22.1 billion to pay for the remaining 80 percent of MCI.
The deal would be the biggest yet in the rapidly changing telecommunications market and the second largest involving a U.S. company -- topped only by the buyout of RJR Nabisco by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts &amp; Co.
A BT spokesman confirmed that the BT board was meeting over the weekend to consider an anticipated proposal from MCI.
He would not be drawn on where the meeting was taking place, saying only that BT chief executive Sir Peter Bonfield was not in the United States.
The spokesman said an announcement was anticipated prior to the opening of the London stock market on Monday. Sources close to the talks said no announcement was likely on Saturday.
BT and MCI have both said there are no assurances that an agreement will be reached or that any transaction will be consummated.
BT had unsuccessful merger talks earlier this year with British rival Cable &amp; Wireless -- a deal which would have created the world's fifth largest telecoms group by revenue.
Any BT/MCI deal would spawn a massive company with a market capitalisation of some $64 billion, just ahead of AT&amp;T Corp -- the leading, but struggling, U.S. phone company. It would still be some way behind Japanese giant NTT Data Corporation -- the world's largest.
Analysts said a merged company would be a good fit in the ultra-competitive U.S. long-distance phone industry where MCI and number three Sprint have been battling AT&amp;T.
Its critical mass would leave it excellently placed to expand into other international markets and new technologies -- MCI possessing the biggest Internet backbone in the U.S.
"This is AT&amp;T Corp's worst nightmare," said consultant Jeffrey Kagan of Kagan Telecom.
AT&amp;T said late on Friday that it was confident any MCI/BT deal would receive proper scrutiny by the U.S. government.
"We would expect that our government would condition any such merger on the complete and unqualified opening of the telecom market in the United Kingdom," it said.
However, analysts regard the British market as broadly open to competition.
For its part, Britain's Trade and Industry Department (DTI) said on Saturday it was too early to say what regulatory hurdles any merger would have to clear.
One potential problem is a media joint venture between MCI and Rupert Murdoch's News Corp. BT would end up with MCI's 13 percent non-voting stake in News Corp and this could cause regulatory difficulties in Britain.
British telecoms watchdog Oftel recently banned a joint advertising campaign between BT and satellite broadcaster BSkyB, a company in which News Corp is the main shareholder.
A $22 billion deal between British Telecom and MCI Communications Corp. that would create the world's second largest telecoms group looked set to be announced Sunday, sources close to the talks said.
BT said it had scheduled a news conference for 8 a.m. EST Sunday at its Central London headquarters following an earlier announcement that it was in merger talks with MCI Communications Corp.
A spokesman said he could not say what the news conference would be about, only that it would be in connection with recent developments.
Executives from BT and MCI were locked in separate board meetings on opposite sides of the Atlantic Saturday as they and their advisers attempted to stitch together the biggest deal ever in the rapidly expanding telecommunications industry.
MCI, the number two U.S. long-distance phone company, sent shock waves through the global communications industry Friday when it said it was in talks about a takeover by BT.
BT, the dominant player in the British market, has been building its overseas presence in recent years and already has a 20 percent stake in MCI. The two also operate a joint venture known as Concert which serves customers in more than 50 nations.
Analysts are speculating on a price of $40 a share -- valuing MCI at $28 billion and leaving BT with a bill of about $22.1 billion to pay for the remaining 80 percent of MCI.
The deal would be the second largest involving a U.S. company -- topped only by the buyout of RJR Nabisco by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts &amp; Co.
A BT spokesman confirmed that the BT board was meeting over the weekend to consider an anticipated proposal from MCI.
BT's nine-story corporate headquarters was a hive of activity Saturday as bankers, lawyers and advisers worked alongside the BT board. A BT spokesman said that the MCI board was also meeting in Washington.
BT and MCI have both said there are no assurances that an agreement will be reached or that any transaction will be consummated. They have said a further announcement is anticipated before the London stock market opens Monday.
BT had unsuccessful merger talks earlier this year with British rival Cable &amp; Wireless -- a deal which would have created the world's fifth largest telecoms group by revenue.
Any BT/MCI deal would spawn a massive company with a market capitalisation of some $64 billion, just ahead of AT&amp;T Corp -- the leading, but struggling, U.S. phone company. It would still be some way behind Japanese giant NTT Data Corporation -- the world's largest.
Analysts said a merged company would be a good fit in the ultra-competitive U.S. long-distance phone industry where MCI and number three Sprint have been battling AT&amp;T.
Its critical mass would leave it excellently placed to expand into other international markets and new technologies -- MCI possessing the biggest Internet backbone in the U.S.
"This is AT&amp;T Corp's worst nightmare," said consultant Jeffrey Kagan of Kagan Telecom.
AT&amp;T said late Friday it was confident any MCI/BT deal would receive proper scrutiny by the U.S. government.
"We would expect that our government would condition any such merger on the complete and unqualified opening of the telecom market in the United Kingdom," it said.
However, analysts regard the British market as broadly open to competition.
For its part, Britain's Trade and Industry Department (DTI) said Saturday it was too early to say what regulatory hurdles any merger would have to clear.
The $22 billion takeover of MCI Communications Corp marks a spectacular end to Sir Peter Bonfield's first year as chief executive of British Telecommunications Plc.
BT and MCI, the second largest U.S. long-distance phone company, confirmed on Sunday that BT would buy the 80 percent of MCI it does not own.
The deal, if completed, is a major coup for the former computer industry executive who took the helm at BT last January when the company split the roles of chairman and chief executive. Sir Iain Vallance, who had been combining the two roles since 1987, became BT chairman.
Bonfield's appointment was cheered by City commentators when it was announced last November.
The influential Financial Times newspaper described it as "one of the most positive events in the group's history".
The newspaper said the appointment marked "a turning point in BT's transition from public sector utility to competitive services group".
Bonfield, 52, had built a reputation for boosting revenue, curbing costs and international expansion during his 10 years in charge of ICL, the British computer company owned by Japan's Fujitsu Ltd.
"His wide international experience, his dedication to quality management and his in-depth knowledge of the computing services industry will be of particular relevance to BT, as we continue our global expansion," Vallance said when Bonfield moved to BT.
Within a few months of his arrival BT was in talks with British rival Cable &amp; Wireless about a merger that would have created a global telecommunications powerhouse.
Those talks ended unsuccessfully in May. But any MCI/BT deal would be bigger than that one that got away.
Bonfield has said he wants BT to be one of the most successful global telecoms companies 20 or 30 years from now. He believes BT's network of continental partners built up in recent years will allow it to become a true pan-European operator.
He has also targeted Asia-Pacific as a region where BT needs to expand, hence the attempt to do a deal with Cable and Wireless, which is very strong there.
Analysts say the critical mass from an MCI deal would provide the power to drive international expansion.
Bonfield also believes BT must become more responsive to its market. One of MCI's strengths is its reputation as an aggressive and fast-moving company.
He grew up in the small town of Hitchin, north of London, where he went to a local state school. He graduated in engineering from Loughborough University in the English Midlands in 1966.
He began his career with Texas Instruments, working in the field of semiconductors and computers in Europe, the Far East and the United States. He became a divisional director of Texas based in the U.S. before joining ICL in the early 1980s.
He became ICL managing director in 1984 and its chief executive and chairman the following year.
Bonfield, a trim, bearded individual, has an informal manner and a reputation for getting on well with colleagues. A married man, he lists his hobbies as sailing, jogging and music.
The planned $20 billion merger of British Telecom and MCI is certain to shake up the global telephone business, officials and analysts said Monday, as regulators started digging in for a close look at the deal.
British Telecommunications Plc and MCI Communications Corp. on Sunday announced the largest trans-Atlantic takeover in history.
The deal would create a global powerhouse vying with AT&amp;T Corp., Germany's Deutsche Telekom and a handful of other companies in a fast-changing, lucrative industry that will be a critical component of global commerce well into the 21st century.
The proposal will create work aplenty for British, American and European regulators who will review the merger, which would create a $40 billion company serving 43 million business and residential customers in 70 countries.
For consumers, it could mean better service and lower international calling charges, while the new company would aim to better support its business customers around the world.
It will cause sleepless nights for rivals such as AT&amp;T, Sprint Corp., France Telecom and Deutsche Telekom as they weigh how to respond. Sprint is allied with the French and German companies in the Global One international venture while AT&amp;T is part of a network of alliances called World Partners.
The new company, to be called Concert, plans to take on AT&amp;T's dominance in the U.S. long-distance market, where MCI now has about 20 percent of a $75 billion business, and to win part of the $100 market for residential local phone service.
It also is expected to expand in the Asia-Pacific region -- a long-held aim for British Telecom.
British Telecom's stock jumped in London and New York, where its American shares rose $5.375 to $60.875 on the New York Stock Exchange in afternoon trading.
MCI shares also rose, but only 50 cents to $30.75, well below the possible value of as much as $39 a share based on the price of British Telecom's American shares. Worries about regulatory hurdles and the time to complete the deal held back the stock, industry analysts and takeover specialists said.
The merger still needed to win approval from regulators in America and Britain.
British Telecom said it was optimistic that the European Commission would clear the merger.
British officials have said only that they were looking at the deal. AT&amp;T has already called on the U.S. Federal Communications Commission to give it thorough scrutiny.
AT&amp;T also said U.S. and European regulators should not give approval unless there is more competition in British Telecom's home market.
British Telecom Chief Executive Sir Peter Bonfield has said it could take a year for the deal to win regulatory approval.
"There are a lot of hurdles to be cleared but I think the deal will go through," one London-based analyst said.
Federal rules prohibit a foreign company from owning more than 25 percent of a U.S. telephone company if the acquiror's home market is not open to competition.
Under the merger British Telecom, which already owns 20 percent of Washington-based MCI, will issue Concert cash and stock for the remaining 80 percent. Holders of MCI stock will end up controlling around a third of the merged company.
The merged company will acquire the 9 percent stake which MCI holds in Rupert Murdoch's News Corp. media empire. MCI, perhaps wary of regulatory concerns, said on Sunday it did not plan to pursue an option to increase this to 13 percent.
Investors on both sides of the Atlantic applauded the planned $20 billion merger of British Telecom Plc and MCI Communications of the United States Monday, boosting their shares in stock market trading.
British, European and U.S. regulators will subject the deal to close scrutiny amid strong opposition to it from rivals, including American long-distance market leader AT&amp;T Corp.
British Telecom, or BT, as it is known, said it was optimistic that the European Commission would clear the largest cross-border takeover deal in history, which will create one of the largest groups in the rapidly expanding global telecommunications sector.
Britain's communications industry regulatory agency said it was studying the details of the merger and it was too early to pass judgment.
BT Chief Executive Sir Peter Bonfield has said it could take a year to clear all the regulatory hurdles.
BT's shares powered 32-1/2 pence higher to 383 1/2p -- adding around two billion pounds ($3.3 billion) to the company's market value on huge trading volume of over 40 million shares.
MCI gained $1.25 to $31.50 in early trading on Nasdaq, while AT&amp;T fell $1.125 to $33.50 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Despite the large cost of the deal to British Telecom -- it will be the biggest-ever acquisition by a British firm -- the deal is seen as having a compelling industrial logic, linking leading phone companies on both sides of the Atlantic.
For BT shareholders the deal is also being sugared with a promise of a special one-time 35p dividend payout and a higher rate of general dividend increases in the future.
"It is positive for BT shareholders and positive for the (telecoms) sector," said Jim McCafferty, analyst at ABN AMRO Hoare Govett.
For customers, the deal promises better service and lower international calling charges, while for businesses it means a company that can support them wherever they are.
The merged company will be called Concert Plc. It will be the second-largest international carrier after AT&amp;T.
The deal values all of Washington, D.C.-based MCI at just over $25 billion. Since British Telecom already owns 20 percent of MCI, it will issue Concert stock and cash worth $20.1 billion for the remaining 80 percent. Holders of MCI stock will control a third of the stock in the combined company.
Larry Stone, BT's head of EU affairs, told Reuters he hoped the deal would be dealt with under the EU's fast-track merger rules and said he did not anticipate any anti-trust problems because the companies "operate in competitive markets."
Analysts expect British Telecom and MCI to start making overtures to major Asian players such as Japan's giant Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp.
But while seeking an Asian partner, MCI appears to be putting another one on a backburner.
MCI is to cut its stake in a U.S. satellite television venture with media tycoon Rupert Murdoch to 20 percent from 50 percent, and has said it will probably not increase its stake in Murdoch's News Corp as originally expected.
MCI paid $1.35 billion for a stake of just under 9 percent, and could increase it to 13 percent with another $1 billion investment.
The Office of Fair Trading (OFT) on Thursday launched a probe into the way travel companies sell foreign package holidays to millions of sun-seeking Britons.
The director-general of the consumer watchdog body, John Bridgeman, called a Monopolies and Mergers (MMC) inquiry into ownership links between leading tour operators such as Thomson and Airtours and retail travel agents.
The MMC will also be able to look at the practice among travel agents of offering holidays at a discount conditional on the purchase of specific travel insurance.
Both travel companies said they were confident they would be cleared by the 12-month MMC inquiry. But shares in Airtours plunged almost 10 percent in London, losing 69p to 644p.
Bridgeman noted that vertically-integrated companies like Thomson and Airtours supply a large proportion of a market worth seven billion pounds ($11.5 billion) and he was concerned that some of their practices could distort competition.
"I believe they have the market power to put competitors at a disadvantage, for example by de-racking (removing) or threatening to de-rack their brochures in an attempt to negotiate larger commissions," he said.
He also said they could pressurise tour operators not to supply independent travel agents on better terms or push their own holidays through in-house incentive schemes.
Thomson owns the leading Lunn Poly travel agency, while Airtours owns the number two travel agent Going Places.
Together they operate around 40 percent of British travel agents. They also supply around 45 percent of over 10 million foreign packages sold to Britons who make the annual pilgrimage to seek the sun around the Mediterranean or further afield.
Thomson, part of Canada's Thomson Corp, welcomed the probe.
"Thomson is confident that the industry at large, and Thomson in particular, will be vindicated from any allegations of anti-competitive practice," said Paul Brett, chairman and chief executive of Thomson Travel.
"We have been cleared by the OFT before in 1994 and we are sure that we will be cleared again by the MMC," he added.
Airtours deputy chief executive Harry Coe said there was no case to answer and claimed the British market offered the world's cheapest foreign holidays.
"Those behind the inquiry are the small tour operators and the small travel agents who can't stand the heat in the kitchen," he said.
But the smaller tour operators were delighted that the MMC was taking up the matter.
"Big companies are screwing the consumer and the smaller operators," said Sue Ockwell, head of the Association of Independent Tour Operators. ($1=.6072 Pound)
British media company EMAP said on Monday it expected to bring a damaging boardroom row to a swift conclusion and build on a strong first-half profit performance.
Finance director David Grigson told Reuters that he believed that an extraordinary general meeting next month would resolve the boardroom battle that has undermined the company's share price in recent weeks.
"The EGM will be a purging process. It will clear the air and leave us with a smaller and happier board," he said.
The EGM, scheduled for December 2, has been called to seek the removal of rebel non-executive directors Ken Simmonds and Joe Cooke from the board.
The pair have led the opposition to changes made to the company's articles at its annual general meeting in July. The changes remove a requirement to maintain at least five non-executive directors and allow a director to be ousted if 75 percent of the board vote for his removal.
EMAP shares, which had fallen from 783p in early October, gained 10p to 732 1/2p after first half profits beat expectations and the company made a bullish statement on its second half prospects.
Pre-tax, pre-exceptional profit grew by 34 percent to 50.6 million pounds ($83.4 million) in the six months to September 30, 1996.
The company also posted a one-off gain of 113.5 million pounds on the sale in June of its regional newspaper business to Johnston Press Plc.
EMAP began life as a regional newspaper company in 1947 but has now decided to focus on commercial radio, consumer magazines and business communications -- trade papers and exhibitions.
It is one of Britain's top commercial radio operators and has a 16 percent share of the French consumer magazine market. Interim dividend was increased from 3.7p to 4.3p as the company looked to the future with optimism.
EMAP said that margins should improve as paper prices continue to decline. Proceeds from the sale of the regional newspaper business should lead to a significant reduction in interest charges.
"EMAP is optimistic about the prospects for the second half, and looks forward to a further sustained period of profit growth," the company said.
Operating profit from its British consumer magazines totalled 19.9 million pounds while the recent acquisition of Tele Star helped its French magazine operation more than double profits to 13.4 million.
Radio contributed 10 million pounds to operating profits, boosted by the acquisition last year of several stations in north-east England. Business communications made an operating profit of 10.2 million.
($1=.6067 Pound)
Shares in Britain's newly-demerged EMI Group Plc rose on Tuesday as the stock market applauded the company's resilience to tougher conditions in the music market.
EMI, which split from rentals company Thorn Plc three months ago, said profit before tax and exceptional items rose nine percent to 112.5 million pounds ($188.4 million) in the six months to September 30. Net interim dividend per share increased by 12.7 percent to eight pence.
EMI shares, which have shed some two pounds in recent weeks on fears that global music sales were faltering after a decade of strong growth, had added 9-1/2p to 1,280-1/2p by 1330 GMT after earlier climbing to 1290p.
"These are excellent interim results from the EMI Group," chairman Sir Colin Southgate said in a statement.
"They have been achieved against a background of variable growth in the major markets and mixed results from our competitors," he added. "The increase in the interim dividend reflects our confidence in the long-term health of the music industry and EMI's position within it."
Analysts said that EMI appeared in better shape than some of its rivals in a patchy worldwide market.
"What we have seen from their competitors was poor but EMI is insulated as it does not have so much exposure to the U.S.," said media analyst Lorna Tilbian of brokers Panmure Gordon, adding: "They tend to be strong in the areas where the growth is coming through."
Panmure are forecasting full-year profit excluding exceptional items of 403 million pounds and have a target share price of 1360p.
Finance Director Simon Duffy said EMI remained confident that the global music business would continue to grow by some 6-8 percent annually in the medium to long-term.
"This year is looking a little bit below that level," said Duffy, adding that markets were mixed but that overall first half music sales growth had been 5.5 percent. However, he added that the impact for EMI was diluted by the strength of sterling.
The market's sluggishness has recently been reflected by 100 layoffs at various labels within Warner Music and 400 job cuts at PolyGram NV -- two other music majors.
EMI said that sales in the United States were almost flat and declined slightly in France. But this was offset by improvements in Japan, Britain and Germany while Southeast Asia and Latin America boasted particularly large gains.
Turnover from the EMI Music division was down marginally at around 1.1 billion pounds but analysts ascribed this to the effect of exchange rates. Better margins helped to boost operating profits in the EMI Music division to 131.9 million pounds from 124.6 million.
The HMV division, grouping record and book stores chains, had an operating loss of 11 million pounds which the company said was in line with expectations.
EMI said major releases for the key pre-Christmas quarter included the third and final Beatles Anthology album, which entered the American charts at number one. It is also releasing a triple album from The Artist Formerly Known as Prince and the debut from British newcomers the Spice Girls. ($1=.5970 Pound)
Shares in EMI Plc, one of the world's five music majors, climbed on Tuesday after the company said that long-term prospects for the stuttering global music market were positive.
EMI, which demerged from rentals company Thorn Plc three months ago, said profit before tax and exceptional items rose 9.4 percent to 112.5 million pounds ($188.4 million) in the six months to September 30. Net interim dividend per share increased by 12.7 percent to eight pence.
EMI shares, under pressure in recent weeks on fears that music sales were faltering after a decade of strong growth, added 15p to 1,286p in a generally lower market.
"These are excellent interim results from the EMI Group," chairman Sir Colin Southgate said in a statement.
"They have been achieved against a background of variable growth in the major markets and mixed results from our competitors," he added. "The increase in the interim dividend reflects our confidence in the long-term health of the music industry and EMI's position within it."
Finance Director Simon Duffy said EMI remained confident that the global music business would continue to grow by some 6-8 percent annually in the medium to long-term.
"This year is looking a little bit below that level," said Duffy, saying that markets were patchy but that overall first half industry growth had been 5.5 percent. However, he added that the impact was diluted by the strength of sterling.
The market's sluggishness has recently been reflected by 100 layoffs at various labels within Warner Music and 400 job cuts at PolyGram NV -- another of the top five in the world music business.
EMI said that sales in the United States were almost flat and declined slightly in France. But this was offset by improvements in Japan, Britain and Germany while Southeast Asia and Latin America boasted particularly large gains.
Turnover from the EMI Music division was down marginally at around 1.1 billion pounds but improved margins helped to boost operating profits to 131.9 million pounds from 124.6 million.
The HMV division, grouping record and book stores chains, had an operating loss of 11 million pounds which the company said was in line with expectations as its international expansion continued.
EMI said major releases for the key pre-Christmas quarter included the third and final Beatles Anthology album, which entered the American charts at number one. It is also releasing a triple album from The Artist Formerly Known as Prince and the debut from British newcomers the Spice Girls. ($1=.5970 Pound)
British National Lottery operator Camelot  LOTT.CN on Tuesday posted lower interim profits as income from scratchcard sales fell by over 450 million pounds ($750 million).
Camelot chief executive Tim Holley also told Reuters that the planned second weekly National Lottery draw would be launched on February 5 and be held every Wednesday thereafter. Camelot, which has faced a storm of criticism over its jackpot earnings since the lottery was launched two years ago, reported pre-tax profits of 31.5 million pounds on sales of 2.1 billion pounds for the 24 weeks to September 14.
This compares with pre-tax profit of 36.2 million pounds and sales of 2.51 billion pounds in the same period a year ago.
Camelot's five shareholding companies -- Cadbury Schweppes, De La Rue, GTech UK, Racal Electronics and ICL shared a total dividend payount of 10 million pounds, up from 9.5 million.
Sales for the weekly National Lottery game rose two percent to 1.68 billion pounds. Two thirds of the adult population regularly buy tickets for the Saturday draw, an event which is televised live and has become a ritual for many Britons.
But sales of Camelot's "Instants" scratchcards fell from 871 million pounds last year to 419 million this time.
Camelot executives said that the decline in scratchcard sales was to be expected as the initial enthusiasm generated by their introduction in March 1995 waned.
"Mirroring the experience of lotteries worldwide, sales of Instants have fallen since their launch and are now settled at around 17 million pounds per week," Chairman Sir George Russell said in a statement.
Chief executive Holley said that the second weekly draw should boost sales of National Lottery game tickets by 15-20 percent from their current weekly average of 69 million.
Camelot said that over one billion pounds -- 50 percent of turnover -- had been handed out in prize money in the first half and that 567 million pounds had gone to "Good Causes" -- including charities and projects in sports and the arts.
Camelot, which has been granted a seven-year licence, said that over 40 percent of turnover went to "Good Causes" and the governnment in duties, making it the world's most efficient lottery operator.
Profit after tax is just under one percent of total sales and Holley dismissed criticisms of Camelot's performance.
"I think we have a slight problem in this country with success," he said, adding that foreign lottery companies were bemused by the atacks on Camelot.
The group confirmed plans to set up The Camelot Foundation to support organisations helping the disadvantaged and disabled.
Camelot will plough five million pounds into the foundation in its first year, which it said would make it one of the largest donors to charities among major British companies. ($1=.5994 Pound)
Granada Group, which won control of leading British hotelier Forte 10 months ago, on Wednesday reaped the fruits of its victory when it posted a 37 percent rise in annual profits to 480 million pounds ($806 million).
Media and leisure group Granada said that it was on target to keep a promise made in the heat of the takeover battle by boosting profits at Forte by over 100 million pounds per annum from the current year.
It said it had already achieved some 40 million pounds in profit improvements at Forte. Such rapid progress lifted the pre-tax, pre-exceptional profits to that 480 million pound figure, topping most share analysts' expectations.
Turnover in the year to end-September grew by 60 percent to 3.82 billion pounds as Granada grafted on Forte's hotel and roadside restaurant businesses.
Total dividend was raised by 11 percent to 13p per share.
"The key has been the speed with which we have been able to move on the Forte businesses," said chairman Gerry Robinson.
Granada took over family-controlled Forte in a 3.9 billion pound deal earlier this year after a bitter bid battle that raged over the Christmas and New Year period 12 months ago.
Analysts were surprised at the lacklustre reaction to Granada's strong results and an upbeat statement in which it said that trading had been encouraging in the first few weeks of its new financial year.
The shares, which had gained in recent days in anticipation of bumper results, slipped 7 1/2p to 885p by mid-afternoon in a generally gloomy market.
"Granada is a cheap stock on fundamentals and is backed by good management," said Greg Feehely of Kleinwort Benson.
Granada, which runs two British commercial television stations and a chain of high street rental stores, continues to reorganise following its acqusition of Forte.
It hopes to complete the sale of a group of top international hotels and the disposal of the Welcome Break chain of British motorway service areas in early 1997.
Analysts expect the hotels to raise a total of around 900 million pounds and the service areas a further 350-400 million pounds. That would help cut net debt from 3.5 billion pounds.
Granada sold the first of the 17 Exclusive hotels on Tuesday when Hong Kong based Mandarin Oriental International Ltd bought London's Hyde Park Hotel for 86 million pounds.
But Robinson said Granada planned to retain its 10.8 percent stake Granada holds in pay television operator British Sky Broadcasting. That investment is worth over one billion pounds.
The largest contribution came from the Restaurants division, which boosted profit before interest and tax by 80 percent to 217 million pounds on turnover which rose over 60 percent to 1.7 billion pounds.
The new Hotels unit contributed 168 million while Media made 163 million, up 17 percent. Profits from the high street rentals arm were marginally higher at 126 million. ($1=.5950 Pound)
Britain's Granada Group, which won control of hotel and catering empire Forte in January, Wednesday reported a 37 percent surge in full-year profits to 480 million pounds ($804 million).
The media and leisure group said that it would deliver on its promise to improve profits at Forte by over 100 million pounds ($167.5 million) per annum from 1996/97.
Calling the results "very satisfying," Granada Chairman Gerry Robinson told Reuters, "The key has been the speed with which we have been able to move on the Forte businesses."
Granada took over family-controlled Forte in a 3.9 billion pound ($6.5 billion) deal earlier this year after a bitter bid battle that raged over the Christmas and New Year period 12 months ago.
The company said Forte had responded well to its management and that it had already improved profitability there by approaching 40 million pounds ($67 million).
Granada continues to reorganize following the acquisition of Britain's leading hotel group. Robinson said there was substantial interest from a wide range of potential purchasers of the luxury hotels it has put on the market.
Granada sold the first of the 17 Exclusive hotels Tuesday when Hong Kong-based Mandarin Oriental International Ltd. bought London's Hyde Park Hotel for 86 million pounds ($144 million).
Robinson said Granada expected to complete the disposals by early 1997. Analysts calculate the sale of assets including the George V in Paris and Plaza Athenee in New York will raise a total of about 900 million pounds ($1.5 billion).
The Granada chairman said the company hoped to sell the Welcome Break chain of British motorway service areas in January or February of next year. The 21 sites were acquired in the Forte deal but must be sold off because of monopoly concerns.
But he said there were no plans to sell the 10.8 percent stake Granada holds in pay television operator British Sky Broadcasting.
Group turnover in the year to end-September climbed 60 percent to 3.82 billion pounds ($6.4 billion). Total dividend was raised by 11 percent to 13p (21.8 cents) per share.
Granada shares, which had risen in recent days in anticipation of bumper results, fell by 8p (13.4 cents) to 884 1/2p ($14.81) in a generally gloomy market.
The largest contribution came from the Restaurants division, which boosted profit before interest and tax by 80 percent to 217 million pounds ($363.5 million) as the Forte acquisition bore fruit.
The new Hotels unit contributed 168 million ($281.4 million) while Media, including Granada's two British commercial television stations, made 163 million ($273.0 million), up 17 percent. Profits from the high street rentals arm was marginally higher at 126 million ($211 million).
Britain's Granada Group, which won control of hotel and catering empire Forte in January, on Wednesday reported a 37 percent surge in full-year profits to 480 million pounds ($804 million).
The media and leisure group said that it would deliver on its promise to improve profits at Forte by over 100 million pounds per annum from 1996/97.
Granada chairman Gerry Robinson called the results "very satisfying". "The key has been the speed with which we have been able to move on the Forte businesses," he told Reuters.
Granada took over family-controlled Forte in a 3.9 billion pound deal earlier this year after a bitter bid battle that raged over the Christmas and New Year period 12 months ago.
The company said that Forte had responded well to its management and that it had already improved profitability there by approaching 40 million pounds.
Granada continues to reorganise following the acquisition of Britain's leading hotel group. Robinson said there was substantial interest from a wide range of potential purchasers of the luxury hotels it has put on the market.
Granada sold the first of the 17 Exclusive hotels on Tuesday when Hong Kong based Mandarin Oriental International Ltd bought London's Hyde Park Hotel for 86 million pounds.
Robinson said that Granada expected to complete the disposals by early 1997. Analysts calculate the sale of assets including the George V in Paris and Plaza Athenee in New York will raise a total of around 900 million pounds.
The Granada chairman said that the company hoped to sell the Welcome Break chain of British motorway service areas in January or February of next year. The 21 sites were acquired in the Forte deal but must be sold off because of monopoly concerns.
But he said there were no plans to sell the 10.8 percent stake Granada holds in pay television operator British Sky Broadcasting.
Group turnover in the year to end-September climbed 60 percent to 3.82 billion pounds. Total dividend was raised by 11 percent to 13p per share.
Granada shares, which had risen in recent days in anticipation of bumper results, fell by 8p to 884 1/2p in a generally gloomy market.
The largest contribution came from the Restaurants division, which boosted profit before interest and tax by 80 percent to 217 million pounds as the Forte acquisition bore fruit.
The new Hotels unit contributed 168 million while Media, including Granada's two British commercial television stations, made 163 million, up 17 percent. Profits from the high street rentals arm was marginally higher at 126 million.
Britain's Ladbroke Group and the U.S. Hilton Hotels Corp (HHC) on Thursday unveiled an alliance to reunite the famous Hilton hotel brand around the world for the first time since 1964.
"We have been separated but now our companies are engaged," said Steve Bollenbach, HHC's chief executive officer.
"This will make Hilton the force to be reckoned with in the global hotel industry," Bollenbach told a news conference. "It will eliminate customer confusion and benefit millions of our customers worldwide."
HHC owns the Hilton name in the United States while Ladbroke holds the rights everywhere else through its Hilton International (HIC) subsidiary.
The two companies have signed an outline agreement to unify the Hilton brand, separated in 1964 when HIC was spun off from the American operation. Ladbroke acquired HIC in 1987.
In the alliance grouping 400 hotels in 49 countries, HHC and HIC intend to cooperate from next year on sales and marketing, loyalty programmes and hotel development.
Ladbroke also announced first half pre-tax profits of 72.8 million pounds ($113.5 million) before exceptional items, a 29 percent increase on last year and above analyst forecasts. The interim dividend was unchanged at 2.4 pence per share.
Ladbroke shares added 7.5p to a 1996 high of 215p in early trade before slipping back to close 2p firmer at 209.5p.
The alliance gives HHC a larger presence in the international hotel arena. It offers Ladbroke a major position in American hotels and the chance to participate in the expansion of HHC's U.S. gaming business.
The companies plan to finalise the agreement as soon as possible in order for it to become effective by early 1997.
Bollenbach and Ladbroke chief executive Peter George said the deal would be worth tens of millions of dollars when cost savings and extra sales were combined.
Share analysts applauded the alliance.
"The Hilton tie-up is more extensive than people expected. We are expecting big things from 1998 onwards," said Greg Feehely of Kleinwort Benson.
HHC intends to acquire a five percent stake in Ladbroke once the final agreement has been signed. Ladbroke has said it expects to invest significant sums in hotels and casinos developed by its partner in the United States.
"We're putting our money where our mouth is," said Bollenbach, a former Walt Disney Company executive who joined HHC in February.
He said one of his first calls at HHC was to his Ladbroke counterpart George. The two men subsequently met several times and even shared a holiday, rafting in Idaho with their wives.
Under the deal, George will join the HHC board while Bollenbach becomes a director of Ladbroke.
The Hilton hotel chain was founded in 1919 when Conrad Hilton opened his first hotel in the Texan town of Cisco.
In 1946, Hilton became the first hotel company to list on the New York Stock Exchange. HIC was spun off in 1964 and it was acquired three years later by Trans World Airlines. ($1=.6412 Pound)
The purchase of British TV group Westcountry Television by Carlton Communications Plc slots another piece into the ITV jigsaw but analysts said on Monday it could be some time before the picture is complete.
"Westcountry was one which was on the table and Carlton have done well to snatch it but I am not convinced that there is going to be a massive rush for other ITV franchises," said Jason Crisp of Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull.
Carlton said on Saturday it had agreed to pay 85 million pounds ($143 million) for Westcountry, pipping United News &amp; Media which had also been seeking to acquire the privately-owned broadcaster.
Analysts said that high prices for takeover targets was likely to dampen down takeover activity.
The ITV commercial television sector is going through a period of consolidation under new media ownership laws. The two-licence ownership limit has been removed and replaced by a cap of 15 percent of television audience.
The Westcountry deal adds the south-western corner of England to Carlton's licences in the English Midlands and for London weekday television. Carlton, United News and Granada Group Plc are the three main players in the sector and are expected gradually to tighten their grip.
The Westcountry move was described as a "useful" addition to Carlton's portfolio but analysts said it should be seen in context, noting that its 1995 pre-tax profit of five million stg was tiny compared with Carlton's 123 million pounds operating profit from broadcast television.
Carlton pipped United News at the post for Westcountry and the two could square up again in a battle for control of HTV, the ITV broadcaster to Wales and an area of southwest England which includes the cities of Bristol and Bath.
"What this means is that there are two suitors for HTV -- Carlton and United News," said one industry source.
United News took a 20 percent stake in HTV last month but said at the time that it regarded the stake as an investment and was not planning a full bid.
The Westcountry and HTV franchise areas are usually sold as a single package to advertisers while HTV does all the transmission for its smaller western neighbour. A move for HTV, which has a market capitalisation of some 315 million pounds, would have obvious benefits for Carlton.
"Carlton can afford to pay more for HTV than anyone else because it could wring out greater cost savings," said Louise Barton of Henderson Crosthwaite.
While United News and Carlton vie for supremacy in the south, Granada is expected to take over its northern neighbour Yorkshire-Tyne Tees Television at some point.
Granada has made its intentions clear by taking a 27 percent stake in Yorkshire, a company valued at over 800 million pounds.
Granada is believed to be sitting it out, waiting for some of the froth to come off the Yorkshire share price before it moves for the rest of the company. ($1=.5941 Pound)
Premier League Sunderland, one of the great names in the history of English soccer, said on Thursday that they hoped to raise up to 12 million pounds ($20 million) through a flotation on the London Stock Exchange.
The north-east club, which won the league title for the sixth and last time in 1936, joins a growing number of clubs seeking to capitalise on the popularity of the national game.
Premier league rivals Manchester United and Tottenham Hotspur have full stock market listings while clubs such as Chelsea trade on the secondary market.
Others are expected to follow suit as revenue from a television deal with satellite broadcaster BSkyB and higher crowds help to transform the sport's finances.
Sunderland said that the new funds would be used to add the finishing touches to a new 15 million pounds stadium, reduce borrowing and fund the purchase of new players.
"The proceeds will assist in retaining premier league status and enable the company to capitalise more fully upon the club's name, strong support and new opportunities arising from the move to the new stadium," chairman Bob Murray told a news conference.
Sunderland will leave their century-old Roker Park home at the end of the season and move to a 42,000-capacity stadium built on the site of a former colliery in the heart of the city.
The club, whose last real taste of glory came in 1973 when they won the F.A. Cup, are optimistic that the move to a new stadium will herald a period of prosperity on and off the pitch.
Sunderland were promoted to the premier league last season and forecast that increased gate receipts and television revenue would help double turnover this season to 13.6 million pounds.
Murray said that the new stadium should allow Sunderland to boost its season ticket holders from 17,000 to around 28,000. Roker Park is in a dilapidated state and large parts of the 22,000 capacity ground are vast terraces open to the elements.
Sunderland, managed by former England international Peter Reid, have only a modest playing squad without the star names of neighbours Middlesbrough and Newcastle United. They are fifth from bottom of the premier league and are likely to face a battle to avoid relegation this season.
The club conceded that staying in the premier league status was "critical" but said that it believed that increased income from the new stadium would offset lost television revenue if the team did go down.
Some 10 percent of the share issue will be made available to club employees and fans rather than institutional investors. The flotation is expected to value the club as a whole at 40-50 million pounds and share dealings will commence on December 24.
Chairman Murray and other leading shareholders, including manager Reid who has a six percent stake, have given undertakings not to dispose of any shares before early 1998.
($ = 0.596 British Pounds)
Britain's Ladbroke Group. and the U.S. Hilton Hotels Corp (HHC) on Thursday announced a worldwide alliance that will reunite the famous Hilton hotel brand after 32 years of separation.
HHC owns the Hilton name in the United States while Ladbroke holds the rights everywhere else through its Hilton International (HIC) subsidiary.
The two companies have signed an outline agreement to reunite the brand, separated in 1964 when HIC was spun off from the American operation. Ladbroke acquired HIC in 1987.
In the alliance grouping 400 hotels in 49 countries, HHC and HIC intend to cooperate from next year on sales and marketing, loyalty programmes and hotel development.
Ladbroke also announced first half pre-tax profits of 72.8 million pounds ($113 million) before exceptional items, a 29 percent increase on last year and above analysts' forecasts.
Interim dividend was unchanged at 2.4 pence per share.
Ladbroke shares added 7.5p to a 1996 high of 215p in early trade before slipping slightly to 213p.
"This deal makes good sense to our customers, our employees and our shareholders," Ladbroke Chief Executive Peter George said in a statement.
"Through this alliance, our two companies intend to lead the hotel and gaming markets worlwide," he added.
The companies plan to finalise the agreement as soon as possible in order for it to become effective by early 1997.
HHC intends to acquire a five percent stake in Ladbroke once the final agreement has been signed. George will join the HHC board while Stephen Bollenbach, his opposite number at HHC, will become a director of Ladbroke.
The two men said that the deal would could be worth several tens of millions of dollars when cost savings and extra sales were combined.
"It seems all upside, there's hard to see a downside," said George. He added the deal had been under negotiation since Bollenbach became HHC chief executive in February and was agreed only on Wednesday night.
It provides for the formation of a jointly owned company to market and develop the Hilton brand around the world.
HHC's guest loyalty programme, which has some five million members, will be extended worldwide. The companies will also participate in each other's future hotels development.
Ladbroke will also have the chance to become a partner in some of HHC's gaming developments in the United States.
Ladbroke said operating profits from HIC grew strongly to 70 million pounds in the first half while those from its betting and gaming division climbed 17 percent to 43.6 million pounds.
($1=.6421 Pound)
British media group EMAP Plc on Monday ended a damaging boardroom row when its shareholders voted to oust two rebel non-executive directors, who had contested changes to the company's articles.
Shareholders backed the board and voted overwhelmingly in favour of resolutions seeking the removal of dissidents Ken Simmonds and Joe Cooke in a poll called at an extraordinary general meeting.
More than 109.2 million votes were registered in favour of each of the resolutions and 12.3 million against.
"I am confident that with these two resolutions passed, the board will be fully united and ready to give full attention to your company's business," chairman Sir John Hoskyns told shareholders at the EGM.
Simmonds, who has been a non-executive director of EMAP for 15 years, struck a conciliatory tone after what had been a bitter dispute.
"Catharsis and thinking about the future are good things. EMAP is going to continue to be great," he said.
EMAP shares, which had fallen from a 1996 high of 790p in the last two months as the dispute worsened, firmed 5p to 735.
The row centred on the removal of a provision for a minimum of five non-executive directors and another change allowing a director to be ousted on a 75 percent board majority without an EGM being called.
The changes were approved at the company's annual general meeting in July. Cooke and Simmonds had continued to oppose them, arguing that they transferred too much power from shareholders to the board.
"You should ensure that the board is your board," Simmonds told the EGM. "The board may now adjust itself quietly and without any notice to you."
Hoskyns said that the board had not been able to function properly while the dispute simmered.
EMAP has been one of Britain's fastest growing companies in recent years, selling out of its original regional newspaper business and expanding its UK local radio operations and its consumer magazine interests at home and in France.
It last month reported pre-tax profit of 50.6 million pounds ($85.2 million) in the first half of its current financial year on turnover of 388.3 million pounds.'
Hoskyns, who is 69 and intends to retire in 1998, denied press reports that he backed chief executive Robin Miller as his successor. Miller joined the company in 1965 as a reporter with Motor Cycle News magazine.
He also dismissed talk of a rift between Miller and managing director David Arculus.
"Robin and David have worked in partnership since 1974. That partnership has always been based on hard thinking, vigorous argument and mutual trust," he said. ($1=.5936 Pound)
Britons will shortly learn how much they will be asked to pay to help fund the expansion of British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) radio and television services in the multi-channel future.
The BBC has been lobbying the government to grant it an above-inflation increase in the annual licence fee, arguing that more money is needed if it is to remain at the forefront of broadcasting into the next millennium. The government is expected to announce its decision by early to mid-December.
The BBC, which calls itself "the world's most successful cultural institution", derives 95 percent of its funding from the annual fee payable by all television set owners.
The fee stands at 89.50 pounds ($150) and provided income of 1.8 billion pounds in the last financial year -- far outweighing the 77 million pound net benefit from the BBC's expanding commercial arm. The licence is guaranteed as a source of BBC funding for the next five years.
BBC Director-General John Birt launched his campaign for what he said would be the first real increase in the licence fee in over a decade at a conference in Edinburgh in August.
"If the BBC is to sustain the existing level of services; if it is to remain as creative and dynamic an institution in the 21st as it has been in the 20th century; if it is to innovate with high quality services in the new technologies...we shall need a real increse in the level of the licence fee," he said.
"Neither a new leap forward in efficiency, nor a vigorous drive to increase our commercial revenue will be enough."
The BBC is believed to be seeking a rise of around five pounds -- which would generate extra revenue of more than 100 million pounds. Annual inflation is currently 2.7 percent.
Birt's call has received a cool reponse from the ruling Conservatives and opposition Labour, wary of pinning a price rise on more than 20 million households in the run-up to a general election. The new rate would take effect in April while the election must be held by the following month.
Recent newspaper reports said that National Heritage Secretary Virginia Bottomley has settled for a five-year formula that would leave the licence fee unchanged in real terms.
The reports said that Bottomley would offer higher rises in the second and third years to help fund new digital services and commercial projects but that increases in the following two years would be pegged below inflation.
The BBC, which runs two television channels and five national radio stations and has an enviable reputation as a quality public service broadcaster, has stepped up its campaign.
"You want us to do things. We want to do them. Now please give us the means and we can get on with the job," Will Wyatt, chief executive of the BBC Broadcast division said in a recent speech.
"We have called for only a modest increase, but one which would enable us to achieve a disproportionate amount of good."
The BBC points out that it has cut its cost base by almost 20 percent over the past three years and increased programme investment by 300 million pounds.
The licence fee debate comes as the broadcasting industry is set to be revolutionised by the move to digital transmission.
Digital technology converts sound and pictures into binary digits -- a series of noughts and ones. It increases picture quality, multiplies the number of channels that can be broadcast and allows for the creation of interactive services.
Pay television operator BSkyB, in which Rupert Murdoch's News Corp is the leading shareholder, plans to launch a digital satellite service with some 200 channels into Britain from next year.
BSkyB, one of the corporate success stories of the 1990s, is Britain's leading pay television operator with more than five million subscribers. Its top package of premium films and live sports events costs subscribers 324 pounds per annum.
A terrestrial digital service, broadcast from land-based transmitters and offering some 36 channels, is expected to begin by mid-1998.
The BBC plans to use digital technology to offer all licence payers supplementary programming to its core BBC1 and BBC2 output plus a 24-hour news service. It plans to make them available via satellite and terrestrial distribution.
The BBC expects to retain a share of around a third of all viewing and listening in 2005, down from 45 percent as the number of channels multiplies and the market fragments.
The digital expansion creates fresh opportunities for the corporation to develop its BBC Worldwide commercial arm.
Worldwide is in negotiations with partners in Britain and the United States over the creation of a number of subscription channels, exploiting its strengths in areas such as comedy, drama and natural history.
Its partner in Britain is Flextech Plc, while it is working with Discovery Communications Inc on channels for international markets. Leading U.S. cable television operator Tele-Communications Inc is a major shareholder in both companies. It aims to launch its UK services in mid 1997.
Some media figures doubt the sustainability of the licence fee as subscription and pay-per-view services proliferate.
David Elstein, chief executive of Britain's new Channel 5 commercial television network, said recently that he believed that pay-per-view would eventually "consign the licence fee to history, where it belongs".
($1=.5953 Pound)
Britons will shortly learn how much they will be asked to pay to help fund the expansion of British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) radio and television services in the multi-channel future.
The BBC has been lobbying the government to grant it an above-inflation increase in the annual licence fee, arguing that more money is needed if it is to remain at the forefront of broadcasting into the next millennium. The government is expected to announce its decision by early to mid-December.
The BBC, which calls itself "the world's most successful cultural institution", derives 95 percent of its funding from the annual fee payable by all television set owners.
The fee stands at 89.50 pounds ($150) and provided income of 1.8 billion pounds in the last financial year -- far outweighing the 77 million pound net benefit from the BBC's expanding commercial arm. The licence is guaranteed as a source of BBC funding for the next five years.
BBC Director-General John Birt launched his campaign for what he said would be the first real increase in the licence fee in over a decade at a conference in Edinburgh in August.
"If the BBC is to sustain the existing level of services; if it is to remain as creative and dynamic an institution in the 21st as it has been in the 20th century; if it is to innovate with high quality services in the new technologies...we shall need a real increase in the level of the licence fee," he said.
"Neither a new leap forward in efficiency, nor a vigorous drive to increase our commercial revenue will be enough."
The BBC is believed to be seeking a rise of around five pounds -- which would generate extra revenue of more than 100 million pounds. Annual inflation is currently 2.7 percent.
Birt's call has received a cool reponse from the ruling Conservatives and opposition Labour, wary of pinning a price rise on more than 20 million households in the run-up to a general election. The new rate would take effect in April while the election must be held by the following month.
Recent newspaper reports said that National Heritage Secretary Virginia Bottomley has settled for a five-year formula that would leave the licence fee unchanged in real terms.
The reports said that Bottomley would offer higher rises in the second and third years to help fund new digital services and commercial projects but that increases in the following two years would be pegged below inflation.
The BBC, which runs two television channels and five national radio stations and has an enviable reputation as a quality public service broadcaster, has stepped up its campaign.
"You want us to do things. We want to do them. Now please give us the means and we can get on with the job," Will Wyatt, chief executive of the BBC Broadcast division said in a recent speech.
"We have called for only a modest increase, but one which would enable us to achieve a disproportionate amount of good."
The BBC points out that it has cut its cost base by almost 20 percent over the past three years and increased programme investment by 300 million pounds.
The licence fee debate comes as the broadcasting industry is set to be revolutionised by the move to digital transmission.
Digital technology converts sound and pictures into binary digits -- a series of noughts and ones. It increases picture quality, multiplies the number of channels that can be broadcast and allows for the creation of interactive services.
Pay television operator BSkyB, in which Rupert Murdoch's News Corp is the leading shareholder, plans to launch a digital satellite service with some 200 channels into Britain from next year.
BSkyB, one of the corporate success stories of the 1990s, is Britain's leading pay television operator with more than five million subscribers. Its top package of premium films and live sports events costs subscribers 324 pounds per annum.
A terrestrial digital service, broadcast from land-based transmitters and offering some 36 channels, is expected to begin by mid-1998.
The BBC plans to use digital technology to offer all licence payers supplementary programming to its core BBC1 and BBC2 output plus a 24-hour news service. It plans to make them available via satellite and terrestrial distribution.
The BBC expects to retain a share of around a third of all viewing and listening in 2005, down from 45 percent as the number of channels multiplies and the market fragments.
The digital expansion creates fresh opportunities for the corporation to develop its BBC Worldwide commercial arm.
Worldwide is in negotiations with partners in Britain and the United States over the creation of a number of subscription channels, exploiting its strengths in areas such as comedy, drama and natural history.
Its partner in Britain is Flextech Plc, while it is working with Discovery Communications Inc on channels for international markets. Leading U.S. cable television operator Tele-Communications Inc is a major shareholder in both companies. It aims to launch its UK services in mid 1997.
Some media figures doubt the sustainability of the licence fee as subscription and pay-per-view services proliferate.
David Elstein, chief executive of Britain's new Channel 5 commercial television network, said recently that he believed that pay-per-view would eventually "consign the licence fee to history, where it belongs". ($1=.5953 Pound)
Satellite broadcaster BSkyB, the dominant force in British pay television, on Tuesday reported a 66 percent rise in full-year profit to 257.4 million pounds ($398.1 million).
Annual turnover climbed to more than one billion pounds as the number of subscribers in Britain and Ireland rose to 5.5 million for BSkyB, in which Rupert Murdoch's News Corp has a 40 percent stake.
Profit for the year to June 30, 1996 -- up more than 100 million pounds on the 155.3 million reported a year ago -- was towards the top end of analysts' forecasts. The full-year dividend of 5.5 pence was lower than expected, however.
BSkyB shares shed seven pence to 530p in early trading, having climbed to record highs in recent days.
"The continuing growth in subscribers, the increase in the number of channels and the renewal of the Premier League (soccer) contract until 2001 provide a firm base from which to pioneer the development of digital television in the UK," chief executive Sam Chisholm said in a statement.
"The agreement with Kirch Gruppe to develop the digital platform in Germany gives us a great opportunity to extend our business into continental Europe," he said.
BSkyB plans to launch a British digital television service next year.
Last month it signed a deal with the group headed by Bavarian media mogul Leo Kirch under which it will take a stake of up to 49 percent in DF1, Kirch's digital pay television operation.
BSkyB is expected to inject 200 million pounds into the alliance to cover start-up losses over the next three years. The deal gives BSkyB access to Europe's largest television market.
BSkyB said spending on programming rose by 28 percent to 420 million pounds after the purchase of golf, boxing and cricket events and the launch of new channels such as Disney.
The programming spend is set to rise further following a 670 million pound deal signed in June which will enable BSkyB to retain rights to broadcast live English Premier League soccer for the next five years.
One cloud on the horizon is a report that British cable companies may seek European Commission intervention over the fees BSkyB charges for its top channels.
The Financial Times said the cable companies fear they will not secure satisfactory conditions despite BSkyB undertakings to revise the structure of its wholesale rate card.
British media company Carlton Communications Plc, boosted by a 20 percent annual profit rise, said on Wednesday that it planned a drive into pay television.
Carlton, the country's largest commercial television (ITV) company, said it aimed to build on its broadcasting strengths in the multi-channel future.
"We want to build up our interests in pay television, both as a content provider and operator. These may encompass cable, satellite and digital television," chairman Michael Green said in a statement.
"Free television and pay channels should not be seen as competitors; they are complementary businesses...Carlton wants to establish a significant presence in both markets," he added.
Green was speaking as Carlton unveiled a 20 percent rise in pre-tax profit to 295 million pounds ($492 million) for the year to September 30. Carlton increased its dividend by 17.5 percent to 11.1 pence per share.
The figures were in line with analysts' forecasts but Carlton shares fell 8.5p to 495p in a weaker market.
Carlton last month agreed to pay 85 million pounds for Westcountry Television, the ITV company which broadcasts to the south-western corner of England. It also operates the ITV licences for the English Midlands and London weekday television and now broadcasts to 22 million people.
Green confirmed that Carlton was considering investing in digital terrestrial television, which is expected to be launched in Britain in 1998 and offer viewers up to 36 channels.
"Digital Terrestrial Television will expand free-to-air broadcasting in the UK and opens the door to the establishment of further pay television services. We are examining these investment opportunities very carefully," he said.
The Independent Television Commission (ITC) recently invited applications to operate the blocks of frequencies which will carry the digital channels.
Digital terrestrial will be broadcast from land-based transmitters and viewers will not need a satellite dish to receive it. They will, however, require a set-top decoder.
Carlton already has two subscription cable channels in the UK and pay television interests in France, India and Singapore.
Operating profits from Carlton's Television division grew by only five percent to 129 million pounds as advertising revenues remained flat. But the company said the outlook for advertising revenue was good.
Carlton's video division increased profit by 21 percent to 73 million pounds as demand for pre-recorded videocassettes continued to grow.
Its film processing arm boosted profits to almost 53 million pounds -- a 27 percent jump -- as the Hollywood studios continued their policy of releasing movies to large numbers of cinemas simultaneously.
The company's products division, aiming to become the world leader in tapeless editing for the television industry, increased profits to 43 million pounds from 32 million.
French radio group NRJ SA is aiming to break into the UK market by winning the fierce battle for a key London FM licence currently up for grabs.
NRJ, a group which has some 500 stations spread across six European nations, has focused its attention on the capital's youth, who it says are poorly served by existing stations.
"Mainstream music for young people does not exist in London. You have too many stations for adults," Marc Pallain, NRJ's head of development, said in an interview. "You have an extraordinary music scene and such a poor radio landscape," he added.  
The Radio Authority, the body which oversees UK commercial radio, is expected to announce the winner of the licence in mid-January. Its choice will be based on criteria such as programme plans and financial viability of the applicants.
The frequency was vacated by easy-listening station Melody Radio, which relocated after complaining of interference in the south-west London area. However, the winner should be able to reach a potential audience of almost six million adults.  
Twenty-five groups have put in bids, including stations aimed at gay men and lesbians, children, London's Irish community and the over-50s. The front-runners are believed to include Capital Radio, Atlantic, XFM and The Edge.
Capital Radio, which already has an FM licence and is the market leader in London commercial radio, wants to transfer its "Capital Gold" oldies station from its AM frequency.
Atlantic, backed by the UK radio arm of Luxembourg broadcaster CLT, The Edge and XFM are all music-based and aiming at a 15-34 year-old audience.  
British actor Michael Caine is chairman of The Edge and his consortium also includes Radio One DJ and Channel 4 presenter Chris Evans. talent. Its co-founder is Chris Parry, manager of British band The Cure.
NRJ's "Energy" station plans to offer a blend of rock, rap and dance music which programme director Christophe Sabot says will be aimed primarily at the under-25s.
NRJ believes its network of stations across markets such as France, Germany and Scandinavia would allow it to give new British bands a European-wide platform.
Chairman Jean-Paul Baudecroux said that a London licence would appeal to many of the company's advertisers in mainland Europe. He said that the station could help to speed the development of radio advertising in the UK by giving companies greater access to young consumers.
Pallain said that NRJ, a company with a market value of some three billion francs, would aim to expand into other British cities if it secured a berth in the capital. He said that NRJ was already in talks with potential partners.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8793
Shares in British Sky Broadcasting (BSkyB) rose strongly on Monday after the pay television operator cleared a key regulatory hurdle and amid reports it planned to push ahead and launch digital services in Britain next year.
BSkyB shares added 19p to 495-1/2p by early afternoon, reversing a downward pattern which has seen them shed almost two pounds ($3.3) since mid-October.
The rise was fuelled by an announcement from Britain's Office of Fair Trading (OFT) that it had accepted BSkyB's new terms for the supply of its channels to cable operators.
The stock had earlier been boosted by a report in the Financial Times that BSkyB, 40 percent owned by Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation, was poised to order the set-top boxes required to receive its digital satellite services.
"The news flow has been positive and some funds which are underweight in BSkyB have been taking the opportunity to buy," said Anthony de Larrinaga of broker Panmure Gordon, commenting on the price rise.
However, he injected a note of caution.
"We still have to see the performance for dish sales in the run-up to Christmas. The decision to push ahead with digital may be partly a reflection of weaker analogue sales," he added.
The OFT approved BSkyB's revised "rate card" -- setting out the pricing and structure for the supply of satellite channels to cable operators.
"The changes increase the flexibility of cable operators in marketing their services," OFT Director General John Bridgeman said in a statement.
But the cable industry criticised the decision and vowed to continue its fight. One option is to take the issue to the European Commission.
"We fail to see how today's announcement is in the consumers' interest," the Cable Communications Association said in a statement.
BSkyB, which supplies a diet of top-quality sport and Hollywood movies, has more than five million subscribers -- 3.3 million receiving the service via a satellite dish and almost 1.9 million on cable.
BSkyB's shares have fallen from highs in the last two months because of regulatory concerns in Britain and worries over the apparent slow take-up of the digital services of Germany's DF1, in which BSkyB and Kirch Group are partners.
BSkyB has announced plans to launch digital satellite services supplying some 200 channels into Britain late next year but recent reports had suggested that it could delay the launch.
But the Financial Times quoted Murdoch as saying that BSkyB will go ahead with a decoder box concentrating on new channels plus pay-per-view sport and films. A decoder offering access to interactive services such as home shopping would follow later.
"Now I think we will go with a straight simple box and have a second-generation box a year later. How many people really want to do home shopping and banking on their television sets or buy things, we don't know yet," Murdoch was quoted as saying.
($1=.6027 Pound)
Wembley, England's home of soccer since the 1920s, will be the site of a new national stadium, the country's Sports Council announced on Tuesday.
The government-backed Council selected the north London venue ahead of the northern city of Manchester as the preferred location. Some 120 million pounds ($200 million) in National Lottery funding will be supplied to help turn the famous old stadium into a world class sports facility for the 21st century.
Wembley and Manchester were selected as the two leading candidates from five applicants last year. Sports Council chairman Sir Rodney Walker said that Wembley won out as it had greater potential to attract major international events.
The Sports Council has supported the English Football Association's bid to host soccer's World Cup in 2006 and the British Athletics Federation's attempts to attract the world championships in 2001.
But Manchester did not lose out completely as the Sports Council announced it had agreed in principle to provide up to 60 million pounds towards a new Stadium of the North to be used to host the Commonwealth Games in 2002, which have already been awarded to the city.
It said it would also consider backing Manchester council's bid for 20 million pound in funding for a new swimming and diving complex in the city, another Games facility.
"The Sports Council has agreed a 200 million package of financial support which will provide further opportunities for English and British sport to develop as a leading competitor on the world stage," Walker said.
A competition is to be held to select an architectural firm to design the English National Stadium at the site owned by Wembley Plc.
Architect Sir Norman Foster has already unveiled his radical plans for an 80,000-seater stadium.
In his design, Wembley's famous twin towers would be repositioned to form a new gateway to the stadium area. The stadium would also be spun round 90 degrees with a new North/South axis.
The Foster design also includes plans for retractable seating to allow spectators at field events like soccer and rugby league close proximity to the action. The seats would be moved back when track events were being held. ($1=.6027 Pound)
British media and leisure firm Pearson, awaiting the arrival of a new chief executive, enjoyed a stock market rally on Wednesday after a trading statement which analysts said contained no nasty surprises.
Pearson shares had gained 25p to 714 1/2p by 1300 GMT as a steady trading statement confounded the pessimists who had pushed the shares down to two-month lows on Tuesday.
Texan Marjorie Scardino will take over as Pearson chief executive from January, becoming the first woman to head one of Britain's top 100 companies.
Scardino, who is moving from the 50-percent Pearson-owned Economist Group, is on record as saying that Pearson's profit performance is not good enough.
Many share analysts say that Pearson has yet to complete its 1990s journey from industrial conglomerate to focused media company and that disposals are likely.
They believe Scardino may sell off the company's merchant banking interests and its Tussauds Group theme park and exhibition unit but they expect her to take her time before beginning to mould the company in her image.
Pearson has a 50 percent stake in London merchant bank Lazard Brothers and nine percent holdings in Lazard Freres in Paris and New York.
The Tussauds portfolio includes London's famous Madame Tussaud's waxwork exhibition and theme parks such as Alton Towers in the UK and Port Aventura in Spain.
There was a sense of relief after Pearson, which has interests ranging from newspaper and book publishing to television, said that trading conditions in the second half of the current year were in line with those of the first six months.
"All in all, it's in line with expectations but that in itself is good as the last few trading updates from the company have been disappointing," said Anthony de Larrinaga of brokers Panmure Gordon.
Pearson said that total video retuning costs associated with the launch of the Channel 5 terrestrial television channel next March would rise to around 150 million pounds ($250 million).
This is almost treble the sum initially earmarked for dealing with video recorders affected by interference from the new channel's signal. But it is below the figure quoted in some recent media reports.
Channel 5 has recently been awarded an extra frequency to boost its coverage to 80 percent of the country and Pearson said its business plan showed significantly higher rates of return than in the original bid.
Pearson said the retuning costs and a major film deal with Fox would come out of the 300 million pound original funding agreed by the Channel 5 shareholders. The other shareholders are Britain's United News &amp; Media, U.S. investment firm Warburg Pincus and Luxembourg broadcast group CLT.
This year's losses from Mindscape, Pearson's ailing U.S. consumer software unit, should be in line with earlier forecasts of around 46 million pounds. Pearson also saw no real impact on its 1996 profits from the current strength of sterling.
Shares in British media and leisure firm Pearson Plc recovered on Wednesday following a trading statement which calmed market jitters about the outlook for the company.
Pearson had dipped to a two-month low on Tuesday but bounced back after the company said trading in the second half of the current year was in line with the first half. The shares were 20 1/2p firmer at 710p by 095 GMT.
Analysts said there was relief that Pearson, which passes into the hands of new chief executive Marjorie Scardino in January, had not produced any really nasty surprises.
"All in all, it's in line with expectations but that in itself is good as the last few trading updates from the company have been disappointing," said Anthony de Larrinaga of brokers Panmure Gordon.
Pearson said that total video retuning costs associated with the launch of the Channel 5 terrestrial television channel next March would rise to around 150 million pounds ($250 million).
This is almost treble the sum initially earmarked for dealing with video recorders affected by interference from the new channel's signal. But it is below the figure quoted in some recent media reports.
Channel 5 has recently been awarded an extra frequency to boost its coverage to 80 percent of the country and Pearson said its business plan showed significantly higher rates of return than in the original bid.
Pearson said the retuning costs and a major film deal with Fox would come out of the 300 million pound ($500 million) original funding agreed by the Channel 5 shareholders. The other shareholders are Britain's United News &amp; Media, U.S. investment firm Warburg Pincus and Luxembourg broadcast group CLT.
This year's losses from Mindscape, Pearson's ailing U.S. consumer software unit, should be in line with earlier forecasts of around 46 million pounds. Pearson also saw no real impact on its 1996 profits from the current strength of sterling.
Pearson's interests range from the Financial Times newspaper, through to theme parks and television production.
The company's critics have long said it lacks focus and much attention is centred on the likely impact of Texan Scardino, the first woman to head one of Britain's leading companies.
"The key issue remains what the structure of Pearson will be. Which are the core areas and do all parts of the business fit?" said de Larrinaga. ($1=.6003 Pound)
Shares in English premier league soccer club Sunderland Plc got strong support on their market debut on Tuesday, trading up to 740 pence to score a 25 percent premium to the offer price of 585p.
The traditional combination of solid defence and star striker is no longer enough to gain success in English soccer and Sunderland joins a growing band of clubs that have moved on to the stock market recently to build up financial strength.
Sunderland reported last Friday that the public offer of shares was 2.7 times oversubscribed. A total of 2.15 million shares were sold under the flotation.
On Tuesday, the price was quoted at 732-1/2p by 0954 GMT to value the club at just under 60 million stg. Trading volume of 134,500 shares was registered.
Manchester United, Britain's most profitable club, was the model for English soccer flotations and now European rivals are seeking to emulate them in the financial stakes.
United, floated in 1991, has grown into one of Britain's 250 biggest quoted companies, with a market value of some 380 million stg. The value of the Manchester United brand name means that revenue from merchandising is as high as gate receipts.
Shares in Premier League club Tottenham Hotspur have also been quoted on the London Stock Exchange for several years but a number of other ambitious clubs are now following suit as the game flourishes.
Former champions Leeds United joined the market in August when they were taken over by media company Caspian Group while Premier League struggler Southampton has recently unveiled plans for a listing.
Share analysts believe that the trend will continue as revenue from a lucrative new contract with pay television operator BSkyB and potentially greater riches from the screening of matches on a pay-per-view basis make the newly listed clubs an attractive investment.
"We are not at saturation point -- Sunderland and Southampton are relatively small clubs compared with Newcastle and Man Utd but they are still going to have access to some chunky television revenue," said Nick Knight, an analyst with stock broker Nomura who has researched soccer club finance.
BSkyB signed a 670 million stg deal in June to secure live rights to Premier League soccer matches until 2001.
Under the deal glamour clubs such as Manchester United and Newcastle United, which is also looking at a flotation, are forecast to more than double their television revenue to over 12 million stg from next season.
Sunderland, promoted from Division One as champions last season, are expecting television and media income to increase more than tenfold to 3.5 million stg this season.
"The key is being in the Premier League or at least in Division One and thus having the potential to get into the Premier League," said Knight.
He believes that up to 20 of the 44 clubs in the top two sections could join the market in the next two or three years.
The trend is European-wide, Italian champions AC Milan, owned by media mogul Silvio Berlusconi, having tentatively planned a flotation for 1997.
A stock market listing enables soccer club owners to tap into new sources of finance, to dilute their own personal exposure to the risks of an expensive business and make it easier to cash in on their stake at some point in the future.
Sunderland, are raising over 10 million stg through their flotation -- funds that will be used to put the finishing touches to a new 42,000-seater stadium, cut debt and buy new players.
Southampton, who will obtain their listing via a merger with a company that builds retirement homes, are also seeking funds to move to a new and larger home.
Improved facilities and a reduction in crowd violence have helped to lift crowds by over 30 percent since the Premier League was launched in 1992.
The financial manna from satellite television has also reversed the exodus of top talent from these shores.
The Premier League clubs are now able to attract foreign talent away from wealthy continental rivals. Players such as Eric Cantona, Ruud Gullit and Fabrizio Ravanelli are now gracing the English game and being paid handsomely for doing so.
The enthusiasm is such that many Premier League matches are sold out weeks in advance, prompting great optimism about the financial prospects from the introduction of pay-per-view.
BSkyB is planning to launch digital satellite television late next year and that will create the additional channel space to show every Premier League fixture live on a pay-per-view basis, although no date has been set for its introduction.
Analysts believe pay-per-view could eventually be worth as much as 100 million stg a year to top clubs.
"Pay-per-view could be worth a million pounds per game to Manchester United, that's 40 million pounds per season just from league matches," said Alon Bull, who trades in soccer club shares at brokers Winterflood Securities.
"If you add in cup and European matches you're up to around 65 million and that could grow to 100 million in two or three years especially if the games are sold to Europe and maybe even the United States."
He forecast that the potential cash bonanza from pay-per-view made the leading soccer clubs potential prey for big business interests.
"The next gear up is where you get multinational companies bidding for football clubs," said Bull. "I can see the likes of Manchester United, Spurs and Newcastle being taken out by bidders," he added.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
British mobile telephone company Cellnet on Friday reported strong growth in its customer numbers, confirming the British cellular market is healthy, already indicated by figures from rival Vodafone Group.
Cellnet, jointly owned by British Telecom and Securicor Group, said it had 2.68 million UK customers at the end of 1996, up from 2.3 million a year earlier.
Vodafone, the market leader in Britain, on Thursday reported a 20 percent increase in UK subscriber numbers over 1996 as a whole, reaching a total of some 2.8 million in December.
The market has settled down after a period of very rapid expansion at the beginning of the decade when mobile phones were a novelty.
However, analysts were impressed by the figures from Britain's two largest cellular companies and said there were signs of an increase in the rate of subscriber growth.
"Vodafone's performance was particularly creditable since historically they have done badly in Q4 while Cellnet did well, due to Cellnet's relative focus on the consumer market," broker SBC Warburg said in a research note.
Vodafone gained a net 146,000 UK subscribers in the last three months of last year once cancellations had been taken into account and said that its performance was an improvement on the corresponding 1995 quarter.
Vodafone shares added 4p to 244p on Friday, reversing the losses suffered in a generally weak market on Thursday.
Cellnet said its subscriber base had grown by 143,000 in the last three months of last year, against an increase of 215,000 in the Christmas quarter of 1995.
But Cellnet said that 1995 had been a bumper year and noted that the growth in its customer base was significantly higher than in the two previous quarters.
Both Vodafone and Cellnet are in the process of transferring their customers from older analogue networks to more efficient digital systems.
Vodafone said that more than 1.2 million of its UK customers were now on the digital network while Cellnet said it had over 880,000 digital customers.
One-2-One and Orange ORA.L, which offer only digital services, are due to release their connection figures next week. Orange shares were 2.5p higher at 188p on Friday.
