When Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn Inc launched Caverject, an anti-impotence drug, it ordered the usual marketing programme and then, in line with a growing trend, it called Time magazine.
And Newsweek and Smithsonian and New Yorker and more than 50 other national publications and radio stations -- all of which are now engaged in a huge "consumer awareness" campaign about impotence, paid for by Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn.
Whether it is impotence, baldness, depression, schizophrenia, osteoporosis or allergies, U.S. consumers are being flooded with ads for health problems and often, in a departure from tradition, prescription drugs to cure them.
Spending on advertising on prescription drugs throughout the U.S. media topped $323 million in the first six months of 1996, compared to $356.8 million for the whole of 1995, according to Competitive Media Reporting, a market research firm.
"It certainly is a growing category for Time magazine and for news magazines in general," said Robert Pondiscio, spokesman for the Time Warner newsweekly.
Time broke new ground in the area this month with a 90-page special issue called "Frontiers of Medicine" almost fully underwritten by Britain's Glaxo Wellcome Plc, the largest drug manufacturer in the world.
The spread of direct-to-consumer prescription drug advertising marks a victory for drug companies, which fought for years with physicians and regulators opposed to it.
The American Medical Association, based here, still stands publicly against such advertising. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), after banning the adverts in the early 1980s, now allows them if they follow certain guidelines.
FDA rules explain why prescription drug advertisements sometimes identify a company and a drug but do not on other occasions.
For instance, Pfizer Inc is advertising its Zyrtec allergy drug in the main U.S. dailies. The ads show a picture of a smiling woman surrounded by wildflowers and weeds. Underneath is large-type text promoting the drug and off to one side is a 1,500-word "brief summary" in fine print about side-effects and dosages. The summary is required by the FDA because the ad mentions Pfizer's and the drug's names.
In contrast, one of Glaxo's many ads in the Time special issue is about how Olympic gold medalist Jackie Joyner-Kersee keeps her asthma under control with a "program" put together by Glaxo. A free telephone number is provided. Callers are automatically sent a complimentary "asthma control kit" from Glaxo.
No mention is made in the advertisement that Glaxo is a world leader in asthma medicines. Its Ventolin is an industry standard. Serevent was introduced a year ago and Flovent was just unveiled. Because none of these drugs is named in the ad, it does not have to include a brief summary of their attributes.
The FDA is talking with drug companies and broadcasters about how to handle radio and TV ads for prescription drugs. Some advertisements are broadcast, but so far remain much rarer than those in print.
These ads -- whether they name the drug or not -- are meant to raise consumers' awareness of new drugs and to reach doctors -- medicine's decision-makers -- through patients.
"The ads are effective in informing consumers of the availability of a drug. The action step is to suggest to the consumer that they consult their physician," said Dick Johnson, spokesman for Hoechst Marion Roussel, which is advertising its Allegra allergy medicine with pictures of a windsurfer skimming across an open field.
The ads seem to be working on the consumer.
In 1987, about 18 percent of U.S. patients initiated conversations with their physicians about advertised drugs. That figure was up to 51 percent in 1995, according to a study done by American Home Products Corp, which advertises Premarin for menopause and Effexor for depression.
"The ads create a more educated consumer and an educated consumer is more prepared to have an intelligent dialogue with the physician," said American Home spokeswoman Audrey Ashby.
Whether or not that dialogue leads doctors to write more prescriptions for advertised drugs, thereby boosting sales for the drug companies, is difficult to judge because the companies will not disclose such details.
No objective studies have determined if drug companies gain incremental revenues from advertising, but the companies' growing advertising budgets in themselves may be a sign of success.
"If these ads weren't working, why would they be doing them? Unless they were being forced to by competitors," said Stephen Scala, pharmaceuticals industry analyst with Cowen &amp; Co.
Advertising is a vital part of the over-the-counter drugs business, where the consumer -- not the doctor -- calls the shots. The kind of competitive pressures that drive over-the-counter markets may help explain the spread of advertising for prescription drugs, as well, Scala said.
But, he added, the role of consumers in a changing healthcare system are part of the answer, too.
"People are more knowledgable and aware and willing to learn about their treatments than they used to be," he said.
Large U.S. medical device manufacturers are expected to post strong profit gains for the third quarter, possibly speeding a flight to quality in a sector where small-cap companies are taking a beating.
Five of nine big device companies are expected to report year-over-year earnings gains of 20 percent or more, according to First Call consensus forecasts.
On the strength of actual and projected earnings, stocks in larger companies, such as Medtronic Inc and Boston Scientific Corp, are rallying from a summer slump.  
"There hasn't been much of a bounce in the small-cap names. Instead, you're seeing a flight to quality ... Investor sentiment is clearly shifting," said Donaldson Lufkin &amp; Jenrette medical technology analyst Steven Halper.
As the market turns cautious on loss-making start-ups, major manufacturers are entering a new period of abundance that makes them attractive, analysts said.
"This quarter will suggest that, in fact, the bigger companies are some of the best positioned in the medical technology field. They have a surfeit of new technology and new products," said Montgomery Securities analyst Kurt Kruger.  
Products are making it to market more quickly as well, thanks to more rapid U.S. Food and Drug Administration reviews. The agency approved 37 product marketing applications in its latest fiscal year, up from 27 in the prior year and 26 in fiscal 1994, according to Montgomery Securitities' count.
"This has reduced considerably the risk in bringing a new product to market and has important commercial relevance for the industry," Kruger said.
Continued powerful growth in European and Asian consumer demand for U.S. medical devices also bodes well for U.S. companies big enough to take advantage of it, analysts said.  
U.S. FIRST CALL CONSENSUS QTRLY EARNINGS FORECASTS
Company			    Qtr  EPS estimate  Yr-ago EPS
C.R. Bard			  Q3     $0.47	   $0.43
Boston Scientific		Q3     $0.41	   $0.31
Guidant			    Q3     $0.54	   $0.39
Johnson &amp; Johnson		Q3     $0.55	   $0.48
Medtronic			  Q2     $0.55	   $0.45
St. Jude Medical		 Q3     $0.45	   $0.42
Sofamor Danek		    Q3     $0.42	   $0.34
Stryker			    Q3     $0.25	   $0.21
Target Therapeutics	    Q2     $0.22	   $0.18
--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
Heartport Inc leaped almost a year ahead of its scheduled plan for developing a new heart surgery technology thanks to an earlier-than-expected U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval granted on Monday.
As a result, analysts who had looked for Heartport to turn its first profit in 1999 are now talking about 1998.
For its part, the company plans a U.S. launch of its port-access surgical system in mid-1997. "That's about a year earlier than we had previously expected," said chief executive Dr. Wesley Sterman in an interview with Reuters.  
Between now and then, Heartport plans to equip its six lead clinical training centers with port-access systems.
"We're targetting having 30 surgical teams trained by the end of the year, then drastically increasing our training capabilities over the next six to 12 months," Sterman said.
"Most analysts were looking at us crossing over (to profitability) in 1999. So maybe you could argue now that it could come in 1998, but I don't know that we would support that. I'm just saying what the analysts are doing," he said.
Shares in Heartport slipped 2 to 34-1/2 on Tuesday afer soaring as much as 7 on Monday after the FDA approval.  
Several medical technology firms are chasing the young market for minimally invasive heart surgery, in which surgeons work through small holes in the chest, instead of by cutting the chest open. Alone among potential rivals, Heartport is focused on a technique that stops the heart and puts the patient on a heart-lung bypass circuit like those used today in traditional open-heart surgery.
Other companies, such as CardioThoracic Systems Inc and Medtronic Inc, are focused on beating-heart techniques that eliminate heart-lung bypass. U.S. Surgical Corp is also working in the field.
The Food and Drug Administration is approving new drugs and medical devices at a rapid clip this year, heartening drug and device companies that have long criticised the agency.
In the federal fiscal year ended Sept. 30, the agency cleared for U.S. marketing 46 new drugs, up from 26 approvals in fiscal 1995, the agency said.
In the same period, 37 new medical devices were cleared, up from 27 the year before, according to a tally kept by Montgomery Securities, an investments firm.
"What you are seeing is the culmination of improvements in the review system that date back 10 years or more," said FDA associate commissioner for public affairs Jim O'Hara.
Even long-time FDA critic the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America, or PHARMA, sounded congratulatory, albeit with reservations. "Improvments have been made in the last couple of years," said Jeff Trewhitt, PHARMA spokesman.
Two bills before Congress that proposed more flexible and shorter FDA new drug reviews died without action with the adjournment of the House and Senate last week, a sign that the agency's actions have blunted attacks from outside critics.
Drug and medical device industry analysts said faster FDA approvals are helping companies in both sectors by reducing their research and development risks.
A year ago, companies had complained that burdensome U.S. regulatory oversight threatened to drive U.S. drug and medical technology research to Europe, known for speedier reviews.
But a study released this spring showed the FDA's median review time for new drugs approved in 1994 and 1995 was 1.3 years, as fast as that of Britain and faster than those of France, Spain, Germany, Australia, Japan, Italy and Canada, according to the FDA. The study was conducted by the British-based Centre for Medicines Research, the agency said.
"In 1996, the U.S. is reviewing and approving ... faster than any other country," O'Hara said.
He credited internal reforms at the FDA largely to passage by Congress in 1992 of the Prescription Drug User Fee Act, which made more money available to the agency through a system of user fees imposed on companies.
Those revenues have paid for the hiring of more reviewers and upgrading of FDA information systems, he said.
Outboard Marine Corp chief executive Harry Bowman talked Thursday with the principals of Greenway Partners -- Alfred Kingsley and Gary Duberstein -- who have bought an 8.5-percent stake for nearly $30 million in the manufacturer of boats and boat engines.
"It was really just a get-acquainted call," said Stan Main, spokesman for Outboard Marine, or OMC.
If Waukegan, Ill.-based OMC is anything like some other companies that Greenway has invested in, Bowman may soon get to know Kingsley and Duberstein very well indeed.  
Former associates of Carl Icahn, the two New York financiers specialize in buying shares in companies that are struggling, then pressuring managements for changes.
OMC does not know Greenway's intentions, Main said. He added, "All you can look at is their track record."
Known as a highly active shareholder, Greenway has sought a three-way break-up of Unisys Corp, the spin-off by Woolworth Corp of its profitable Footlocker division, and helped cause the 1994 sale of U.S. Shoe Corp.
"We're not bashful," Kingsley said in an interview, confirming that he has had one chat with OMC.  
The topic of discussion on the call was "the company and its operations," Kingsley said. He added, "We might have more conversations with them."
Of particular interest, Kingsley said, is OMC's new FICHT fuel injection technology, which the company said can reduce hydrocarbon emissions of two-stroke engines by 70-80 percent.
"It's true that for emissions standards, they have to do something. But I think that they've got an interesting engine here with other applications, in addition to the outboard motor area," Kingsley said.  
Asked if Greenway was happy with OMC's financial performance, Kingsley said, "The company's probably not satisfied with their performance."
OMC has made that quite clear in recent quarters and is taking steps to fix the situation, Main said. "There is a plan being developed," he said.
Investors have been waiting for improvements at OMC, but are beginning to lose patience, said Lehman Brothers analyst Harriet Baldwin. "It's likely Greenway's effect will be to bring more focus on management," she said.  
OMC makes Evinrude and Johnson outboard motors, as well as Chris-Craft and Four Winns boats. The company posted a loss in its third-quarter ended June 30 of $0.18 per share, compared to a profit of $1.39 per share last year. Quarterly revenues were $291 million, down from $329.6 million a year before.
Shares in the company were up 1-5/8 to 17-3/8 Friday after the Greenway stake was announced in a filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. A year ago, OMC shares traded in the low 20s.
Main said OMC is pursuing other markets for the FICHT system. "We are talking with people who make personal watercraft engines or motorcycle engines," he said.
In addition, he said OMC is taking cost-cutting steps. "We are looking very hard at our corporate overhead costs and expect some dramatic cost savings there," he said.
For example, OMC may consolidate administrative functions for its boat companies from six locations to one in Nashville, Tenn., Main said.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk  312-408-8787
Pall Corp and Memtec Ltd may have different reasons, but they seem equally determined to acquire Gelman Sciences Inc.
Analysts and arbitrageurs were reluctant to say whether that portends an all-out bidding war, especially after a rally in American Depositary Shares of Memtec on Thursday that reflected some doubt on Wall Street of Memtec's commitment.
Still, Gelman would nicely complement the operations of either suitor and will likely be hotly pursued by both, filtration industry analysts said.  
Shares in Ann Arbor, Mich.-based Gelman closed up 3 at 29 on the American Stock Exchange on the news that it was in discussions with Pall about a possible acquisition.
Gelman reached a definitive agreement on August 30 to be acquired by Australia's Memtec, which said Thursday it intends to proceed with the agreement.
"I don't think Memtec is going to back away," said Robert W. Baird &amp; Co analyst Walter Morris.
Memtec wants Gelman's sophisticated membrane technology to put Memtec into closer competition with East Hills, N.Y.-based Pall and Millipore Corp, Morris said. 
Pall -- much larger than either Gelman or Memtec -- wants Gelman to broaden Pall's medical and process businesses and "frankly, to eliminate a pesky competitor," Morris said.
Gelman sales in fiscal 1996 ended July 31 were $112 million, versus $103.5 million in fiscal 1995. Memtec sales in the year ended June 30 were $175 million, up from $145 million in fiscal 1995. Pall had revenues of $960.3 million in fiscal 1996 ended August 3, up from $822.2 million in fiscal 1995.
"Pall under chief executive Eric Krasnoff has been more acquisitive than under previous management teams," said Morgan Stanley &amp; Co analyst Mark Gulley.  
"If he does this deal, it will have been his third acquisition" since taking the helm at Pall about two years ago, Gulley said.
Krasnoff's acquisitions have tended to broaden Pall's presence in existing markets, rather than move it into new areas -- a pattern into which a Gelman acquisition would fit, said Fourteen Research analyst Anthony Ginsberg.
"There's good overlap ... They're in many of the same venues and markets," Gulley said.
Morris said, "Gelman is strategically important to both companies."
Arbitrageurs seemed to cast doubt Thursday on Memtec's contention that it plans to proceed with the Gelman deal by bidding up the Australian company's American depository shares as much as 3-5/8 in the morning. They lost ground in the afternoon to close up 1-15/16 at 28-15/16.
The rally in part was likely explained by short covering, arbitrageurs said.
Late Thursday, Gelman issued a statement saying it intended to pursue its agreement with Memtec, but also to talk with Pall and any other interested parties.
--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
Wall Street hammered shares of Swedish-American drug giant Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn Friday after it said profits would fall far short of expectations.
The company said it expects earnings of about 44 cents a share for the third quarter, equal to year-ago results. Analysts had expected 10 cents more than that and hit the stock hard after the announcement.
The stock dropped as much as $6.50 before trading down $5.25 at $34.875 in late trading on the New York Stock Exchange. More than 18 million shares had changed hands by early afternoon.
The company blamed foreign exchange problems, pricing pressures and weak U.S. sales of older products for the shortfall. It also cited a sales force transition and "the usual short-term disruptions seen in a multinational merger."
Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn was formed by the merger of Sweden's Pharmacia AB and Kalamazoo, Mich.-based Upjohn Co. It formally began operations in November 1995.
"This clearly indicates that the merger is not going as smoothly as hoped. I think this is a wake-up call," said independent pharmaceuticals industry analyst Hemant Shah.
With few new high-margin products expected out of the pipeline for the next year or so, Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn had been hoping that the merger would produce cost savings and other synergies that would help it through the dry spell.
"The problem is, they're not realising synergies as they thought they would," said Mehta &amp; Isaly analyst Steve Lisi.
"They were hoping that through this merger they would realise synergies to ride this out ... We just don't know if they can do it," Lisi said. "They'll get through these next couple of years, but it's going to be ugly."
Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn Chief Executive John Zabriskie said the merger is producing benefits, including a 3,000 person reduction in the work force to date. The company also said it continues to expect $500 million in cost savings by 1998.
Earnings for the fourth quarter and full year are expected to top year-ago levels, buoyed by two new drugs, Xalatan for glaucoma and Camptosar for cancer, the company said.
But analysts were uncertain about the near-term outlook and said the company offers no firm guidance for next year.
"There's a cloud over the beginning of 1997," said Rodman &amp; Renshaw analyst Mario Corso.
Merger synergies that were supposed to carry Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn Inc through a dry spell in its new product pipeline are not being realized as planned, raising questions about the drug giant's short-term future.
Shares in the barely one-year-old Swedish-American concern fell 6-1/2 to 34-7/8 on Friday after it said its third-quarter profits would be well below Wall Street estimates.
"This clearly indicates that the merger is not going as smoothly as hoped. I think this is a wake-up call for the company," said independent drug industry analyst Hemant Shah.  
Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn, formed through the merger of Sweden's Pharmacia AB and Kalamazoo, Mich.-based Upjohn Co, formally began operations in November, 1995.
"There's a cloud over the beginning of 1997. There's no earnings guidance," said Rodman &amp; Renshaw analyst Mario Corso.
In a conference call on Friday, the company said the merger is on track and cost savings of $500 million by 1998 are still projected. It said the merger has reduced the work force by 3,000 people to date. But the company earlier blamed "the usual short-term disruptions seen in a multinational merger" in part for its third-quarter earnings disappointment.  
"The problem is they're not realizing synergies as they thought they would," said Mehta &amp; Isaly analyst Steve Lisi.
Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn blamed the third-quarter earnings shortfall chiefly on currency translations. It said foreign exchange -- especially involving the Japanese yen, Italian lira and Swedish krona -- reduced quarterly sales by two percent and increased the cost of goods sold.
Limits to the company's currency hedging activities were blamed by the company for the foreign exchange hit. These inadequacies, coupled with an ongoing sales force transition, can be traced to the merger, analysts said.  
Merger programs are progressing, but the combination may never realize the synergies hoped for, Corso said.
That could compound another problem. Several of Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn's top drugs face competition from generic equivalents and few new products are in the pipeline, analysts said.
Xalatan for glaucoma and Camptosar for cancer are rolling out and could give the fourth quarter a boost. The company said it expects earnings for the fourth quarter and the full year to exceed year-ago levels. It also said it anticipates profit margin improvement through 1997.
But analysts were uncertain about the near-term outlook. They said the company offered no specific guidance on the conference call for 1997 earnings levels.
"They were hoping that through this merger they would realize synergies to ride this out ... We just don't know if they can do it," Lisi said. "They'll get through these next couple of years, but it's going to be ugly."
--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
A lower than expected third quarter sales growth rate may explain why shares in Guidant Corp closed off 2-7/8 to 46-1/2 Monday on the New York Stock Exchange, said Guidant chief executive Ronald Dollens.
"There was some expectation of higher sales growth rates," Dollens said in an interview with Reuters.
Sales increased 11 percent on the quarter against the year-ago period. "Last quarter our sales were up 18 percent," Dollens said. "They were looking for a higher sales number ... I think that's what caused the consternation."  
Sales would have been up 13 percent if not for the negative impact of exchange rate translations, he said.
About 39 percent of the medical device manufacturer's sales are in non-U.S. markets. Unfavorable exchange rates hit hardest in Japan in the third quarter, Dollens said.
Guidant posted earnings of $41.2 million, or $0.57 per share, on sales of $260.1 million. A year ago, earnings were $28 million, or $0.39 per share, on sales of $234.1 million.
"Earnings were up 47 percent. They were above Street expectations, but the stock's getting hit. That is a hard one to understand," Dollens said.  
Analysts' concerns focused on Guidant's vascular intervention business, which saw a sales decline in the third quarter to $104.7 million from $108.4 million a year earlier.
"Revenues there were a little lower than expected," said Hilliard Lyons analyst Stephen O'Neil. "It relates to the stent business here in the U.S.... Right now they're not positioned quite right in that market, but I think they will be."
Guidant's U.S. sales of devices based on the most widely used stent technolgy are growing, but not enough to offset some erosion in other areas, Dollens said.  
Guidant expects to introduce two catheters into the U.S. market this quarter. "Then the truly important step will be when we get our stent approved in the United States," Dollens said, adding the ACS Multi-Link stent is selling in Europe.
"We did $14 million of stent sales internationally this quarter," Dollens said. A U.S. Food and Drug Administration trial is under way for the new stent. Patients who have received implants must now be tracked for nine months.
--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
United Airlines said Thursday it ordered 51 new airliners valued at $4.4 billion from Boeing Co. and Airbus Industrie, and although the lion's share went to Boeing, one industry analyst said the European consortium scored a big victory over arch-rival Boeing.
United said it will buy 24 narrow-body A319 aircraft from Airbus. The order is valued at $900 million based on manufacturers' list prices, but United will likely pay much less thanks to special discounts.
United chose the Airbus planes over competing Boeing 737-700s and 737-300s after evaluating both, a UAL spokesman said.
"It certainly is a big win for Airbus," said Peter Jacobs, aerospace analyst at Ragen MacKenzie.
Boeing hardly walked away empty-handed, as United said it will buy 27 new wide-body planes -- 19 747-400s, six 757s and two 777s -- from the Seattle-based aircraft manufacturer.
The Boeing order is valued at $3.5 billion based on list prices. But again, United spokesman Joe Hopkins said, "We're not paying the retail price."
Jacobs said United may have won discounts from Boeing and Airbus of 10 percent to 15 percent off list price.
The new wide-body planes will replace older Boeings in United's fleet, said the airline, a unit of Chicago-based UAL Corp.
Boeing has been flooded with orders for new aircraft over the past 18 months. That may have made the manufacturer less willing to offer rock-bottom prices to beat Airbus for the narrow-body planes, Jacobs said.
"Boeing may have been more willing to walk away from an order than it would have been earlier," he said.
Airbus initially sold United a fleet of narrow-body A320s in 1992 by offering the airline deep discounts and an unusual walk-away lease arrangement.
"What that did was it got Airbus planes into the United fleet. That made this next decision for United easier," Jacobs said.
United will likely need to order another 100 narrow-body planes over the next seven years to update its fleet, he added.
United said the planes will be part of its "retire and replace" programme to update its fleet.
"By 2000, the programme is expected to generate more than $100 million in annual operating cost savings, reducing fuel, maintenance and labour costs," it said.
The programme will also ensure that United meets certain noise reduction requirements.
Delivery of all aircraft is scheduled to be completed by 2002, United said.
The carrier said it placed orders with United Technologies Corp.'s Pratt &amp; Whitney unit for engines for the Boeing aircraft and with International Aero Engines AG for engines for the Airbus jets. United Technologies owns 33 percent of International Aero Engines.
The Airbus A319s will replace United's older Boeing 737-200s, the airline and Airbus said. The new planes are configured to seat 126 passengers.
The A319 is a smaller derivative of the Airbus A320. United already operates 34 A320s and will take delivery of 16 more by the end of 1998, they said.
United joins German airline Deutsche Lufthansa AG as the largest airline customers for the A320 family, each with 74 planes.
Airbus Industrie is a consortium made up of French-owned Societe Nationale Industrielle, British Aerospace Plc, Daimler-Benz Aerospace, a unit of Germany's Daimler-Benz AG, and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA of Spain.
United Airlines has ordered $4.4 billion worth of airplanes from Boeing Co. and Europe's Airbus Industrie, with the the lion's share going to Boeing, the airline announced Thursday.
United ordered 27 wide-body jets -- 19 jumbo 747-400s, six 757s and two 777s -- valued at about $3.5 billion from Boeing and 24 narrow-body Airbus A319s valued at $900 million.
The Chicago-based UAL Corp. unit is the first U.S. airline to order Airbus' latest model, United and Airbus said.
United chose the Airbus planes over competing Boeing 737-700s and 737-300s after evaluating both, a UAL spokesman said.
"United benefited from substantial discounts to the prices from both manufacturers," the airline said, noting that the order values it quoted were based on manufacturers' list prices.
United said the planes will be part of its "retire and replace" programme to update its fleet.
"By 2000, the programme is expected to generate more than $100 million in annual operating cost savings, reducing fuel, maintenance and labour costs," the airline said.
The programme will also ensure that United meets certain noise reduction requirements.
Delivery of all aircraft is scheduled to be completed by 2002, United said.
The carrier said it placed orders with United Technologies Corp.'s Pratt &amp; Whitney unit for engines for the Boeing aircraft and with International Aero Engines AG for engines for the Airbus jets. United Technologies owns 33 percent of International Aero Engines.
The Airbus A319s will replace United's older Boeing 737-200s, the airline and Airbus said. The new planes are configured to seat 126 passengers.
The A319 is a smaller derivative of the Airbus A320. United already operates 34 A320s and will take delivery of 16 more by the end of 1998, they said.
United joins German airline Deutsche Lufthansa AG as the largest airline customers for the A320 family, each with 74 planes.
Airbus Industrie is a consortium made up of French-owned Societe Nationale Industrielle, British Aerospace Plc, Daimler-Benz Aerospace, a unit of Germany's Daimler-Benz AG, and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA of Spain.
Third-quarter profits for St. Jude Medical Inc were held back by several factors, including a missed heart valve sale to Iran, tax law changes and a dilutive acquisition, said chief executive Ronald Matricaria.
In an interview with Reuters on Wednesday evening, Matricaria also said St. Jude would not rule out possibly someday acquiring Cyberonics Inc, although a proposed merger of the two was called off by St. Jude on Wednesday.
"We're going to maintain our equity position in the company," Matricaria said.  
Although it owns 18 percent of Cyberonics, St. Jude said it will not exercise its option to acquire the remainder, as it had proposed doing earlier this year.
Matricaria declined to comment on analysts' speculation that St. Jude found problems with data from medical trials testing Texas-based Cyberonics' implantable device for treating epilepsy by stimulating the vagus nerve.
"I can't say anything about the data," he said. "The best thing I can tell you is if I had a son or daughter and they were on drug therapy and they weren't getting relief, the first thing I'd look for would be the Cyberonics device."  
St. Paul, Minn.-based St. Jude is the world's largest maker of heart valves and is a major producer of pacemakers and other medical devices. It reported third-quarter earnings of $0.44 per share, up from $0.42 per share from a year ago.
Matricaria said the heart valve business showed no growth in the third quarter because St. Jude failed to land a major order from Iran that it did get in last year's third quarter.
"The timing just wasn't in this quarter. It will probably be the fourth quarter or the first quarter next year. It didn't happen (in the third quarter), so it basically wiped out all of our unit growth," he said.  
Changes in U.S. tax law effecting St. Jude's operations in Puerto Rico cut earnings by about $0.02 per share in the third quarter, Matricaria said.
Recently acquired Daig Corp was St. Jude's fastest-growing unit on the quarter and reported sales of $11.5 million. But the Daig acquisition reduced earnings again this quarter by about 10 percent. Matricaria said he sees that level of earnings dilution continuing until mid-1997.
"For the third and fourth quarters this year and the first and second quarters next year, it will have a dilutive impact ...of about 10 percent," he said, adding Daig is expected to begin adding to profits in the third quarter of 1997.
Research and development spending remained about nine percent of sales in the third quarter.
Finally, Matricaria said St. Jude expects to begin regaining market share in the fourth quarter in the pacemaker market, where it has lost ground recently due to technological shortcomings in its products that have now been overcome.
--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
Amidst a wave of consolidation, U.S. hospital management and nursing home companies are expected to post mixed results in the third quarter.
Big hospital companies, despite cost and competitive pressures, are beating up on non-profits and posting fat profit margins. The average gain expected from the top five firms is 17.6 percent, based on First Call estimates.
"I haven't noticed deterioration in margins in these companies because they're grabbing market share, controlling costs and being efficient," said Wheat First analyst Joel Ray.  
The hospital business was shaken Thursday by the proposed $1.8-billion merger of Tenet HealthCare and OrNda HealthCorp, which combined will be second-largest in the field behind giant Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp.
The nursing home industry was jolted Thursday when Integrated Health Services Inc said it acquired First American Health Care of Georgia, the largest privately held U.S. home healthcare company.
The volatile nursing home and post-acute care market is less concentrated than the hospital business and the third quarter profit picture is more mixed, analysts said.  
"Results are going to be coming in all over the board," said Alex. Brown &amp; Sons analyst Jean Swenson.
Big profit gainers on the quarter look to be Vencor and Genesis Health Ventures, with weak results forecast for Beverly Enterprises and Horizon/CMS Healthcare, analysts said.
Challenges facing both the labor-intensive hospital and nursing home businesses include upward wage pressure due to record-low unemployment levels, as well as ongoing debates in Washington over the future of Medicare and its reimbursement rates for certain contract therapy services, analysts said.
U.S. FIRST CALL CONSENSUS QTRLY EARNINGS FORECASTS
Company			    Qtr  EPS estimate  Yr-ago EPS
Beverly Enterprises	    Q3     $0.22	   $0.23
Columbia/HCA Healthcare	Q3     $0.70	   $0.61
Genesis Health Ventures	Q4     $0.39	   $0.31
Health Management		Q4     $0.17	   $0.14
Horizon/CMS Healthcare	 Q2     $0.26	   $0.27
Manor Care			 Q2     $0.53	   $0.46
OrNda Healthcorp		 Q4     $0.39	   $0.33
Vencor Inc			 Q3     $0.47	   $0.38
--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
Eli Lilly &amp; Co's third-quarter profits are expected to be up strongly over 1995, but analysts expressed some concern about the drugmaker's profit margins.
Increased marketing costs for the anti-depressant Prozac and the recently launched anti-schizophrenic drug Zyprexa may combine with higher sales of lower-margin goods, such as the blood clot buster ReoPro, to hold back margins, analysts said.
"One of our concerns ... is that gross profit margin could again fall below last year's level, said Deutsche Morgan Grenfell pharmaceuticals industry analyst Mariola Haggar.
Third-quarter 1995 gross margin was 74.3 percent.
The First Call consensus of 20 analysts' projections forecast third-quarter Lilly profits of $0.64 per share, up 18.5 percent from $0.54 per share a year ago.
Revenues on the quarter were expected to come in at about $1.8 billion, up from $1.63 billion in the year-ago period.
Shares in Lilly were up 3/4 to 69-1/4 on Monday ahead of the earnings report expected on Tuesday morning.
Analysts said the third quarter could be boosted by a one-time gain on the deal giving Dura Pharmaceuticals marketing rights to the antibiotics Ceclor CD and Keftab.
No significant revenue was expected to be recorded in the third quarter from Zyprexa, approved for marketing October 1, but it was expected to lift the fourth quarter. Lilly was expected to record its first revenues in the third quarter from Humalog, a new short-acting insulin, analysts said.
Under close scrutiny will be Prozac, which accounts for about a third of Lilly revenues. New prescription growth rates for the blockbuster drug were recovering but continued to lag competing products, August script reports showed.
A Lilly spokesman declined to comment on analysts' comments and forecasts.
--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
Eli Lilly &amp; Co expects marketing and administration costs in the fourth quarter to be only slightly up or flat versus the year-ago level, marking a slowdown from a third-quarter jump of 6.5 percent.
The line item "may be up a couple percent, but certainly below the growth rates we showed in the third quarter," Lilly chief financial officer Charles Golden said in an interview.
Lilly's gross profit margin declined again in the third quarter, partly due to increased marketing costs for launching new products, such as the anti-schizophrenia drug Zyprexa.  
Zyprexa is one of a handful of new, higher-margin products that will begin to lift sales in the fourth quarter, but a margin trend turnaround is likely further off, Golden said.
"I think it's going to be sometime next year. I'm not sure it's in the next quarter," Golden said of improved margins.
Gross margin has declined for two consecutive quarters.
Other than that, analysts greeted Lilly's third-quarter results with a positive tone.
"I didn't see any real big surprises in these numbers," said NatWest Securities drug industry analyst John Lamberton.  
Lilly's third-quarter operating profits of $0.64 per share, versus $0.54 per share in 1995, were precisely in line with Wall Street expectations, said Deutsche Morgan Grenfell analyst Mariola Haggar.
The company said an 11-percent sales gain was led by the anti-depressant Prozac, the human insulin Humulin and increased revenues from the PCS Health Systems unit.
Shares in Lilly were up 1/2 to 69-1/4 on Tuesday after the Indianapolis-based drugmaker reported an 18-percent gain in third-quarter earnings over the year-ago period.  
In the fourth quarter, Golden said, Lilly will likely lose a small benefit to earnings per share stemming from a decline in outstanding shares versus the prior year. That benefit, caused by the split-off of Guidant Corp last year, boosted third-quarter earnings by five percent.
"We will lose that in the fourth quarter ... You're talking a penny or two per share," he said.
In the fourth quarter, the company will also lose a small boost to earnings from a lower tax rate that lifted third-quarter earnings slightly compared with the prior year.
--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
In a move that would reshape the world medical device business, St. Jude Medical Inc agreed Wednesday to make four long-awaited, strategic transactions that would lift it into the top ranks of manufacturers of devices for regulating heartbeat.
The $665-million package of interlocking deals is costly and poses some risks, but likely will proceed, analysts said.
Shares in St. Paul, Minn.-based St. Jude traded down 1-1/2 to 37-1/8 after the announcement, while shares in other companies in the industry also fell.  
"There's a small chance this won't go through, and the Street is also concerned about dilution. But I think this is perfect timing ... It's an idea whose time has come," said Montgomery Securities medical technology analyst Kurt Kruger.
The main thrust of St. Jude's bold move is an agreement to buy Ventritex Inc in a stock swap valued at $505 million. Ventritex, of Sunnyvale, Calif., is the smallest of three companies that dominate the fast-growing, $500-million world market for implantable defibrillators, or ICDs -- electronic devices implanted in the chest and connected to the heart by wires to keep it from beating too rapidly.  
To resolve some long-standing legal actions and help free Ventritex from cross-licensing restrictions that have hobbled it for years, St. Jude is making three smaller deals.
The company agreed to buy certain assets from Telectronics Pacing Systems, a unit of Australia's Pacific Dunlop ; to acquire Medtel, an Asia-Pacific medical goods distributor also tied to Pacific Dunlop; and to buy certain intellectual property rights from the Intermedics unit of SulzerMedica, owned by Swiss medical giant Sulzer AG.
"Part of the brilliance of this deal is bringing all these parties together," said Piper Jaffray analyst Arch Smith.  
St. Jude is the world's largest maker of heart valves, markets for which are growing, but slowly.
In search of growth and risk diversification, chief executive Ronald Matricaria engineered St. Jude's 1994 acquisition for $500 million of the Pacesetter Inc unit of Germany's Siemens AG. The deal transformed St. Jude into a leading manufacturer of heart pacemakers.  
Since then, rumors have swirled that St. Jude might acquire Ventritex--a deal seen by many analysts as setting a capstone on Matricaria's efforts. "If he pulls this off, it's the highlight of his career," said J.P. Morgan analyst Michael Weinstein.
Even with St. Jude's careful efforts, analysts said legal action could ensue. The other two main players in the ICD market -- Medtronic Inc and Guidant Corp -- could seize the chance to drag St. Jude into the courtroom.  
Shares in Minneapolis-based Medtronic were down 7/8 to 63-3/4, while shares in Indianapolis-based Guidant were off 2-3/8 to 41-3/8. Analysts said both fell on a perceived competitive threat from the St. Jude-Ventritex combination.
"Medtronic's world is getting more competitive, but I think they're less vulnerable than Guidant ... A hard rain is going to fall on Guidant," Kruger said.
Acquiring Ventritex promises to cut into St. Jude's future profits. UBS Securities analyst Samuel Navarro estimated 1997 earnings could be reduced by 10 to 15 percent.
Analysts disagreed on whether 1998 earnings would show a neutral, positive or continued negative impact from the deal.
St. Jude earned $129 million, or $1.71 per share, on sales of $723.5 million in 1995. The pre-merger First Call consensus of Wall Street analysts' estimates projected St. Jude earnings of $1.85 per share in 1996 and $2.19 per share in 1997.
""One of the reasons the stock is off is uncertainty over 1997 earnings ... It's very difficult to say what St. Jude's earnings will look like in 1997 in the wake of this. But if you look into 1998 and beyond, it's powerful," Smith said.
--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
In a move that would reshape the medical device business, St. Jude Medical Inc. agreed Wednesday to make four strategic transactions that would lift it into the top ranks of manufacturers of devices for regulating heartbeat.
The $665 million package of interlocking deals is costly and poses some risks, but likely will proceed, analysts said.
The stock of St. Paul, Minn.-based St. Jude fell $1.25 to 37.375 after the announcement, while shares in other companies in the industry also fell.
The main thrust of St. Jude's moves was an agreement to buy Ventritex Inc. in a stock swap valued at $505 million.
Ventritex, of Sunnyvale, Calif., is the smallest of three companies that dominate the fast-growing, $500 million world market for implantable defibrillators, or ICDs -- electronic devices implanted in the chest and connected to the heart by wires to keep it from beating too rapidly.
"There's a small chance this won't go through, and the Street is also concerned about dilution. But I think this is perfect timing ... It's an idea whose time has come," said Montgomery Securities medical technology analyst Kurt Kruger.
To resolve some long-standing legal actions and help free Ventritex from cross-licensing restrictions that have hobbled it for years, St. Jude is making three smaller deals.
The company agreed to buy some assets from Telectronics Pacing Systems, a unit of Australia's Pacific Dunlop; to acquire Medtel, an Asia-Pacific medical goods distributor also tied to Pacific Dunlop; and to buy certain intellectual property rights from the Intermedics unit of SulzerMedica, owned by Swiss medical giant Sulzer AG.
"Part of the brilliance of this deal is bringing all these parties together," said Piper Jaffray analyst Arch Smith.
St. Jude is the world's largest maker of heart valves, markets for which are growing, but slowly.
In search of growth and risk diversification, chief executive Ronald Matricaria engineered St. Jude's 1994 acquisition for $500 million of the Pacesetter Inc. unit of Germany's Siemens AG. The deal transformed St. Jude into a leading manufacturer of heart pacemakers.
Since then, rumours have swirled that St. Jude might acquire Ventritex -- a deal seen by many analysts as setting a capstone on Matricaria's efforts.
"If he pulls this off, it's the highlight of his career," said J.P. Morgan analyst Michael Weinstein.
Even with St. Jude's careful efforts, analysts said legal action could ensue. The other two main players in the ICD market -- Medtronic Inc. and Guidant Corp. -- could seize the chance to drag St. Jude into the courtroom.
Shares in Minneapolis-based Medtronic fell 12.5 cents to $64.125, while shares in Indianapolis-based Guidant dropped $2 to $41.50. Analysts said both fell on a perceived competitive threat from the St. Jude-Ventritex combination.
"Medtronic's world is getting more competitive, but I think they're less vulnerable than Guidant ... A hard rain is going to fall on Guidant," Kruger said.
Baxter International Inc said it expects to maintain annual gross profit margin in the 44 to 45 percent range.
"We'll definitely be able to stay, on an annual basis, in the 44 to 45 percent range," said chief financial officer Harry Kraemer in an interview with Reuters.
The Deerfield, Ill.-based medical products and services company also is still comfortable with the forecast it made in September that 1996 sales would be about $6.2 billion, although Kraemer suggested that figure could be low.  
"I would say that we're very comfortable with that number ... It could be higher," Kraemer said of the estimate.
Baxter reported third-quarter earnings on Wednesday of $0.65 per share, beating the consensus Wall Street estimate of $0.64 per share. Year-ago profits were $0.59 per share.
Sales for the quarter were $1.31 billion, compared to $1.26 billion a year earlier.
Foreign exchange translations reduced third-quarter sales by about $60 million, Kraemer said. "Despite the fact that our sales impact of foreign exchange was $60 million, we still exceeded the earnings estimate for the quarter," he said.  
Unfavorable currency exchange ratios continued to hit hardest in Japan, Kraemer said. "Going forward, we're assuming that it doesn't get better. If it does get better, then we have this strange thing called an upside ... But predicting foreign exchange is the first step to doom," he said.
After closing its acquisition of Switzerland's Immuno International AG, likely by the end of the year, Baxter expects 60 percent of sales and 75 percent of profits to come from outside the United States.
The company targeted 1996 cash flow of $500 million. In the first nine months of the year, cash flow was $457 million.  
Shares in Baxter were unchanged at 44 at midday.
On a segment basis, sales growth in the third quarter was strongest in Baxter's smallest business, cardiovascular medical products, and weakest in its largest business, the intravenous systems sector.
In cardiovascular, percentage third-quarter sales growth was in the high teens, led by strong sales gains in tissue heart valve and perfusion services, Kraemer said. The segment generated 14.5 percent of 1995's $5.05 billion in sales and is expected to remain in that range this year, he said.  
Percentage sales growth in the biotechnology segment was in the mid-teens, powered by growth in sales of Recombinate, a blood-clotting factor for haemophiliacs, and Gammagard, a therapy for patients with weak immune systems, Kraemer said.
Biotech provided 22.4 percent of 1995 sales, but is expected to jump to 32 percent after the Immuno acquisition.
Kraemer added that Baxter's development of a blood substitute product "continues to move ahead."  
The renal therapy business showed percentage sales growth on the quarter in the low teens outside the United States, while U.S. sales were down in single digits. The U.S. decline was caused by sales lost to Fresenius AG following its acquisition of the National Medical Care unit of W.R. Grace &amp; Co, Kraemer said.
The renal segment's percentage share of Baxter sales is expected to contract to about 22.6 percent this year from 25.5 percent last year, Kraemer said.
In the cash cow intravenous business, percentage non-U.S. sales growth was in the mid-single digits, while it was flat inside the United States, Kraemer said.
The IV business generates more than 50 percent of Baxter's cash flow and is feeling pressure from the continuing cost containment push in the healthcare industry, he said.
The IV segment accounted for 37.4 percent of 1995 sales. This year, that share is likely to fall to about a third of sales, based on Baxter sales growth estimates.
--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
The growing attractiveness of the subprime auto lending market was underlined again Monday when Olympic Financial Ltd said it had received expressions of interest from more than one potential acquirer.
Olympic expects to get a formal acquisition offer "within the next several weeks," said spokeswoman Jennifer Weichert.
The company's stock price shot up 6-1/4 to 23-7/8 in heavy trading Monday amid speculation of a buyout.
"We don't have an offer on the table ... and we don't have a price," Weichert said.  
She also declined to identify those expressing interest in buying Olympic. But she said, "Generally the kinds of companies that would look at a firm like this are other finance companies or regional banks or a conglomerate."
Two major regional bank companies have waded into the subprime auto lending market via acquisitions in the past year. KeyCorp bought AutoFinance Group Inc last September, and Southern National Corp is in the process of buying Regional Acceptance Corp.
"It's partly the banks saying they want to recapture this market share," said Robison-Humphrey analyst John Coffey.  
Minneapolis-based Olympic, as with other subprime lenders, makes loans to borrowers with credit histories classified as weak or on the average- to lower-end of prime.
"These companies exist today because the banks have been unable to serve these markets ... and because you don't need to be a deposit taker to make auto loans," Coffey said.
Returns on well-managed subprime car loan portfolios can be strong and attractive to banks, he said.
Earlier this year, the Consumer Bankers Association warned of pitfalls in the subprime business and cautioned banks against jumping headlong into this growing market.  
Analysts said banks that could be interested in Olympic include KeyCorp, Norwest Corp and BankAmerica.
Also mentioned by analysts as a possible suitor was the GE Capital unit of General Electric Co.
Whoever the buyer, Coffey said, Olympic is "intent on selling this company."
He suggested the price could go higher than the $30 per share that other analysts set Monday as the likely top limit.
Trading volume in Olympic shares Monday was triple normal levels. "There's some people taking some bets that it's going to go," said Principal Financial analyst Bob Ollech.
-- Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
Freed from its slow-growing data storage and imaging businesses, Minnesota Mining &amp; Manufacturing Co. Friday reported a 16 percent jump in earnings for the third quarter.
The St. Paul, Minn.-based manufacturing giant -- sometimes seen as a mirror of the U.S. economy -- said net profits rose to $398 million, or 95 cents a share, in the quarter, from $344 million, or 82 cents a share, in the 1995 period. The year-ago quarter included earnings of $5 million, or 1 cent a share, from discontined operations.
Sales grew 7 percent to $3.62 billion from $3.37 billion.
The results surpassed analysts' average forecasts of 93 cents a share, according to First Call, which tracks estimates.
3M's stock jumped $2 to $73.25, helping to boost the Dow Jones industrial average, of which is it is a component.
"It's been a long time since 3M beat any kind of estimate," said PNC Institutional Investment Services analyst John Franck. "A lot of people were questioning whether this company could grow again."
3M served notice that it can grow with third-quarter sales up 7.5 percent and profits up 17.4 percent, analysts said.
"Now that they've spun off Imation, which was taking up too much of their resources and adding to earnings volatility, this is the 3M that most people expect when they invest in it," said Crowell Weedon analyst Douglas Christopher.
On July 1, 3M's data storage and imaging businesses began operations as an independent company, Imation Corp. The third quarter was 3M's first since the spinoff.
"They're not held back anymore by that business that's now called Imation," said Merrill Lynch analyst Robert Curran.
3M said it expected solid growth again in the fourth quarter.
If it can deliver successive quarters of big gains, the company's stock could move out of the realm of value stock funds and draw the attention again of growth stock investors, analysts said.
"3M is a little different from most companies ... They're PhD oriented so there's a lot of intellectual types up there, but they're building a powerhouse," said Franck.
3M makes thousands of products -- from Scotch tape, Post-it notes and air filters to diaper closures, flexible computer circuits and kitchen sponges.
"It can be said that their domestic business is something of an indicator of the economy as a whole because it's so diverse," said Merrill Lynch's Curran.
That portrayal is somewhat less accurate since the Imation spin-off, since key sectors of the economy are now absent from 3M's product line and more than half its business is outside the United States.
Still, said Franck, "You can probably take U.S. GDP (gross domestic product), multiply it by two and factor in whatever you want for inflation and you've basically got their sales growth rate ... If the economy is doing well, they do well."
The company's units in Japan, elsewhere in Asia, Latin America and Canada posted double-digit volume increases in the quarter while unit sales in Europe grew 7 percent, despite sluggish economies in many major European countries.
For the nine months, net income grew 6 percent to $1.14 billion, or $2.73 a share, as sales rose 4 percent to $10.61 billion.
Freed from its slow-growing data storage and imaging businesses, Minnesota Mining &amp; Manufacturing Co showed on Friday it can excite Wall Street.
The St. Paul, Minn.-based manufacturing giant -- sometimes seen as a mirror of the U.S. economy -- posted strong third quarter sales and earnings growth versus year-ago results.
Shares in 3M jumped 2-1/8 to 73-3/8 on the strength of an earnings report that exceeded analysts' estimates. "It's been a long time since 3M beat any kind of estimate," said PNC Institutional Investment Services analyst John Franck.  
"A lot of people were questioning whether this company could grow again," Franck said.
3M served notice that it can with third-quarter sales up 7.5 percent and profits up 17.4 percent, analysts said.
"Now that they've spun off Imation, which was taking up too much of their resources and adding to earnings volatility, this is the 3M that most people expect when they invest in it," said Crowell Weedon analyst Douglas Christopher.
On July 1, 3M's data storage and imaging businesses began operations as an independent company, Imation Corp. The quarter just ended is 3M's first since the spinoff.  
"They're not held back anymore by that business that's now called Imation," said Merrill Lynch analyst Robert Curran.
After reporting third-quarter profits of $398 million, or $0.95 per share, on sales of $3.62 billion, 3M said it expects solid growth again in the fourth quarter.
If it can deliver successive quarters of big gains, 3M could move out of the realm of value stock funds and draw the attention again of growth stock investors, analysts said.
"3M is a little different from most companies ... They're PhD oriented so there's a lot of intellectual types up there, but they're building a powerhouse," Franck said.  
3M makes thousands of products -- from Scotch tape, Post-it notes and air filters to diaper closures, flexible computer circuits and kitchen sponges.
"It can be said that their domestic business is something of an indicator of the economy as a whole because it's so diverse," Curran said.
That is less true since the Imation spin-off. There are key sectors of the U.S. economy absent from 3M's product line. And more than half its business is outside the United States.
Still, said Franck, "You can probably take U.S. GDP (gross domestic product), multiply it by two and factor in whatever you want for inflation and you've basically got their sales growth rate ... If the economy is doing well, they do well."
--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
ClinTrials Research Inc expects to continue to expand revenues 35 to 45 percent per year, thanks to growing use by major pharmaceutical companies of outside research help and market share gains by the firm -- the world's fifth-largest contract research concern.
"We can grow at the 35-45 percent rate over the next several years and be able to handle it," said chief executive William O'Neil on Tuesday in remarks to investors at a Robinson-Humphrey investors conference here.
Later, in an interview with Reuters, O'Neil said the Nashville, Tenn.-based company estimates that drug and biotechnology companies spend $10 to $11 billion annually on research and development.
About $2.5 billion, or roughly one quarter, is outsourced to companies such as ClinTrials and rivals, including the Corning Research unit of Corning Inc and Quintiles Transnational Corp. "Five years ago, only five percent was outsourced. So it's been growing very rapidly," O'Neil said.
Moreover, he said, R&amp;D spending is growing about 10 percent annually and ClinTrials is taking market share from smaller contract researchers. "Of the additional dollars being spent, more is being shifted to us," he said.
ClinTrials recently acquired BioResearch Laboratories Inc, of Montreal, for $65 million. The acquisition was immediately accretive to earnings and effectively reduced ClinTrials' tax rate thanks to Canadian laws under which BioResearch pays no taxes, O'Neil said.
Without another major acquisition, ClinTrials likely will stay for now in the fifth-largest position in the contract research market, he said. Although he would not rule out another major deal, O'Neil said one is not in the offing.
Eighty percent of revenues for the company come from major drug companies, with biotech firms and medical device manufacturers making up the balance.
When such companies develop a new compound or device they hope may be marketable, they must test it through an extensive series of clinical trials. Animal subjects are first used. Later human patients become involved. All tests have to be conducted under standards set out by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or other government regulators.
When launched in 1990, ClinTrials handled portions of research work that had overflowed the capacities of drug and biotech firms. Today, O'Neil said, ClinTrials finds itself increasingly built into the R&amp;D budgets of clients.
Last week, ClinTrials for the third quarter reported profits of $2 million, or $0.18 per share, on revenues of $25.4 million. In the year-ago period, profits were $979,000, or $0.11 per share, on revenues of $16 million.
Shares in the company closed up 1/2 at 38 on Tuesday.
TheraTx Inc does not expect the federal government to implement new guidelines for certain key Medicare reimbursement rates until the summer of 1997, postponing until then any likely damage to the health care services concern's profitability.
"It's a government reimbursement change which is forthcoming. It will definitely pressure our earinings, there's no doubt about it," chief financial officer Donald Myll said in an interview.  
Like other companies that provide rehabilitation services to patients mostly in nursing homes, TheraTx has been waiting for two years for action from Washington on the reimbursement issue.
The company's stock has been depressed during that time by a market unjustifiably focused on one issue, Myll said following a presentation to investors at a Robinson-Humphrey conference here on Tuesday.
"At this point, I'd rather have bad news on salary equivalency than what we have now, which is no news," Myll said, referring to the issue.  
Public since 1994, Alpharetta, Ga.-based TheraTx operates 29 nursing homes and provides rehabilitation services on contract to dozens of other nursing homes companies. The firm also runs several occupational health clinics.
The rehabilitation division provides about 45 percent of revenues and offers three main forms of therapy: speech, occupational and physical.  
Most revenues in the rehabilitation area come from Medicare, the federal healthcare program for the elderly. The U.S. Health Care Financing Administration, which oversees Medicare, has been rewriting its reimbursement rules for speech, occupational and physical therapy since October 1994.
If HCFA proceeds with its latest set of reforms, TheraTx could see 1997 earnings come in flat to down compared to this year's level, Myll said.
Much remains to be determined, however, he said. Moreover, despite market concerns, the potential earnings hit from the changes is not large enough to hurt TheraTx seriously, he said.  
"There's no real threat. It's a one-time pricing issue.... The market has no clue on this," Myll said.
TheraTx on Tuesday reported third-quarter profits of $0.29 per share, up from $0.26 per share a year ago. The First Call consensus earnings forecast for the third quarter was $0.30 per share.
"The general performance of the company is on track. Whether (1996 per-share net) is $1.17 or $1.12 is not for me to say...but I would guess that analysts are probably going to revise their estimates downward because the third quarter was a couple pennies below the consensus," Myll said.
The First Call 1996 earnings estimate range is $1.15-$1.20 per share.
TheraTx shares closed Tuesday up 3/8 at 10-1/2.
Cellex Biosciences Inc said it expects to report a strong fiscal fourth quarter ending September 30 and to move into the black next fiscal year.
In a Reuters interview, chief executive Richard Sakowicz said revenues this year will be "substantially up" from last year. "We're going to have a good fourth quarter," he said.
As of June 30, the company -- which records revenues when it ships product -- had $3.6 million worth of work in process.
The Minneapolis-based concern expects to turn a profit next fiscal year, said chief financial officer Mary Lore.  
Formed in 1983 at the beginning of the biotechnology boom, Cellex makes and markets two types of machines for growing cell cultures used by drug and biotech companies.
Cellex's original business is in perfusion systems in which cells grow for 35-45 days on hollow-fiber membranes contained in cases through which liquid nutrients, such as sugars and vitamins, flow to feed the cells and flush out their waste products. The company has 60-80 percent of the $10-$15 million world market for perfusion culture systems.
In December 1993 Cellex acquired LSL Biolafitte SA, a French maker of larger, old-style cell culture tanks.  
Unlike perfusion systems, tanks grow batches of cells in a nutrient bath that produces for a few days before the cells begin to degrade in their own wastes and have to be replaced.
Biolafitte has 10-15 percent of the $100-million world culture tank market. About 80 percent of Cellex revenues come from sales of the technologically better-established tank systems, with the rest from perfusion systems, Sakowicz said, adding that perfusion system sales are growing faster.
For the nine months ended June 30, tanks provided three-quarters of revenues totalling $10.7 million, up from $7.5 million in the year-ago period, he said.  
Cellex posted a loss of $0.75 per share in the nine-month period, compared to a year-ago $1.69 per share loss.
To boost weak tank sales in the United States, Cellex plans to open a U.S. tank factory, Sakowicz said.
"We'll also be introducing over the next six months a number of bench-top research systems for fermenters," he said.
The company gets about $1.5 million in annual revenues from sales of disposable hollow-fiber packets for its perfusion systems. That figure is growing about 35 percent annually, although most revenues still come from sales of long-lasting tank systems and spare parts.
Shares in Cellex traded off 1/8 Tuesday to 2. Once as high as more than $14 per share, Cellex was hit hard by the biotech sell-off of late 1994, Sakowicz said.
He said he sees signs of renewed investor interest in biotechnology. "As we grow the revenue base and pay down our debt and lessen our dependence on major custom systems, I think our whole operating performance is going to be much improved and much more predictable," Sakowicz said.
--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
U.S. consumers are greeting the latest home computers -- faster than ever, but lacking new whiz-bang features -- with a collective yawn.
Major U.S. electronics retailers said Thursday that home PC sales were weak in October and analysts see few signs of a recovery without lower prices or a technology breakthrough.
"Everybody seems to have stopped buying PCs all of a sudden," said Janney Montgomery Scott analyst Terrence McEvoy.
Defying the downdraft are mail-order computer vendors and sellers of computers to business, which are both thriving.  
Their success reflects a shifting market, analysts said.
"The business today is less first-time buyers and more repeat customers," said Robertson Stephens analyst Edward Lee.
The pool of entry-level buyers is contracting and the PC industry increasingly relies on second- or third-time buyers, who are smarter than novices. Veterans look for vendors offering lots of peripherals, such as CompUSA Inc, or discount mail-order houses, such as Dell Computer Corp and Gateway 2000 Inc, analysts said.
That leaves generalists, like Best Buy Co and Circuit City Stores, to fight for a shrinking market.  
Eden Prairie, Minn.-based Best Buy, with 268 stores in 31 states, reported October sales were down 15 percent from a year ago on a same-store basis and said "the sale of personal computers was impacted by industry-wide weakness."
Richmond, Va.-based Circuit City saw an October decline in same-store sales of nine percent and cited "softness in the personal computer and ... consumer electronics categories."
Disappointing results were posted by Tandy Corp, owner of the RadioShack, Computer City and Incredible Universe chains. "Our results parallel the sluggish consumer electronics and personal computer retail market," Tandy said.  
"Demand is starting to dry up across the board," Lee said.
Best Buy shares Thursday fell 3-1/4 to 13 on the October report. Circuit City shares were up 3/8 to 34-7/8. Shares in Fort Worth, Texas-based Tandy were off 3/4 to 38-3/4.
At the same time, shares in Dell were up 1-1/2 to 88-5/8, while Gateway 2000 shares were up 3-3/4 to 52-3/4. Shares in computer and microprocessor manufacturers also rallied, with Intel Corp up 5-3/4 to 124-5/8 and International Business Machines Corp up 1 to 134-1/4.  
PC sales at this time last year were buoyed by promotions and the multi-media explosion. The home PC was transformed from a word processor into a high-quality game station and an educational tool for kids thanks to CD-ROM drives, speakers and soundcard packages and a bevy of new applications.
"Today, computers are faster than they were a year ago, but what does it do more?" Lee asked. "Demand is driven by applications and how it changes the typical consumer's life."
Savvy consumers could just be waiting for lower prices, of course, and analysts said if they keep dropping, there may yet be a holiday buying burst. But without some hot new features, the shopping season for PC retailers could be a cold one.
"When you've got Intel moving up five in one day and Best Buy moving down three the same day, that tells you something ... It's a tough business," said Securities Corp of Iowa analyst Pat Dunkerley.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk  312-408-8787
Outboard Marine Corp said it is only five percent finished with a radical restructuring that it expects will result in more charges against earnings in 1997 and possibly in 1998, the company said.
Restructuring is about "five percent complete as far as going down the road and getting the savings," said spokesman Stan Main. "That does not mean that we've taken only five percent of our restructuring charges ... There will likely be more charges during '97 and perhaps even into '98."
Shares in Outboard on Friday were off 1/4 to 15-3/4.  
The Waukegan, Ill.-based maker of boats and boat engines reported fourth-quarter profits Thursday that, excluding restructuring charges, beat Wall Street estimates.
Analysts cautioned, however, that a turnaround at Outboard remains a long-term project.
"They're going to be continuing this restructuring process in '97 and they're going to continue to have some more charges ... They describe the phase they're in now as the discovery process," said Lehman Brothers analyst Harriet Baldwin.
A key moment could come Tuesday when Outboard executives are scheduled to meet with analysts and investors in New York.  
Expected to be in attendance are the principals of Greenway Partners, an investment firm led by former Carl Icahn associates Alfred Kingsley and Gary Duberstein. Greenway bought an 8.5-percent stake in Outboard this summer.
Although the firm is known for activism, Greenway so far has not pressured Outboard to alter course, Main said. Nor has there been further communication between Greenway and company executives since initial discussions in August, he said.
Analysts speculated there could be fireworks next week or at the January 16 annual meeting of shareholders, who are said to be growing impatient for a cohesive recovery plan.  
A restructuring was set in motion this year by chief executive Harry Bowman, who came aboard in 1995, when the stock was trading in the low 20s. Bowman continues to deliberate over how to fix Outboard and key pieces remain to be put in place, analysts said.
The business is under evaluation from top to bottom, Main said. Once restructuring is complete, Outboard "certainly will be a marine products company," he said.  
"Longer term, we could get into products that would not be marine related. But our initial focus over the next two to three years is to fix the business that we're in and then perhaps look at other areas that might be less cyclical or seasonal," said Main, who is director of strategic planning.
Bowman has spoken of finding more stability for Outboard, which suffers more from boating's boom-bust cycles than rivals, such as Lake Forest, Ill.-based Brunswick Corp, which has diversified into bowling, fishing and camping gear.
Outboard sees opportunities to enter other markets -- such as motorcycles, snowmobiles and personal watercraft -- via its innovative FICHT fuel injection engine technology, Main said.
Spending on capital and tooling in fiscal 1996, ended September 30, fell to $52.7 million from $66.5 million the year before, but spending on FICHT is holding steady as the company converts more of its engine line to it, he said.
Sales of 150-hp FICHT engines to dealers will begin in December and consumers will see the engines in January. A promotional roll-out is underway.
The company plans to convert its entire outboard engine line above 20-hp to FICHT engines, which will cost 22 to 25 percent more than their traditional equivalents, Main said.
--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
Chicago Board of Trade Chairman Patrick Arbor said Thursday he expects electronic technology to replace open outcry trading in 20 to 25 years.
"I would think that in 20 to 25 years, there will be some kind of technology that will replace the traditional, open outcry market," Arbor said in answer to a student's question after a speech at the University of Chicago.
In the past, the CBOT has said it views electronic trading as a supplement to open outcry pit trading, which it has said provides maximum integrity and liquidity at minimum cost.
A CBOT press release distributed after Arbor's speech quoted him saying that "electronic trading ... supplements open outcry during daytime hours and the evening session."
In answer to the student's question, Arbor remarked that his 33-year-old son, a CBOT member allowed to trade in the pits, has "got about 20 years left" in his trading career.
Arbor added, "Technology is the wave of the future. There's no question about it."
Electronic trading remains a small part of the total volume of trading done on the CBOT, but is growing rapidly.
Total trading volume on the exchange in 1995 was more than 210 million contracts and Arbor predicted record-setting volume in 1996. Electronic trading increased to an average daily volume of 7,397 contracts in the first quarter of 1996 from just 560 contracts in 1992, when it commenced.
"The growth of electronic trading is here. It's going to continue," Arbor said.
He said he expects the CBOT -- the world's largest futures exchange -- soon to move away from paper orders. He said, "My prediction would be that in three to five years, the Board of Trade floor ... will be completely paperless and pretty much automated as far as the entering and exiting of orders."
Baxter International Inc said on Wednesday it expects to record unspecified charges against earnings in the first quarter of 1997 on in-process research and development acquired through its purchases of Research Medical Inc and Immuno International AG.
The amounts of the anticipated charges have not been determined, said Michael Mussallem, Baxter group vice president, in an interview with Reuters.  
The Research Medical charge "will be substantial," Mussallem said. "When you start talking about half the transaction value, that's substantial."
He said the company expects to have a better grasp on the estimated charges by the end of January.
Baxter announced early Wednesday it reached a definitive agreement to acquire Utah-based Research Medical for about $236 million, or $23.50 per share, in a stock transaction.
At the same time, Baxter said it expects to close its purchase of Immuno in two to six weeks. Baxter agreed in August to buy Immuno for $715 million over three years.  
The acquisition had been delayed last month because it was not yet approved by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission and because of a postponed bond issue related to the deal.
In announcing the Research Medical acquisition, Deerfield, Ill.-based Baxter said in a statement it expects the purchase to be accretive to earnings in 1998.
In the interview, Mussallem said, "This is not going to be significantly accretive in 1998. It will be more significantly accretive beyond that."
The acquisition will dilute Baxter earnings through 1997 in decreasing amounts with each successive quarter, he said.  
"You're really talking about pennies here," he added.
Shares in Baxter, a U.S. healthcare products giant, were up 3/8 to 41-3/8 in midday New York Stock Exchange trading.
A maker of medical devices focused on heart surgery, Research Medical employs 270 people, mostly at its Salt Lake City base. No layoffs or transfers are planned, Baxter said.
Research Medical chief executive Gary Crocker will stay on with Baxter through a transition. "We'll see how long it goes beyond that, but we certainly welcome him," Mussallem said.
Under the acquisition agreement, Research Medical shareholders will get shares of Baxter worth $23.50 for each share of Research Medical. The Baxter stock will be priced as the average of the 10 trading days ending two days prior to the Research Medical shareholders meeting. No meeting date has been set, but is expected to come in the first quarter.
--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
Monsanto Co. said on Monday it will spin off its chemicals business in a long-awaited and costly move that will allow the company to focus on its faster-growing agriculture, food and healthcare units.
Between 1,500 and 2,500 jobs will be eliminated in the transaction, causing the company to take a $400 million to $600 million fourth-quarter charge against earnings, it said.
"What they're trying to create is one company that's clearly focused on growth and one that's clearly focused on efficiency," said Smith Barney industry analyst James Wilbur.
St. Louis, Mo.-based Monsanto is a far-flung conglomerate whose varied products include Roundup weed killer, NutraSweet sweetener, carpet fibers, and drugs for treating arthritis and insomnia, as well as genetically engineered corn and soybeans.
Wall Street had long expected the giant company, which has about $8.9 billion in annual sales, to break itself up.
"It was a fait accompli," Wilbur said. "The market likes companies that are less diversifed."
The pared-down Monsanto will focus on its higher-profit margin agricultural, pharmaceuticals and biotechnology businesses, a spokesman said.
The new chemicals business will have to emphasize production efficiencies in a market subject to cyclical sales trends and intense global competition, analysts said.
"After careful consideration, we're convinced these businesses must operate separately to reach their maximum potential and thereby unlock significant value in both," Monsanto Chairman Robert Shapiro said.
Shapiro will head the post-spin-off Monsanto and Executive Vice President Robert Potter, who runs the chemicals business, will run the new company, still unnamed, Monsanto said.
The scope of job cuts coming with the spin-off has not been determined, but more details will likely be available by the end of January, a spokesman said.
Monsanto employs 28,500 people around the world. The anticipated cuts would reduce that headcount by 5 percent to 9 percent, the company said.
The tax-free spin-off proposed would create a new firm by the end of 1997. Current Monsanto shareholders would keep their Monsanto shares and get shares in the new concern as a special dividend, the company said.
Monsanto said its directors approved the spin-off.
The company also said the exact amount of the after-tax charge, which is to cover the costs of job reductions, asset and equipment write-offs, and consolidation of some manufacturing and offices, would be fixed at a later date.
Analysts estimated the one-time charge would total between 80 cents and $1 per share.
Monsanto, which reported 1995 profits of $739 million, or $1.25 a share, is expected to post per-share profits for 1996 of $1.50, according to First Call, which tracks analysts' projections.
Monsanto said in October it was considering options for its chemicals business, which had about $3 billion in 1995 revenues but is growing less rapidly than other units and is subject to more ups and downs.
"Chemicals would hurt the multiple of the company if they held onto it ... because the chemicals growth rate is not as high as the agriculturals growth rate and the earnings are more cyclical," said PaineWebber industry analyst Paul Raman.
The chemicals business -- making acrylic carpet fibers, plastic interlayers for glass, industrial phosphorus compounds and other products -- was shopped around for months, but no buyer was found, in part for tax reasons, analysts said.
Monsanto said the spin-off requires shareholder approval and clearance by government agencies and the Internal Revenue Service for it to be tax-free.
The spin-off is intended to be completed no later than the end of next year. Until then, the two companies will operate separately within Monsanto beginning early next year, it said.
Monsanto's stock slipped 37.5 cents to $40.75 in midday trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Aon Corp said Wednesday it expects to take a charge against earnings of about $100 million in the 1997 first quarter on its $1.23-billlion purchase of Alexander &amp; Alexander Services Inc.
In an interview, Aon Chief Executive and Chairman Patrick Ryan told Reuters, "There will be consolidating costs that will take place in the first quarter after we close."
Those costs will cause the charge, he said. "It's certainly going to be in the $100 million range ... It's a 'guesstimate' at this stage, but it's in that range."  
Ryan said Aon does not expect additional charges beyond the first quarter.
"But there is a fair value charge that will go into the deal cost," he said. "Space costs and corporate redundancies have yet to be determined ... So it's difficult to say at this point what will be a charge to earnings and what will be an increase in terms of the cost of the deal."
He added, "The charge is in that ($100-million) range. I can't get any more precise at this stage."
Chicago-based Aon would become either the largest or second-largest insurance brokerage through the deal, he said.  
How the post-acquisition Aon will size up against rival giant Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos Inc of New York depends on how the two companies' operations are counted, Ryan said.
"It's not apples to apples," he said.
Asked whether Aon would look to do further acquisitions, Ryan said, "We've got to digest these."
In October Aon completed a $250-million acquisition of Bain Hogg Group Inc from Inchcape Plc.
"The industry has been consolidating. Certainly, people have been expecting us to continue to be a leader in that. And we had announced that we intended to be," Ryan said.  
"We've made what we think to be two strategic and good acquisitions. Now we've got to put them together," he said.
Aon employs about 27,000 people. Alexander &amp; Alexander, based in New York, employs about 12,000.
"We're not in a position to comment on layoffs, other than to say that as you bring businesses together, there obviously will be some redundancies," Ryan said.
"There will be some redundancy at corporate and things like that that we have to identify," he said.
"Will all employees that are currently employed be employed down the road? That generally is not the case. But I don't think you should look for huge layoffs," he said.
Shares in Aon were up 3/8 to 58 and shares in Alexander &amp; Alexander were up 3-1/8 to 17-1/4 at midday on the New York Stock Exchange.
-- Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
Aon Corp. said Wednesday it agreed to acquire Alexander &amp; Alexander Services Inc. for about $1.23 billion, creating by some counts the world's largest insurance and risk consulting company.
Aon, a Chicago-based insurance holding company, said it will pay $17.50 a share, or about $790 million, for Alexander &amp; Alexander's common stock and about $437.5 million to holders of the company's preferred stock.
Layoffs and office closings are expected to follow the deal as Aon moves to cut cost, analysts said.
With offices around the world, Aon employs about 27,000 people; Alexander &amp; Alexander about 12,000.
"You have to assume every place there's an Aon office and an Alex office, one of them has got to close. And that's a lot of places," said Conning &amp; Co. insurance analyst Gary Ransom.
Aon Chairman Patrick Ryan said he could not estimate possible job cuts.
"I don't think you should look for huge layoffs," he said.
Alexander &amp; Alexander's stock jumped $3.125 to $17.25, while Aon rose $1 to $58.625, both on the New York Stock Exchange.
Alexander &amp; Alexander, based in New York, is the fourth-largest insurance broker in the world. It has operations in 80 countries, primarily the United States, Canada and Britain.
After its acquisition of Alexander &amp; Alexander, Aon will become either the largest or second-largest insurance broker in the world.
How it will size up against rival giant Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos. Inc. depends on how their operations are counted, Ryan said. "It's not apples to apples," he said.
Aon said it will begin a cash tender offer for Alexander &amp; Alexander's common shares no later than Dec. 16 and upon completion of the tender offer the purchase of the preferred shares will begin.
"Virtually everyone who watches the insurance industry has been expecting this deal," said Robinson-Humphrey insurance analyst Thomas Rosencrants.
"It's a fair price. A&amp;A has been struggling for 15 years. There will be tremendous economies of scale to come out of this as A&amp;A is folded into Aon," Rosencrants said.
Analysts said they would expect Ryan to head up the combined operations and Alexander &amp; Alexander Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Frank Zarb to step aside.
"I would have to assume that Frank Zarb would not be around," Ransom said.
The deal was approved unanimously by the boards of both companies, Aon said.
Over the past decade, the insurance industry has become increasingly competitive and insurers have been forced to hold down premium rate increases, which has put downward pressure on their profit margins.
"There's no end in sight to the 10-year soft market," Rosencrants said.
Competition has pressured companies to look for strategic alternatives and led to industry consolidation.
Aon in October completed a $250 million acquisition of Bain Hogg Group Inc. from Britain's Inchcape Plc. The Alexander &amp; Alexander deal likely caps Aon's acquisition drive for now, analysts said.
"The industry has been consolidating. Certainly people have been expecting us to continue to be a leader in that," Ryan said. "We've made two what we think to be strategic and good acquisitions. Now we've got to put them together."
Aon added that its offer was still subject to several conditions, including the tender and non-withdrawal of at least a majority of the voting power of A&amp;A's common shares, and various regulatory approvals.
Aon Corp's acquisition of Alexander &amp; Alexander Services Inc looks like a good deal for both insurance giants and an even better one for American International Group Inc.
Aon will pay an aggregate of $1.23 billion for Alexander &amp; Alexander -- a price called reasonable by industry analysts.
Included in that amount is $317.5 million in cash for Alexander &amp; Alexander's Series B preferred shares, which AIG bought for $200 million in June 1994. "AIG made out pretty good on this," said Conning &amp; Co analyst Gary Ransom.  
An AIG spokesman declined to comment on the transaction.
Analysts had long expected Aon to make a major buy. Its purchase this fall for $250 million of Inchcape Plc's Bain Hogg Group unit, a third the size of Alexander &amp; Alexander, did not convince most analysts that Aon was through expending its $1 billion cash warchest. "Virtually everyone who watches the insurance industry has been expecting this deal," Robinson Humphrey analyst Thomas Rosencrants said.
"It's good for Aon. It's good for Alex, too. It gives them something better than what they had. Their (Alexander's) stock price looked like it was going to keep going down," Ransom said.  
Aon chief executive Patrick Ryan is expected to head up the combined operation, with Alexander &amp; Alexander chief executive Frank Zorb expected eventually to step aside.
"I would not be surprised to see Frank take a consulting role. I would not expect him to be involved to a great extent following the merger," Rosencrants said.
In an interview with Reuters, Ryan said Aon was attracted to the strategic fit offered by Alexander &amp; Alexander.
"They've got a great international business. They've got a wonderful consulting business that fits with ours. And they're strong in Canada, where we are quite small," Ryan said.  
Over the past decade, the insurance industry has become increasingly competitive and insurers have had to hold down premium increases. Profit margins have suffered in the process and industry consolidation has accelerated.
"There's no end in sight to the 10-year soft market," Rosencrants said. "A&amp;A has been struggling for 15 years ... Their only realistic alternative would have been to sell to Marsh &amp; McLennan (Cos Inc). But they've been such close competitors over the years that there could have been some cultural problems there."
Aon shares were up 1-1/4 to 58-7/8, Alexander &amp; Alexander was up 3 to 17-1/8, and AIG was off 2 to 109-5/8.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
Increasing pressure from customers to hold down prices will keep a profit squeeze on U.S. medical device manufacturers in 1997, although the sector's biggest firms are expected to show healthy growth.
Other variables looming over the industry are the naming of a successor to departing U.S. Food and Drug Administration Commissioner David Kessler and Congress' mood on healthcare.
"Expectations are still for a positive environment from a Washington standpoint, but I don't think you can take that for granted," said Prudential Securities analyst Charlene Lu.  
After six contentious years, Kessler announced his resignation from the FDA last month. The White House has not named a replacement. "Questions like who replaces Kessler are going to have a big impact on whether new products get approved quickly," Lu said.
Congressional and White House sentiment on reforming the U.S. healthcare industry is lukewarm at the moment, but could reemerge as an issue, analysts said.
"Meanwhile, managed care marches on and that will have an impact," said Wasserstein Perella analyst Robert Dunne.  
Health maintenance organizations, hospitals and others that buy medical devices -- such as pacemakers, catheters and heart valves -- are squeezing device makers for lower prices. That has cut into profits and limited the growth potential of some companies, analysts said.
"You're going to continue to see greater and greater market pressures," Lu said.
In search of growth, many device companies are looking overseas and finding opportunity. "To grow the top line, you've got to move outside the United States," said Dain Bosworth analyst Rachael Scherer.  
Partly as a result, the sector's biggest firms -- those with global reach -- had the best 1996 and are widely expected to lead the pack again next year. Companies such as Medtronic Inc, Boston Scientific Corp and Guidant Corp are widely seen as market outperformers for 1997.
"I'm looking probably for 20 percent-plus earnings growth from them ... Those stocks will probably perform a little bit better than the market," Dunne said.  
Possibly less rosy is the general outlook for small device companies. Scherer pointed out that Nasdaq medical technology stocks severely underperformed the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 Stock Index this year, while larger listed issues topped the index, mirroring a dichotomy seen in other industries, as well.
"We're optimistic that Nasdaq med tech issues will outperform next year," Scherer said.
Smaller and mid-sized firms named by analysts as potential 1997 winners were Datascope Corp, Target Therapeutics Inc, Stryker Corp, Mentor Corp, and Nellcor Puritan Bennett Inc.
On the technology front, growth was expected to continue to be strong for stents, which shore up the insides of diseased blood vessels, and implantable defibrillators, which treat too-rapid heartbeat.
Key products expected next year from industry giant Medtronic include an atrial fibrillation device, a device for continually recording electrocardiogram readouts to help diagnose unexpected fainting, a new stent and an implantable drug pump for cancer patients, Medtronic said.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
If the weather cooperates, U.S. retailers expect this weekend to cap a holiday shopping season that looks moderately better than last year's, despite being shorter by five days.
"This weekend is crucial," said Prudential Securities retail analyst Wayne Hood in Atlanta. "With the snow and cold weather, it's a little too early to tell. ... But on balance, it should be a better holiday sales season than last year."
Warmer weather is forecast for much of the country this weekend following a cold snap that rattled some regions.
A blast of arctic air slowed shopping earlier this week in Minnesota, the Dakotas, Iowa and Nebraska, said Susan Eich, spokeswoman for Minneapolis-based retailer Dayton Hudson Corp., which owns Target, Mervyn's and three department store chains.
Cold, wet weather in the Northeast dampened midweek shopping in the New York area, analysts said.
Snow fell Wednesday in Atlanta. And south Florida felt an unfamiliar chill Friday, but the retail impact was minimal. "It looks fairly good. ... Down here they're buying," said J.W. Charles Securities retail analyst Allen Roness in Boca Raton, Fla. The registers are ringing in California as well, where weather has not been a problem, said Robertson Stephens retail analyst Edward Weller in San Francisco. "It's going to be a reasonably good Christmas for American consumers and a very good one for retailers," he said.
He noted, however, that some sectors are outperforming others. Clothing sales are strong, reflecting perhaps the closings this past year of hundreds of apparel retailers, Weller said.
On the other hand, home computer sales continue to look anemic and prices are coming down fast. "Consumer demand for computers is, in technical terms ... poor," Weller said.
There are five fewer shopping days this year between Thanksgiving and Christmas compared with 1995. As a result, retailers have that much less time to meet their sales targets and consumers have that much less time to shop and compare.
"Everybody knew it going in. So they got the ads out early and put the decorations up early," said A.G. Edwards retail analyst Stephen Latz in St. Louis, where warmer weather is forecast for the weekend.
Staring down the barrel of a shortened season, retailers have begun some sales promotions, but last year's huge price markdowns so far are not being matched, Latz said.
"I don't think anybody has gone nuts like they did in past years," he said. "It's going to be the best season in the last few years, but those five fewer days are a lot to overcome ... That's going to be the story."
After a tough year of slimmer profits and lower stock values, U.S. health maintenance organisations are expected to bounce back a bit in 1997.
Medical cost inflation is slowing and analysts see room for HMOs to raise premiums and restore some of the profit margin they lost this year. Still, the prognosis is cautious as the industry continues consolidating and faces controversy.
"It's not a super spectacular outlook, but it certainly looks better than 1995 and 1996," said Bear Stearns managed health care industry analyst Gary Frazier.
This year, medical costs, driven largely by higher prescription drug prices, rose faster than forecasts based on historical trends and left HMOs locked into premium rates that were too low to preserve profit margins. By early spring, the pinch was evident to Wall Street and HMO stock values from March to July declined sharply across the board.
Thirteen of the 16 largest publicly traded HMOs still have not regained first-quarter highs since the sell-off. The three that have are United Wisconsin Services Inc., Oxford Health Plans Inc. and FHP International Corp., which is being acquired by PacifiCare Health Systems Inc.
Good recovery has been experienced by PacifiCare, WellPoint Health Networks Inc. and Aetna Inc., while only modest upward reversals have been made by industry giant United Healthcare Corp., Humana Inc. and others. Still reeling from the debacle are Coventry Corp., Mid Atlantic Medical Services Inc. and Physician Corp.
"Questions about pricing and margins still hang over the industry," said Salomon Brothers managed health care industry analyst Robert Hoehn.
Medical cost inflation forecasts vary, but most analysts look for premiums to rise slightly faster than costs in 1997.
"The HMOs are starting to take some action by raising premiums, but the problem is they're really just catching up," said Peter Reilly, an actuary at the health care consulting firm of Milliman &amp; Robertson. "Premium increases have lagged cost increases significantly."
Whether HMOs are able next year to restore profit margins to the levels that Wall Street likes may have as much to do with their willingness to court public criticism as with their actual market power, suggested one industry observer.
"This has been a year characterised by scathing attacks on the industry with the implication that profits are being made at the expense of high-quality health care," said Doug Sherlock, editor of the industry newsletter Pulse.
With one eye on public relations and the other on the bottom line, some HMOs in 1996 may have intentionally let margins slip, Sherlock suggested. "One or 2 percent profit margins are less easy to attack than 9 percent," he said.
If the heat in state legislatures and elsewhere subsides, HMOs may feel they have room to move, or they may not, Sherlock said. "These companies still have ... all the bargaining power they need. It's really a situation of whether they choose to exercise it or not."
Based on a survey of 100 HMOs nationwide, Pulse projects the industry's aggregate medical-loss ratio to decline 1.5 percentage points next year, boosting profits slightly. The ratio, which measures how much HMOs pay out to cover members' medical costs, rose a hefty 4.2 percentage points in 1996.
More mergers and acquisitions are expected, as well. Of the more than 600 U.S. HMOs, only United and Aetna look to be truly national players, Hoehn said. "Everybody else has to either merge with someone or sell," he said.
Holiday sales for top U.S. retailers so far look mildly disappointing, but Wall Street is withholding judgment on the season and retailing's fourth quarter profit outlook until all the scores are tallied.
"There's a lot of nervousness about retailers and what they're going to report. It's definitely taking a toll on the stocks," said UBS Securities retailing analyst Annie Erner.
Shares in most retailers fell Thursday after J.C. Penney Co Inc said fourth-quarter earnings would not meet expectations and November-December profit margins were thin.  
Dayton Hudson Corp also reported early holiday results Thursday that were less than exciting, following a Friday warning of lower holiday sales from  Nordstrom Inc. The reports put retail analysts on edge, but they remain confident that other big players, such as Sears Roebuck and Co, May Department Stores and Federated Department Stores, will meet or exceed expectations.
"My impression is that May did okay. Federated looks like they're on plan and for Sears, we're looking for a good fourth quarter," said Brown Brothers Harriman analyst Joseph Ronning.
Shares in all three companies fell Thursday, nevertheless.  
The only major retail stocks to defy the downdraft, which was aggravated by a broadly lower Dow Jones industrial average, were Toys R Us Inc and Saks Holdings Inc, reflecting good toy and luxury items sales, analysts said.
Bed Bath &amp; Beyond Inc, a smaller home furnishings seller, also made gains Thursday after reporting good same-store sales for December, offering hope to analysts of more positive surprises from specialty retailers.
No such hopes lingered for hard-pressed computer retailers, however, as shares in CompUSA Inc, Tandy Corp and Circuit City Stores Inc declined.  
Reflecting a broad slump in home computer sales, CompUSA said Thursday that second-quarter same-store sales rose 1.5 percent, letting down analysts who had expected three percent.
Doing substantially better than computer sellers are drugstores, which may be among the top performers in weeks ahead as retailers post fourth-quarter results, analysts said.
Rite Aid Corp on Thursday reported strong December same-store sales gains. Advances in non-pharmacy revenues signalled good holiday gift sales and pharmacy-side gains reflected the growing prevalence of third-party payor schemes for prescription drugs, analysts said.  
In addition, J.P. Morgan Securities analyst Mark Husson said, "The cough and cold season is beginning to warm up. So that's good for sales, too."
Among department stores and discounters, a big factor in the mixed holiday sales season was the fact that it was five days shorter than last year's due to a fluke in the calendar.
"None of us knew what this five fewer days would do ... to the mechanics of the season," said Morgan Stanley analyst Bruce Missett.  The net result was that most big sales gains were restricted by the shortened season, while mediocre showings were made worse by it, analysts said.
"You came out with a trend line not dissimilar to what we've seen all year, which is modest growth," Missett said.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
Major retailers reported mixed results Thursday for the crucial holiday sales season, sparking a drop in their stocks on Wall Street.
The preliminary holiday reports by J.C. Penney Co. Inc., Dayton Hudson Corp., Carson Pirie Scott &amp; Co. and others are "further confirmation that the holiday was one of moderate growth," Morgan Stanley retailing analyst Bruce Missett said.
"There's a lot of nervousness about retailers and what they're going to report. It's definitely taking a toll on the stocks," said UBS Securities retailing analyst Annie Erner.
J.C. Penney said sales for the four weeks ended Dec. 28 were close to the Plano, Texas-based company's goals but that markdowns were higher than expected.
Total sales, including drug store sales, for the period were $3.6 billion, a 23.2 percent increase from the $2.9 billion in sales for the comparable period in 1995.
Same-store sales at J.C. Penney, not including drug stores, for the holiday period increased 6.2 percent over 1995. The company did not release dollar figures for same-store sales, which cover stores open at least a year.
The company also said it expected fourth-quarter earnings before charges would not meet Wall Street expectations and that profit margins for November and December were below planned levels.
J.C. Penney stock dropped $1.25 to $47.50 in midday trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Dayton Hudson said same-store sales at its 65 department stores in the Midwest, 736 Target discount stores nationwide and 300 Mervyn's discount stores in the West and South were up 4.2 percent for the same period. The Minneapolis-based company did not give dollar figures.
"Results at Target and Mervyn's for the four weeks were on plan, while department stores sales were below our expectations," Chief Executive Bob Ulrich said in a statement. "With the shorter selling season this year, we planned our sales conservatively and generally met our plans for the season."
Dayton Hudson department store sales increased 0.3 percent, Mervyn's sales decreased 4.1 percent and Target sales rose 7.1 percent, the company said.
Dayton Hudson stock fell $1.375 to $37.875 on the NYSE.
Carson Pirie reported a 12.8 percent increase in sales to $194.1 million for the four-week period. Same-store sales rose 7.6 percent.
"The sales results during the 1996 holiday season were in line with my expectations," Chairman Stanton Bluestone said in a statement.
But the Milwaukee-based company, which operates 53 department stores and four furniture stores, said it expected five-week sales results for fiscal December will fall slightly below those for the five-week period ended Dec. 30, 1995.
Carson Pirie and Dayton Hudson expect to report five-week results next week.
Last Friday, Seattle-based Nordstrom Inc. warned that holiday sales would decline from year-ago levels and that earnings would be below Wall Street estimates.
The reports put retail analysts on edge, but they remained confident that other big names, such as Chicago's Sears Roebuck and Co., May Department Stores Co. of St. Louis, and Federated Department Stores, of Cincinnati, would meet or exceed expectations.
"My impression is that May did okay. Federated looks like they're on plan and for Sears, we're looking for a good fourth quarter," said Brown Brothers Harriman analyst Joseph Ronning.
A big factor in the mixed sales performance for the holiday season was the fact that it was five days shorter than the previous year since the Thanksgiving holiday was later.
"None of us knew what this five fewer days would do ... to the mechanics of the season," said Morgan Stanley's Missett.
The net result was that most big sales gains were restricted by the shortened season, while mediocre showings were made worse by it, analysts said.
"You came out with a trend line not dissimilar to what we've seen all year, which is modest growth," Missett said.
Carson Pirie's stock dropped 25 cents to $25 on the NYSE. Among other retailers, Sears dropped $1.25 to $44.75 and May fell $1.25 to $45.50, both on the NYSE.
Major retailers reported mixed results for the crucial holiday sales season Thursday, sparking a drop in retail stocks.
The preliminary holiday reports by J.C. Penney Co. Inc., Dayton Hudson Corp., Carson Pirie Scott &amp; Co. and others are "further confirmation that the holiday was one of moderate growth," Morgan Stanley retailing analyst Bruce Missett said in an interview.
J.C. Penney said sales for the four weeks ended Dec. 28 were close to the Plano, Texas-based company's goals but markdowns were higher than expected.
Total sales, including drug store sales, for the period totalled $3.6 billion, a 23.2 percent increase from the $2.9 billion in sales for the comparable period in 1995.
Same-store sales at J.C. Penney stores, not including drug stores, for the holiday period increased 6.2 percent over 1995. The company did not release dollar figures for same-store sales, which cover stores open at least a year.
The company also said it expected fourth-quarter earnings before charges would not meet Wall Street expectations and that profit margins for November and December were below planned levels.
J.C. Penney stock dropped $1.75 to $47 in midday trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Dayton Hudson said same-store sales at its 65 department stores in the Midwest, 736 Target discount stores nationwide and 300 Mervyn's discount stores in the West and South were up 4.2 percent for the same period. The Minneapolis-based company did not give dollar figures.
"Results at Target and Mervyn's for the four weeks were on plan, while department stores sales were below our expectations," Chief Executive Bob Ulrich said in a statement. "With the shorter selling season this year, we planned our sales conservatively and generally met our plans for the season."
Dayton Hudson department store sales increased 0.3 percent, Mervyn's sales decreased 4.1 percent and Target sales increased 7.1 percent, the company said.
Dayton Hudson stock fell $1.25 to $38 on the NYSE.
Carson Pirie reported a 12.8 percent increase in sales to $194.1 million for the four-week period vs. 1995. Same-store sales rose 7.6 percent.
"The sales results during the 1996 holiday season were in line with my expectations," Chairman Stanton Bluestone said in a statement.
But the Milwaukee-based company, which operates 53 department stores and four furniture stores, said it expects five-week sales results for fiscal December will fall slightly below those for the five-week period ended Dec. 30, 1995.
Carson Pirie and Dayton Hudson expect to report five-week results next week.
Carson Pirie stock dropped 25 cents to $25 on the NYSE. Among other retailers, Sears Roebuck &amp; Co. dropped $1.25 to $44.875 and May Department Stores Co. fell $1.375 to $45.375, both on the NYSE.
General Instrument Corp is setting goals for NextLevel Systems Inc -- the lead business to come out of a three-way corporate break-up -- of 35-45 percent annual operating income growth and 22-25 percent annual sales growth on operating margins of 10-12 percent.
Those growth rates could be even higher this year, General Instrument chief executive Richard Friedland said in an interview with Reuters on Tuesday, adding he sees stock price gains ahead for all three firms being formed in the break-up -- NextLevel, CommScope Inc and General Semiconductor Inc.
"I'd look to CommScope and General Semiconductor to increase at above-average rates in the eight to 10 percent return range, maybe more. I see NextLevel Systems doubling over the next year to 18 months," Friedland said.
Shares in General Instrument were up 1/4 to 22-7/8 Tuesday after the Chicago-based company announced a three-way split designed primarily to unlock the share value of NextLevel.
For CommScope, to be built on the world's largest coaxial cable business, Friedland said management's goals are 18 to 20 percent annual sales growth and 16 to 17 percent operating income growth with operating margins of 16 to 17 percent.
For General Semiconductor, to be formed from General Instrument's electronic component manufacturing operations, goals are 10 to 11 percent operating income growth on annual sales growth of 14-16 percent and operating margins of 20-21 percent, Friedland told analysts at a meeting Tuesday.
Under the plan, General Instrument shareholders will get one share in each of the new companies for each General Instrument share held, Friedland said.
"We may have to do a reverse split to comply with New York Stock Exchange rules," he said, adding closing of the transaction is seen by July.
No layoffs or hiring are planned. "There are no staff actions contemplated as a result of the transaction," he said.
General Instrument has primary goals in the restructuring, Friedland said. One is to unlock the value of the businesses that will comprise NextLevel, which analysts said has been held back by General Instrument's other segments.
"Electronic conglomerates are not looked at very favorably these days," said Michael Geran, industry analyst at the Pershing Division of Donaldson Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
The other goal, Friedland said, has to do with General Instrument's heritage as part of the cable television industry -- a legacy that has overshadowed its newer technologies.
"We're going to continue to service the heck out of the cable base, but we're also getting into provision of dial tone and data. We need to break out of that mold General Instrument has been in of being a cable supplier," Friedland said.
He said the company decided to proceed with the break-up because it showed in 1996 that it could meet its business objectives, after failing to do so in years past. "We've made that transition from development to deployment," he said.
Deprived of cash flows thrown off by the CommScope and General Semiconductors businesses, NextLevel will fund growth two ways. "We do have a lot of visibility to cash flow in NextLevel Systems now that we have the products going out the door," he said. "So we feel that, while NextLevel Systems may be slightly cash negative in '97, even our downside scenarios say we have more than adequate capabilities."
In addition, he said, most of General Instrument's debt will be loaded onto CommScope and General Semiconductor, which can afford to service it. "That leaves CommScope and General Semiconductor in fine shape in terms of their capital structure because they do generate the cash to pay this debt off in the near-term," he said.
Approval of Eli Lilly &amp; Co's new anti-schizophrenia drug, Zyprexa, is expected to come soon from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, analysts said.
Marketing clearance for the drug, known generically as olanzapine, would put Lilly in the front of a parade of new anti-schizophrenia medications coming on the U.S. market.
"We expect approval yet this year ... There's been no hint of any issues" from the FDA that might cause delay, said Lilly spokesman Edward West.
Wall Street analysts said approval could come this month.  
The FDA has not scheduled an advisory committee hearing for Zyprexa. West said Lilly has no indication that a committee hearing will be set. Analysts said the drug likely will be cleared without committee deliberations.
"The big expectation would be that Zyprexa will be approved ... That's what's on everybody's radar screen," said Smith Barney pharmaceuticals analyst Christina Heuer.
Zyprexa received a positive opinion in June from the European Union's Committee for Proprietary Medicinal Products. European marketing approval likely will follow, analysts said.
Several competing products are in the pipeline.  
Close behind Lilly are Abbott Laboratories Inc with Serlect, Zeneca Group Plc with Seroquel and Pfizer Inc with Ziprasidone. All are expected to hit the market within the next 12 months.
Already on the market are Johnson &amp; Johnson's Risperdal, Sandoz AG's Clozaril and the benchmark treatment available since 1967, haloperidol, as well as a host of less frequently prescribed drugs.
Studies have shown that one in 100 people is schizophrenic. Estimates of the annual U.S. market for treating the disease range from $1 billion to $4.5 billion.
Looking at the huge success of Lilly's Prozac in treating clinical depression, drugmakers are hoping to score equally impressive wins with the new anti-schizophrenics.
--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
General Instrument Corp. said Tuesday it planned to split into three companies through a tax-free spin-off to shareholders in a bid to boost its stock market value.
Wall Street welcomed the move, which was seen as unlocking the value of the Chicago-based company's core high-tech communications business.
"That's where the growth is," said industry analyst Louis Ehrenkrantz of brokerage Ehrenkrantz King Nussbaum.
General Instrument said it will create NextLevel Systems Inc. out of its cable television, satellite and telephone business; CommScope Inc. out of its coaxial cable manufacturing business; and General Semiconductor Inc. from its units that make electronic components.
"Investors will be able to value each of the three companies on its own merits and growth fundamentals," said General Instrument Chairman Richard Friedland.
The company said the breakup will force it to take an after-tax charge against earnings of $55 million to $65 million, or 37 cents to 44 cents a share, for the fourth quarter. The fourth-quarter charges consist mainly of costs related to the transition to the next generation of digital products, restructuring costs incurred through Dec. 31, and the write-down of certain assets, the company said.
The company said it will incur additional charges this year of up to $70 million for costs related to the spin-off, including the costs of dividing the company's Taiwan assets between NextLevel Systems and General Semiconductor.
The company expects fourth-quarter earnings, which will be announced Feb. 10, to be in the range of 28 cents to 32 cents a share, excluding the charges. Last year, the company reported net earnings of $53.5 million, or 43 cents per share, in its fiscal fourth quarter.
The restructuring is expected to be completed this summer.
Friedland, who will become chairman of NextLevel, said the three businesses would be best positioned as independent, public companies.
"The businesses have different dynamics and business cycles, serve different markets and customers, are subject to different competitive forces and must be managed with different short- and long-term goals," Friedland said in a statement.
NextLevel will be comprised of General Instrument's cable, satellite and telephone businesses, which had 1996 sales of about $1.7 billion. The company will supply systems and components for high-performance networks delivering video, voice and Internet and data services.
CommScope Inc. will make and supply coaxial and electronic cables, businesses that had 1996 sales of more than $560 million.
General Semiconductor Inc., the company's power semiconductor division, will supply low-to-medium power rectifiers and voltage suppressors. It had 1996 sales of more than $360 million.
General Instrument stock rose 25 cents to close at $23 on the New York Stock Exchange.
General Instrument Corp pleased Wall Street Tuesday by announcing a three-way corporate break-up that analysts said will unlock the value of the company's core high-tech communications systems business.
"Generally, these things work in the sense that when you do the spinoff, the sum of the parts tends to be greater than the initial whole," said industry analyst Hickman Powell at Southeast Research Partners.
At the same time, the planned creation of three new companies raises some questions, analysts said.
Chicago-based General Instrument said it will create a company to be called NextLevel Systems Inc out of its cable television, satellite and telephone businesses.
Also planned is creation of a new firm called CommScope Inc out of a world-leading coaxial cable manufacturing business, and General Semiconductor Inc out of electronic component manufacturing operations.
"Investors will be able to value each of the three companies on its own merits and growth fundamentals," said General Instrument chief executive Richard Friedland.
Shares in General Instrument were up 1/4 to 23 at midday.
The prize to emerge from the bust-up will be NextLevel, focused on high-speed modems, television cable set-top boxes and other hot areas. "That's where the growth is," said analyst Louis Ehrenkrantz of Ehrenkrantz King Nussbaum.
But some analysts questioned how the business will fund its growth after being stripped of the coaxial and semiconductor businesses, which throw off large cash flows.
"The answer must be that that portion will have to, from time to time, come to the equity market," Powell said, adding that a recent optic fiber deal with NYNEX Corp bodes well for NextLevel.
Optic fiber is replacing coaxial cable in many places, especially along communications trunk lines, which may pose a threat to the distant future of CommScope, analysts said.
But Powell pointed out, "There's still quite a lot of the world to be cabled up...That company, by the way, has been gaining market share."
Finally, General Semiconductor on its own will suffer from the same cyclical swings in the electronic components markets that drove it as a unit of General Instrument, analysts said.
"Two-thirds of that company are going to be very good stocks. The semi-conductor unit, well, it will come along when the semiconductors recover," Ehrenkrantz said.
General Instrument said the break-up will force it to take charges against earnings of as much as $135 million on its fourth quarter results due February 10 and later this year.
General Instrument Corp. said Tuesday it planned to split into three companies through a tax-free spin-off to shareholders in a bid to boost its stock market value.
Wall Street welcomed the move, which was seen as unlocking the value of the Chicago-based company's core high-tech communications business.
"That's where the growth is," said industry analyst Louis Ehrenkrantz of brokerage Ehrenkrantz King Nussbaum.
General Instrument said it will create NextLevel Systems Inc. out of its cable television, satellite and telephone business; CommScope Inc. out of its coaxial cable manufacturing business; and General Semiconductor Inc. from its units that make electronic components.
"Investors will be able to value each of the three companies on its own merits and growth fundamentals," said General Instrument Chairman Richard Friedland.
The company said the breakup will force it to take an after-tax charge against earnings of $55 million to $65 million, or 37 cents to 44 cents a share, for the fourth quarter. The fourth-quarter charges consist mainly of costs related to the transition to the next generation of digital products, restructuring costs incurred through Dec. 31, and the write-down of certain assets, the company said.
The company said it will incur additional charges this year of up to $70 million for costs related to the spin-off, including the costs of dividing the company's Taiwan assets between NextLevel Systems and General Semiconductor.
The company expects fourth-quarter earnings, which will be announced Feb. 10, to be in the range of 28 cents to 32 cents a share, excluding the charges. Last year, the company reported net earnings of $53.5 million, or 43 cents per share, in its fiscal fourth quarter.
The restructuring is expected to be completed this summer.
Friedland, who will become chairman of NextLevel, said the three businesses would be best positioned as independent, public companies.
"The businesses have different dynamics and business cycles, serve different markets and customers, are subject to different competitive forces and must be managed with different short- and long-term goals," Friedland said in a statement.
NextLevel will be comprised of General Instrument's cable, satellite and telephone businesses, which had 1996 sales of about $1.7 billion. The company will supply systems and components for high-performance networks delivering video, voice and Internet and data services.
CommScope Inc. will make and supply coaxial and electronic cables, businesses that had 1996 sales of more than $560 million.
General Semiconductor Inc., the company's power semiconductor division, will supply low-to-medium power rectifiers and voltage suppressors. It had 1996 sales of more than $360 million.
General Instrument stock rose 12.5 cents to $22.875 in afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Ford Motor Co. said Wednesday it may sell its interest in Budget Rent a Car, joining other U.S. automakers in their race to exit the battered rental car business.
"We're looking at the idea that a sale could be done," said Ford spokesman Chris Vinyard.
Ford does not own Budget outright, holding non-voting preferred shares and an option to acquire the car rental agency's common shares, which are owned by investor John Nevin, Vinyard said.
"We could theoretically either sell our option or direct the sale of the common shares through our option," he said.
If a sale goes through, as analysts widely expect, Budget would be the fifth major rental car agency to change hands since 1994. "The reason is they're not making any money," said WEFA Group automotive consultant George Magliano in New York. "Travel is hot, but the car rental business is going nowhere."
That is not evident from the sudden interest shown in the $14 billion a year business by a new class of investors who are buying up the agencies as the automakers unload them.
"They see opportunity for profits. The industry is in a mild recovery and it's probably a better time to own a rental car agency than it has been for a long time," said Jon LeSage, editor of Auto Rental News, a trade journal in California.
Ford declined to comment specifically on an article in Wednesday's Wall Street Journal that said Ford was expected to sell Budget to Team Rental Group Inc., a Daytona Beach, Fla.-based Budget licensee, for $350 million.
A Team Rental spokesman also declined comment.
"No agreements have been reached among any parties," said Kimberly Mulcahy, spokeswoman for Lisle, Ill.-based Budget. She declined further comment.
Ford said last year it would exercise its option and buy out Budget's common shares, but analysts said the deal looks shaky now after delays resulting from an antitrust review by the Federal Trade Commission.
Budget has been closely allied with Ford for many years and rents mainly Ford vehicles. Ford's planned purchase of the company was meant to improve its performance.
Vinyard said Ford was exploring a possible sale because of rising investor interest in rental car firms. "Interest in the group in the last six to 10 months has increased significantly," Vinyard said.
Vinyard said the automaker does not plan to make any announcements regarding Budget following Ford's regular board of directors meeting scheduled for Thursday.
A.G. Edwards auto analyst Michael Braigg in St. Louis said he expects Ford to sell Budget soon, likely to Team Rental. "I think that one's pretty far along," he said.
"The real issue is that Budget is the small rental property of Ford. And if Budget is for sale, then so is Hertz in the long run," Braigg said.
Ford began investing in Park Ridge, N.J.-based Hertz in 1987 when U.S. automakers were buying up rental car agencies hoping to load up their fleets with the thousands of new cars that consumers were leaving on the lots.
The strategy worked for a while, but then backfired when agency sales of barely used rental vehicles started eating into new car sales. Automakers began encouraging the agencies to hold fleet cars longer, which restricted how many new cars the agencies could take on.
Ford bought all of Hertz in 1994 and, unlike many rental car agencies, Hertz is probably profitable, analysts said.
"There is no big advantage to the automakers to owning these agencies anymore," WEFA's Magliano said. "Probably along the way, Ford will sell Hertz. Generally, when these companies begin to divest operations, they get rid of them all."
Reassured by a back-to-basics management trend running through U.S. industry, automakers started selling off rental car agencies in 1994 with Chrysler Corp.'s sale of Snappy Car Rental. General Motors Corp. sold National Car Rental Systems Inc. in 1995 to private investors, who earlier this week agreed to sell National to Republic Industries Inc.
Seeking to lock in supply for its fledgling AutoNation used-car chain, Atlanta-based Republic in November agreed also buy Alamo Rent-A-Car Inc.
Last June GM sold its 29-percent stake in Avis Inc. to HFS Inc., a real estate and hotel concern based in New Jersey.
Chrysler still owns Dollar Rent-A-Car and Thrifty Rent-A-Car. "Our status today is that Dollar and Thrifty are very much a part of our everyday business. It's business as usual," said Chrysler spokeswoman Lori McTavish.
"It is Chrysler's goal, however, to focus on our core automotive business," she added.
Based on U.S. vehicle fleet size, Auto Rental News ranks privately held Enterprise Rent-A-Car, of St. Louis, as the nation's largest rental car agency, followed by Hertz, Avis, National, Alamo, Budget, Dollar and Thrifty.
Together, Enterprise, Hertz and Avis own half of the total rental fleet of about 1.5 million vehicles, according to the trade journal.
Ford Motor Co joined other U.S. automakers Wednesday in their accelerating race to exit the battered car rental business.
Ford said it may sell its interests in Budget Rent a Car, the nation's sixth-largest rental car agency.
If a sale goes through, as analysts widely expect, Budget would be the fifth major agency to change hands since 1994.
"The reason is they're not making any money," said WEFA Group automotive consultant George Magliano in New York. "Travel is hot, but the car rental business is going nowhere."  
That is not evident from the sudden interest shown in the $14-billion a year business by a new class of investors who are buying up the agencies as the automakers unload them.
"They see opportunity for profits. The industry is in a mild recovery and it's probably a better time to own a rental car agency than it has been for a long time," said Jon LeSage, editor of Auto Rental News, a trade journal in California.
Ford declined to comment specifically on a published report that it may sell Budget to Team Rental Group Inc, a Florida-based Budget licensee, for $350 million.
A Team Rental spokesman also declined comment.  
"No agreements have been reached among any parties," said Budget spokeswoman Kimberly Mulcahy, declining further comment. She said Ford does not own Lisle, Ill.-based Budget outright, but controls the company through an option to purchase its common shares.
Ford said last year it would exercise its option and buy out Budget's common shares, but analysts said the deal looks shaky now after delays resulting from a U.S. Federal Trade Commission antitrust review.  
As a result, A.G. Edwards auto analyst Michael Braigg in St. Louis said he expects Ford to sell Budget soon, likely to Team Rental. "I think that one's pretty far along," he said.
"The real issue is that Budget is the small rental property of Ford. And if Budget is for sale, then so is Hertz in the long run," Braigg said.
Ford began investing in Hertz in 1987 at a time when U.S. automakers were buying up rental car agencies hoping to load up their fleets with the thousands of new cars that consumers were leaving on the lots.  
The strategy worked for a while, but then backfired when agency sales of barely used rental vehicles started eating into new car sales. Automakers began encouraging the agencies to hold onto fleet cars longer, which restricted how many new cars the agencies could take on.
Ford bought all of Hertz in 1994 and, unlike many rental car agencies, Hertz is probably profitable, analysts said.
But Magliano said, "There is no big advantage to the automakers to owning these agencies anymore ... Probably along the way, Ford will sell Hertz. Generally, when these companies begin to divest operations, they get rid of them all."  
Reassured by a back-to-basics management trend running through U.S. industry, automakers started selling off rental car agencies in 1994 with Chrysler Corp's sale of Snappy Car Rental.
General Motors Corp in 1995 sold National Car Rental Systems Inc to private investors, who earlier this week resold National to Republic Industries Inc.
Seeking to lock in supply for its fledgling AutoNation used-car chain, Atlanta-based Republic in November agreed to buy Alamo Rent-A-Car Inc.
In June last year, General Motors sold off its 29-percent interest in Avis Inc to HFS Inc, a real estate and hotel concern based in New Jersey.
Chrysler still owns Dollar Rent-A-Car and Thrifty Rent-A-Car. "Our status today is that Dollar and Thrifty are very much a part of our everyday business. It's business as usual," said Chrysler spokeswoman Lori McTavish.
She added, "It is Chrysler's goal, however, to focus on our core automotive business."
Based on U.S. vehicle fleet size, Auto Rental News ranks privately held Enterprise Rent-A-Car, of St. Louis, as the largest U.S. rental car agency, followed in order by Hertz, Avis, National, Alamo, Budget, Dollar and Thrifty.
Together, Enterprise, Hertz and Avis own half of the U.S. rental car fleet of about 1.5 million vehicles, according to the trade journal.
Eight of the top 10 publicly traded U.S. health maintenance organizations are expected to report lower or flat fourth-quarter profits as the industry shuts the books on a dismal year and moves warily into 1997.
Dissatisfied with narrow profit margins, Wall Street is turning cautious on many HMO stocks, although plenty of merger and acquisition action underlies the sector and is supporting the share prices of firms seen as targets.
"Consolidation will remain at a high level," said Salomon Brothers managed healthcare analyst Robert Hoehn.  
As HMOs report quarterly results over the next few weeks, two companies are expected to defy the earnings slump.
Booming Oxford Health Plans Inc has been a bright spot in the gloom all year and is forecast to post profits 70 percent higher than the year-ago level, analysts said.
PacifiCare Health Systems Inc is expected to show 10 to 13 percent earnings improvement, although its quarter will be complicated by a pending acquisition of FHP International Corp.
"It's sort of a throw-away quarter for" PacifiCare, said Volpe Welty analyst Ed Keaney.  
The problem that most HMOs were unable to solve throughout 1996 was a costly mismatch between medical cost inflation forecasts that fell short and an inability to push through compensatory premium increases. A margin squeeze resulted.
"This year there may be room for a little bit of (premium) expansion as the year unfolds, but not enough of an increase to make it possible for these companies to restore margins to previous levels," Keaney said.
Citing small premium rises so far in the January renewal period, Hoehn said: "Uncertainties regarding profitability will remain, albeit at a reduced level from 1996."  
U.S. FIRST CALL CONSENSUS QTRLY EARNINGS FORECASTS
Company				Qtr   EPS estimate   Yr-ago EPS
Foundation Health	 Q2	 $0.64	   $0.72
Humana		     Q4	 $0.21	   $0.30
Mid Atlantic Medical   Q4	($0.02)	  $0.33
Oxford Health			Q4	 $0.36	   $0.21
PacifiCare Health		  Q1	 $0.99	   $0.88
Physicians Health     Q4	($0.43)	  $0.42
Sierra Health	    Q4	 $0.59	   $0.59
United Healthcare	Q4	 $0.48	   $0.57
Healthsource		Q4	 $0.10	   $0.22
NOTE: Parentheses indicate loss.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
Most U.S. nursing home and hospital companies are expected to report higher profits in the fourth quarter on some easy comparisons, but Wall Street is wary of negative surprises.
"A lot of them are going against very weak results last year so they have easy comparisons," said NatWest Securities industry analyst Marie Conway.
At the same time, Schroder Wertheim analyst William McKeever said, "There's probably more potential for downside to earnings than upside ... There could be disappointments."  
Pressing industry issues such as Medicare and Medicaid reform and reimbursement rates for contract therapy services remain unresolved. "Little progress has been made in Washington," said Scott &amp; Stringfellow analyst George Shipp.
The industry finished a volatile 1996 on the upswing after a big summer sell-off. The Morgan Stanley Healthcare Provider index of 15 top hospital management and nursing home stocks was near 326 Tuesday, up from 288 at the start of the year.
"We like the sector in general, although there are some issues that have dogged certain companies," Conway said.  
For instance, Sun Healthcare Group Inc and Horizon/CMS Healthcare Corp, dragged down by various problems, have lagged the sector, she said.
Earnings at Integrated Health Services Inc are forecast to be barely improved from last year after the company's acquisitions of Coram Healthcare Corp and First American Health Care of Georgia Inc. "They've made a very bold bet on home healthcare ... Things at Integrated are getting a little better," Shipp said.  
Health Management Associates Inc is expected to lead the for-profit hospital sector in earnings gains, with moderate increases projected for Tenet HealthCare and sector giant Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp.
U.S. FIRST CALL CONSENSUS QTRLY EARNINGS FORECASTS
Company			   Qtr  EPS estimate  Yr-ago EPS
Beverly Enterprises	    Q4	$0.21	  $0.10
Columbia/HCA		     Q4	$0.61	  $0.53
Health Care &amp; Retirement     Q4	$0.33	  $0.27
Health Management Associates Q1	$0.18	  $0.14
Integrated Health		Q4	$0.53	  $0.52
Manor Care			 Q3	$0.39	  $0.33
Tenet Healthcare		 Q3	$0.38	  $0.33
Vencor Inc			 Q4	$0.51	  $0.41
NOTE: Manor Care figures exclude earning of Choice Hotels unit. Manor Care and Tenet Q3's end in February.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp., the largest U.S. hospital company, Thursday agreed to buy pharmacy benefits management firm Value Health Inc. for about $1.3 billion in stock.
The deal caused concern on Wall Street, which sold off Columbia shares. Its stock fell $1 to $39.25 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Some analysts said the acquisition signalled that Columbia intended to set itself up as a competitor to health insurers and HMOs, many of which are its customers, in a strategy that could have huge repercussions in the healthcare business.
"If anybody was unclear about Columbia's intentions before today, they certainly shouldn't be anymore," said Montgomery Securities healthcare industry analyst Ken Laudan.
Other analysts viewed the Value Health deal as essentially defensive, gaining for Columbia some of the same buying power its biggest customers enjoy and sometimes use against it.
"There will be a point where Columbia will compete with HMOs and payors," said an analyst who asked not to be identified.
When that day comes, Columbia wants to be sure it can offer consumers a package of healthcare services as integrated and affordable as those of its rivals, he suggested.
"Value Health fits well into Columbia's integrated delivery system and increases our ability to be a full service provider of healthcare services for our patients and customers," Columbia Chairman Richard Scott said in a statement.
For Avon, Conn.-based Value Health, which had 1995 revenues of nearly $1.9 billion, the proposed Columbia deal ends a long process of shopping for suitors. "Value Health has been on the block for a while," said ABN-AMRO Chicago Corp. healthcare industry analyst Peter Costa.
Value Health was rumoured in late 1994 to have received a buyout offer from Pfizer Inc. of as much as $60 per share, analysts said. At the time, drug manufacturers were busily acquiring pharmaceutical benefits managers, with the notion that they could sell more drugs through them.
Since then, Value Health's stock price has dropped from a trading range in the high $50s to $21.875, up $1.625, Thursday. On a per-share basis, the Columbia stock transaction proposal is worth about $23.35 per share, based on Wednesday's closing price of Columbia, analysts said.
"I don't think there's going to be a competing bid because everyone has had a chance to see Value Health by now," said Dain Bosworth healthcare industry analyst Chris Sergeant.
In the rapidly changing healthcare business, Nashville, Tenn.-based Columbia, with 1996 revenues estimated to total nearly $20 billion, is in a class by itself.
It operates 344 hospitals, 135 surgery centres, more than 550 home health locations and a pharmacy benefits management operation of its own. No other hospital company approaches its size and its decisions have far-reaching impact on drugs, medical devices and virtually every other healthcare market.
Last March, Columbia said it intended to buy for $299.5 million most of Cleveland-based Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Ohio, a health insurer that covers 1.5 million people.
With Columbia's Blue Cross deal awaiting Ohio regulatory clearance, the Value Health deal heightens fears that Columbia sees its future extending beyond hospitals, analysts said.
At the same time, Robinson Humphrey analyst John Runningen said the Value Health deal did not pose a direct challenge to insurers and HMOs. "Value Health is not an HMO. It's a company that sells services to HMOs ... (Columbia) is stopping short of competing with HMOs," Runningen said.
Columbia did not immediately return telephone calls.
Shareholders are pushing harder for change at WMX Technologies Inc, which said Monday a major investor is proposing that the company hire investment bankers to examine further sales of non-core assets.
Lens Inc, based in Washington, D.C., also has hired an executive recruiter to assemble an alternate slate of nominees for four WMX board seats coming open this year, including WMX chairman Dean Buntrock's seat,  said a Lens spokeswoman.
"The battle lines are being drawn here," said Goldman Sachs industry analyst Barry Mannis.  
WMX, the largest U.S. garbage hauler with $10 billion in annual revenues, has been under investor attack for months. Not only Lens, headed by Robert Monks, but billionaire George Soros and others are among WMX shareholders demanding changes.
The company has responded by repurchasing shares and selling off pieces of its Rust International unit, its stake in Wessex Water Plc and most of its medical waste business. The sales have raised about $1 billion in cash.
Yet WMX's stock price has hardly budged, prompting the activist stakeholders to press harder still for management changes, new directors and more asset sales, analysts said.  
"Management has been moving in this direction and the stock price has responded moderately, but I don't think to anywhere near the level that investors want," Mannis said.
Shares in WMX were off 1/4 at 33-1/2 late Monday, compared to a 24-month high above $36 in early December. A year ago, they were trading in the $30 per share range.
"Between now and the annual meeting (May 9), management has its opportunity to once and for all...show the Street its plan for enhancing shareholder value. If they don't do that, I think investors are going to look at some of the proposals Lens is making," Mannis said.  
Soros Fund Management owns 19.7 million shares of WMX, or nearly four percent of the company, according to CDA/Spectrum.
Lens's stake is reportedly much smaller than Soros's.
The latest proposal from Lens on selling non-core assets contains little new, WMX spokesman Bill Plunkett said.
"The proposal is consistent with the things the company is already aggressively pursuing, essentially affirming our strategy," Plunkett said. "We have other equity investments remaining. We have other businesses that are non-core and we have under-performing businesses.... We have been working with various financial advisers to enhance shareholder value."
Credit Suisse First Boston industry analyst Michael Hoffman said WMX on its own will likely fulfill Soros's and Lens's agenda. "These guys would just like it to happen faster," Hoffman said. WMX has "done a lot of the easier things. Now it gets a little more challenging."
An obvious next step for the company would be to authorize more share buybacks, Mannis said.
WMX could still sell off certain non-U.S. interests, as well as its equity interest in ServiceMaster LP, analysts said. Whether such steps are taken before the annual meeting remains to be seen, but in the meantime, Lens and Soros can be expected to keep the pressure on.
"This is just another volley in the skirmish," said Smith Barney industry analyst Leone Young.
WMX is scheduled to report fourth-quarter financial results in the week of February 3.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
Amoco Corp is basing its 1997 business plans on assumed prices of $18 to $19 per barrel for crude oil and $2.00 to $2.10 per thousand (corrects from million) cubic feet for natural gas, said chief financial officer John Carl.
In an interview with Reuters, Carl said, "We're making our investment decisions on $18 to $19 crude. On natural gas ... around $2.00, $2.10 per thousand (corrects from million) cubic feet of natural gas is what we're looking at from a planning assumption.""
U.S. crude futures for March delivery on Wednesday closed at $24.24 per barrel.  
"We like these prices where they are. We think they're where they are because of a tightness between supply and demand ... But we're not making our investment decisions on those prices," Carl said.
Shares in Chicago-based Amoco rose 7/8 to 85-7/8 on Wednesday after the energy giant reported strong fourth-quarter and 1996 financial results.
Amoco will likely spend about $550 million this year on exploration, compared to about $610 million in 1996, he said.
The company also is planning to hold its 1997 operating costs throughout the company flat at the 1996 level, he said.  
"You look at total operating costs as a company, they're basically flat, '97 to '96, on a planning basis. We're really pushing that responsibility down into the units. One unit to another unit might have job eliminations ... But we don't anticipate any wholesale, large restructurings like we announced in '92 and '94," Carl said.
In reporting results, Amoco said fourth-quarter chemical sector earnings fell versus the year-ago period and cited lower olefins and softened paraxylene product profit margins.
On paraxylene prices, Carl said, "It looks like maybe they hit the bottom at the end of December" near $0.19 per pound.  
"It may be that they're starting to firm up a little bit, but I think it's too soon to call that," he said.
Paraxylene traded on the spot market Wednesday near $0.22 per pound. "Paraxylene prices appear to be coming up," said Salomon Brothers energy industry analyst Paul Ting.
On olefins, Carl said, "Olefins is much tougher. The trick with olefins right now is the feedstock issue hitting them. A little bit of pressure on the price side, too. Too soon to call that one, too, I think."
He said Amoco saw refining margins decline in December. "We're not seeing any change from that" in Q1, he said. "It's kind of hanging around the same place. Those refining margins continue to be below where we were a year ago on a year-to-date basis. It's still tough out there."
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
