Australian oil and gas companies are being snapped up by foreign companies with an eye for undervalued stocks, but analysts said the sector faces a bright future with higher oil prices and a deregulated gas market.
During 1996, there has been about A$2.5 billion worth of takeovers announced in Australia's shrinking oil and gas sector and another A$600 million worth of asset sales as some non-oil and gas players quit the local oil and gas market.  
Analysts said local oil groups with low share prices and overseas assets have struck the eye of hungry foreign companies.
"Overseas people appreciate the value of oil and gas assets, particularly in southeast Asia, but I don't think the market is fully valuing these assets through the share prices," Timothy Savage, an oil and gas analyst at Hartley Poynton, told Reuters.
Mobil Corp's A$1.78 billion tilt for Ampolex Ltd in February was the largest bid made this year in the sector. British oil producers are also keen on local oil firms.  
Crusader Ltd was taken over mid-year by Clyde Petroleum Plc, while in the past month Premier Oil Plc has made a bid for Discovery Petroleum NL and Cairn Energy Plc has made a offer for Command Petroleum Ltd.
BT Securities oil and gas analyst Stuart Baker said most of the Australian oil groups that have attracted predator attention have been producers with oil assets offshore.
"It is no coincidence at all that the companies that have disappeared have been always companies that have endeavoured to build an overseas presence, and they have all without exception been taken over," Baker told Reuters.  
Analysts said the rise in the oil price this year had not been a reason for the corporate activity. NYMEX oil futures prices have risen almost 50 percent over the past five months to current levels of about US$25.50 a barrel.
"Takeovers have been a feature of this sector for years and it doesn't seem to matter if the oil price is up or down," Baker said.
Baker said oil companies making the bids have a double positive effect from the oil price rise with increased cash flow and a boost in share prices making it easier for companies to raise equity and debt.
Analysts said rationalisation might continue in the sector for some time, but most of the short-term activity had occured.
"I think it is possibly going to clam down now," one Sydney-based oil analyst said.
Analysts said remaining potential targets in the oil and gas sector were Cultus Petroleum Ltd and Petroz NL, which have assets in the prospective Timor Sea area.
Woodside Petroleum Ltd and Santos Ltd were unlikely bid targets, analysts said. Woodside, which accounts for nearly 50 percent of the A$12 billion sector, is controlled by oil giant Royal Dutch/Shell Group.
Santos is seen to have a restrictive share ownership structure making it difficult for takeovers, analysts said.
Santos has also been keen on purchases, buying A$250 million worth of oil assets this year from groups quitting the sector.
Analysts said the takeover activity has raised the focus on the sector, particularly in gas exploration and development.
They said reforms in the local gas industry has opened up opportunities for gas supplies to major mines in remote areas and the set up of co-generation projects around the country.
"There is a lot of money coming over here and finding their way into all sorts of corners of the industry. So it looks like it is going to be a fairly buoyant period again, irrespective of whether we have further takeovers ahead," Baker said.
Australia's oil and gas index hit a record high of 1459.5 on Tuesday, but fell slightly to close at 1432.9 on Wednesday.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373 1800
Australian oil and gas companies are being snapped up by foreign companies with an eye for undervalued stocks, but analysts say the sector faces a bright future with higher oil prices and a deregulated gas market.
During 1996, there has been about A$2.5 billion (US$1.98 billion) worth of takeovers announced in Australia's shrinking oil and gas sector and another A$600 million worth of asset sales as some non-oil and gas players quit the local market.
Local oil groups with low share prices and overseas assets have struck the eye of hungry foreign companies, analysts said.
"Overseas people appreciate the value of oil and gas assets, particularly in southeast Asia, but I don't think the market is fully valuing these assets through the share prices," Timothy Savage, an oil and gas analyst at Hartley Poynton, told Reuters.
The A$1.78 billion tilt by U.S. oil giant Mobil Corp for Sydney-based Ampolex Ltd in February was the largest bid made this year in the sector, while British oil producers are also showing an active interest in Australian oil firms.
Brisbane-based Crusader Ltd was taken over mid-year by Clyde Petroleum Plc of the UK, while in the past month Premier Oil Plc has made a bid for Discovery Petroleum NL and Cairn Energy Plc has made a offer for Command Petroleum Ltd.
Most of the Australian oil groups that have attracted predator attention have been producers with oil assets offshore, said Stuart Baker, an oil and gas analyst with BT Securities.
"It is no coincidence at all that the companies that have disappeared have been always companies that have endeavoured to build an overseas presence, and they have all without exception been taken over," Baker told Reuters.
However the rise in the oil price this year had not been a reason for the corporate activity, analysts said. The main oil futures contract traded in New York has risen almost 50 percent over the past five months to about US$25.50 a barrel.
"Takeovers have been a feature of this sector for years and it doesn't seem to matter if the oil price is up or down," Baker said.
Baker said oil companies making the bids have a double positive effect from the oil price rise with increased cash flow and a boost in share prices making it easier for companies to raise equity and debt.
Remaining potential targets in the local oil and gas sector were medium-sized groups like Cultus Petroleum Ltd and Petroz NL which have assets in the prospective Timor Sea area.
The sector's largest listed companies, Woodside Petroleum Ltd and Santos Ltd, were unlikely bid targets, analysts said. (A$1 = $0.79)
Australian oil and gas companies are being snapped up by foreign companies with an eye for undervalued stocks, but analysts say the sector faces a bright future with higher oil prices and a deregulated gas market.
During 1996, there has been about A$2.5 billion (US$1.98 billion) worth of takeovers announced in Australia's shrinking oil and gas sector and another A$600 million worth of asset sales as some non-oil and gas players quit the local market.
Local oil groups with low share prices and overseas assets have struck the eye of hungry foreign companies, analysts said.
"Overseas people appreciate the value of oil and gas assets, particularly in southeast Asia, but I don't think the market is fully valuing these assets through the share prices," Timothy Savage, an oil and gas analyst at Hartley Poynton, told Reuters.
The A$1.78 billion tilt by U.S. oil giant Mobil Corp for Sydney-based Ampolex Ltd in February was the largest bid made this year in the sector, while British oil producers are also showing an active interest in Australian oil firms.
Brisbane-based Crusader Ltd was taken over mid-year by Clyde Petroleum Plc of the UK, while in the past month Premier Oil Plc has made a bid for Discovery Petroleum NL and Cairn Energy Plc has made a offer for Command Petroleum Ltd.
Most of the Australian oil groups that have attracted predator attention have been producers with oil assets offshore, said Stuart Baker, an oil and gas analyst with BT Securities.
"It is no coincidence at all that the companies that have disappeared have been always companies that have endeavoured to build an overseas presence, and they have all without exception been taken over," Baker told Reuters.
However the rise in the oil price this year had not been a reason for the corporate activity, analysts said. The main oil futures contract traded in New York has risen almost 50 percent over the past five months to about US$25.50 a barrel.
"Takeovers have been a feature of this sector for years and it doesn't seem to matter if the oil price is up or down," Baker said.
Baker said oil companies making the bids have a double positive effect from the oil price rise with increased cash flow and a boost in share prices making it easier for companies to raise equity and debt.
Remaining potential targets in the local oil and gas sector were medium sized groups like Cultus Petroleum Ltd and Petroz NL which have assets in the prospective Timor Sea area.
The sector's largest listed companies, Woodside Petroleum Ltd and Santos Ltd, were unlikely bid targets, analysts said. Woodside, which accounts for nearly 50 percent of the A$12 billion sector, is controlled by Anglo-Dutch oil giant Royal Dutch/Shell Group.
Santos is seen to have a restrictive share ownership structure making it difficult for takeovers, analysts said.
Santos has also been keen on purchases, buying A$250 million worth of oil assets this year from groups quitting the sector.
Takeover activity has raised the focus on the sector, particularly in gas exploration and development, analysts said.
They said reforms in the local gas industry has opened up opportunities for gas supplies to major mines in remote areas and the set up of co-generation projects around the country.
"There is a lot of money coming over here and finding their way into all sorts of corners of the industry. So it looks like it is going to be a fairly buoyant period again, irrespective of whether we have further takeovers ahead," Baker said.
(A$1 = $0.79)
The growth of the Internet has created the biggest creative explosion in the history of the computing world, said Sun Microsystems Inc chairman Scott McNealy on Friday.
"It is only been since we unleashed the Internet that you have suddenly seen this unleashing of technology and innovation and research and a transformation," McNealy told Reuters in an interview.
McNealy cited the launch of the Netscape Communications Corp Navigation browser and his company's Java computer language that allows users to operate across all computer operating systems as examples of recent computer innovation.
The Internet and Java is likely to pose the biggest threat to U.S. software giant Microsoft, said McNealy, who is on a 10-day visit to Australian and New Zealand along with 2,500 Sun employees, who are in Sydney attending a sales convention.
"Its two main two sources of revenue, (Microsoft) Office (software) and the desktop operating system are under threat," said McNealy, who is well known for firing salvos at Bill Gates, Microsoft's co-founder.
Microsoft and Sun are locked in many battles across the fiercely competitive computer industry. Microsoft has annual revenues around US$8.6 billion, while Sun has revenues of US$7.00 billion a year.
McNealy said Java users could operate in all operating systems including Windows, while the Internet and Java allowed users to download word processing applications without buying Microsoft's popular Microsoft Office software.
"The Internet has forced them (Microsoft) to change their strategies," said the 42-year-old computer millionaire.
Microsoft unveiled plans on Thursday to relaunch its online service Microsoft Network (MSN) with a US$100 million promotion push in order to double MSN's subscriber base. But McNealy said this showed another Internet strategy shift by Microsoft.
"Do you know what the Internet has done to our business? Absolutely nothing, we haven't changed our strategy one bit," said McNealy, who is on his first visit to Australia.
Java, which was developed by Sun and launched in May 1995, is a language that specialises in letting a wide range of computers share information with each other through networks.
Those capabilities are in themselves a threat to dominant players like Microsoft, whose MS-DOS and family of Windows operating systems run on nearly 90 percent of the world's PCs, industry sources said.
Sun has already licenced its Java technology to most of the world's computer industry, including Microsoft.
McNealy sees no threat from selling Sun's Java technology to its competitors. "We don't own the language, we compete by doing something better in the language. It is like trying to own the English language, you compete by what you do with the language."
Java computers, known as Network Computers, would be launched soon, which McNealy likened to the launch of the car. The Network Computer is the third wave in the evolution of the computer, McNealy said. The first was the mainframe, with the second wave being the personal computer, he said.
"We will still have buses and trains, which work on centralised systems like the mainframe. We will still have bicycles, which are like PCs, but the preferred mode of transportation for most of us is the automobile, which will be the Network Computer," McNealy said.
Australian regional banks St George Bank Ltd and Advance Bank Australia Ltd on Monday unveiled a merger plan to create the nation's fifth largest bank with a market value of A$4.5 billion (US$3.55 billion).
"We have that golden opportunity, we are not going to miss it," St George Bank managing director Jim Sweeney told reporters at a joint news conference. This is the fifth merger St George has tried with different banks in the past two years.
"We are going to build a special new different bank here that will take advantage of all of things that many of us always want to do," said Sweeney, who will head the enlarged group.
Advance Bank shareholders would be offered a combination of A$2.10 in cash, a 20 cent special cash dividend and new St George shares up to a value of A$5.00 per Advance Bank share.
The total value of the offer was A$7.30 per Advance share, which values it at A$2.65 billion. St George would fund the offer by a mixture of cash and scrip and a new capital raising.
The friendly merger of the two Sydney-based banks would create a bank with assets of A$40 billion and make it one of Australia's top 25 listed companies.
"The Australian banking industry is currently going through a very dramatic stage, we cannot be sure what will come out the other end, but we believe this will allow us to make the most of opportunities that the market change present," Sweeney said.
Advance bank shares soared on the merger announcement. It closed 57 cents or nine percent higher at A$6.85, a record close. St George shares ended 40 cents or 4.5 percent lower at A$8.55, after hitting a low of A$8.30 during the day.
Australian banking analysts said that the offer was generous to Advance shareholders because it was well above prices paid in recent local banking takeovers.
Any rival bidders might be scared off entering the fray by a current official inquiry into the banking industry and an agreement, part of the merger deal, for Advance to pay A$100 million to St George if it is taken over by a third party.
"I think that would make it unattractive for somebody else to come in and make a bid," said Linda Lyon, banking analyst at brokers BNP Equities.
St George has been desperately seeking a friendly merger over the past two years to avoid being swallowed up itself.
The stock market viewed Australia's largest banking group, National Australia Bank Ltd (NAB), as the most likely predator.
NAB holds 6.8 percent of St George although it has said it had no takeover plans for the Sydney bank.
However, in June it voted against a plan for St George to merge with Queensland based Metway Bank Ltd.
NAB declined to comment on Monday's announcement.
St George's bid for Metway was also was scuttled by the Queensland government, which trumped St George's offer with a higher bid through its wholly-owned financial services group Suncorp and the Queensland Industry and Development Corp (QIDC).
Last year, St George was also blocked by Westpac Banking Corp, one of Australia's top banks, in a takeover bid for Perth-based Challenge Bank Ltd after Westpac made a higher offer.
St George was also in talks last year to merge with the Bank of Western Australia Ltd before the Bank of Scotland Plc took control of the Perth-based bank, and with the Bank of South Australia, which was taken over by Advance in early 1995.
A$1 = $US0.79
St George Bank Ltd announced on Monday an agreed A$2.65 billion merger with Advance Bank Australia Ltd - its fifth merger attempt in the past two years.
The merger of the two Sydney-based regional banks would create Australia's fifth largest bank, with assets of A$40 billion and a market capitalisation of A$4.5 billion, making its of Australia's top 25 listed companies.  
Analysts said the plan for Advance to pay St George A$100 million if it were taken over by a third party was seen as a way to ward off other bids, making it look like it was fifth time lucky for the St George.
"I think that would make it unattractive for somebody else to come in and make a bid," said Linda Lyon, banking analyst at brokers BNP Equities.
St George said it would offer an effective A$7.30 for each share in Advance Bank.  
Advance shareholders would be offered a combination of A$2.10 in cash, a 20 cent special cash dividend and new St George shares up to a value of A$5.00 per Advance Bank.
St George said the total value of the offer was A$7.30 per share, representing a 20 percent increase over the average Advance Bank share price over the previous five trading days.
Advance shareholders will also receive Advance Bank's interim dividend, expected to be 20 cents, payable in February.
St George said it would also raise A$360 million in a new capital raising to help fund the bid. The issue would proceed upon completion of the acquisition, expected to in April.  
St George said the merger was driven by the need to lower costs and a review had found the merger could achieve a reduction of 15 percent in annual combined expenses or A$140 million before tax.
Advance shares soared over 10 percent on the announcement.
Analysts said that although there would be cost savings, the price was still fairly generous.
"My initial reaction is that it looks like Advance Bank shareholders are coming out of the deal quite well, whereas St George shareholders are coming out not so well," said one Sydney-based banking analyst.  
"It's a big price. I can't imagine anybody else coming and topping the price St George is offering," said BNP's Lyon.
Analysts said the offer valued Advance at 2.8 times net asset backing, well above the 2.0 times asset backing level at which recent Australian bank merger prices had been based.
St George has been desperate to have a friendly merger as it is seen as a takeover target itself.
Australia's largest banking group, National Australia Bank Ltd (NAB), holds a 6.8 percent stake in St George.
NAB has said it has no takeover plans for St George.  
Analysts said the Wallis inquiry into Australia's finance and banking sector might put NAB's acquisition plans on hold until the inquiry reported its findings in March.
St George's bid for Metway Bank Ltd earlier this year was scuttled by the Queensland government, which trumped its offer with a higher bid through its wholly-owned financial services group Suncorp and the Queensland Industry and Development Corp (QIDC). Last year, St George was foiled in its merger bid for Perth-based Challenge Bank Ltd when Westpac Banking Corp made a higher offer.  
St George was also in talks last year to merge with the Bank of Western Australia Ltd, before the Bank of Scotalnd Ltd took control, and the Bank of South Australia, which was takeover by Advance early 1995.
St George shares plunged after the announcement.
At 2.20 p.m. (0420 GMT) Advance Bank shares were 69 cents or 10.99 percent higher at A$6.97 while St George shares were 40 cents or 4.47 percent down at A$8.55.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Media mogul Rupert Murdoch said on Tuesday he intended to use sports broadcasting rights as a "battering ram" for dominance of pay television markets in Asia and throughout the world.
He said the purchase of those rights would also buy his way into the world's sporting establishment.
"Sport absolutely overpowers film and everything else in the entertainment genre," Murdoch told shareholders at the annual meeting of News Corp, his global media group.
"We have the long-term rights in most countries to major sporting events and we will be doing in Asia what we intend to do elsewhere in the world, that is, use sports as a "battering ram" and a lead offering in all our pay television operations," said Murdoch, News' chairman and chief executive.
News Corp has spent big money on acquiring sports programming rights worldwide over the last five years and has set up sports programme distribution deals with some of the industry's biggest players in the past 12 months.
Murdoch's global media and entertainment group set up a worldwide sports programming joint venture with U.S. cable television giant Tele-Communications Inc (TCI) and Liberty Media of the United States in January.
Two weeks ago, News Corp formed an Asian sports programming joint venture with its former competitor Walt Disney Inc's sports broadcaster ESPN.
"Sport will remain very important and we will be investing and acquiring long-term rights and becoming part of the world sports establishment," said Murdoch, News' chairman and chief executive.
"Football, of all sports, is number one," said Murdoch, who sails as a sporting pastime.
News Corp has spent millions on football programming rights over the past few years. It has bought the rights for the National Football League (NFL) in the U.S. and Premier League soccer in the United Kingdom and is setting up its rebel rugby league competitions in Australia and Europe.
"We expect the next three World Cups will have a significant place on our platforms," said Murdoch referring to the soccer and Rugby Union world cups.
Murdoch received a boost to his Australian sports broadcasting plans two weeks ago, when the Australian Federal Court overturned a Court ruling in March that banned the launch of News' rebel rugby league competition, Super League. News Corp's Australian offshoot has spent A$273 million (US$216 million) on setting up Super League.
"There has been an unfortunate hold-up, but it (Super League) is going to be a wonderful asset to have now that we are free to get that competition under way," said Murdoch, who is Australian-born, but now holds U.S. citizenship.
The group's sports programmes are broadcast through its vast television operations, which reach accross the United States and into parts of Latin America.
In Europe, News Corp's main TV interest is through its 40-percent stake in British Sky Broadcasting Plc (BSkyB), which announced sharply-increased pre-tax profits of 257 million pounds sterling (US$406 million) for the year to June 30.
News Corp operating profits for the same period were A$1.26 billion. Television, which contributed A$549 million, was the most profitable sector.
In Asia, News' satellite TV operator STAR TV broadcasts throughout Asia from Saudi Arabia to Japan. In Australia, News Corp has a 50-percent stake in the Foxtel cable TV joint venture and a 15-percent stake in TV broadcaster Seven Network Ltd.
(A$=US$.7900, 1 pound sterling = $1.58)
The international partners in Australia's largest gas project said on Thursday they plan to spend A$6.0 billion to double production, making it Australia's largest single resources investment.
Australian oil and gas producer Woodside Petroleum Ltd said the partners in the North West Shelf gas project offshore Western Australia plan to double production capacity to 14.5 million tonnes of liquefied natural gas (LNG) a year.  
The decision by the North West Shelf partners was unlikely to boost the much-touted prospect of a co-operative development with the nearby Gorgon gas field, which has the capacity to produce six million tonnes of LNG a year, analysts said.
"The North West shelf partners have their own plans for expansion, but if the Gorgon partners have a good proposal that we can work together then we will certainly have a look at it," said Woodside's corporate affairs manager Geoff Wedgwood.
"But to date we have not seen a plan from them that fits within our plans," Wedgwood told Reuters.  
Last month an executive of Royal Dutch/Shell Group, a partner in both projects, raised hopes that the two projects could be developed together and questioned the expansion of the Shelf on a stand-alone basis.
Cor Herkstroter, chairman of Royal Dutch/Shell's committee of managing directors, then told Reuters in an interview that expansion of the North West Shelf could not be justified without integrating it with another project and that the development of both projects was a viable option.
Royal Dutch/Shell also owns 34 percent of Woodside.  
Woodside, the project operator, said the expansion plan was submitted to the project's eight Japanese power and gas utility customers at a meeting in Osaka this week.
"It is a significant step for the expansion of the North West Shelf project," Wedgwood said. The partners have spent A$12 billion on the project since it started in the early 1980s.
Woodside is an equal one-sixth shareholder in the project along with some of the world's major oil producers.
The Osaka meeting followed indications from buyers in June of their interest in an expansion of the project, said Woodside.  
However, work on the expansion would not start for another two years at least, Wedgwood said.
"The next thing that is likely to be a letter of intent in late 1997 for the development of this expansion proposal," Wedgwood said. He said between now and then there are lots of talks on technical issues surrounding the proposal.
"Following that would be a purchase agreement between the North West shelf partners and the Japanese buyers, which would be around late 1998," Wedgwood said.  
Only after this agreement would work start on the expansion. Besides Woodside and Shell, the other equal partners in the Shelf are The Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd, The British Petroleum Co Plc, Chevron Inc and a partnership of Mitsui &amp; Co Ltd and Mitsubishi Corp.
Shell and Chevron are also partners in Gorgon along with U.S. oil giants Texaco Inc and Mobil Corp.
-- Sydney newsrooom 61-2 9373-1800
The international partners in Australia's largest gas project said on Thursday they plan to spend A$6.0 billion (US$4.7 billion) to double production, making it Australia's largest single resources investment.
Australian oil and gas producer Woodside Petroleum Ltd said the partners in the North-West Shelf gas project offshore Western Australia planned to double production capacity to 14.5 million tonnes of liquefied natural gas (LNG) a year.
The decision by the North West Shelf partners was unlikely to boost the much-touted prospect of a co-operative development with the nearby Gorgon gas field, which has the capacity to produce six million tonnes of LNG a year, analysts said.
"The North West shelf partners have their own plans for expansion, but if the Gorgon partners have a good proposal that we can work together then we will certainly have a look at it," said Woodside's corporate affairs manager Geoff Wedgwood.
"But to date we have not seen a plan from them that fits within our plans," Wedgwood told Reuters.
Last month an executive of Anglo-Dutch oil giant Royal Dutch/Shell Group, a partner in both projects, raised hopes that the two projects could be developed together and questioned the expansion of the North West Shelf on a stand-alone basis.
Cor Herkstroter, chairman of Royal Dutch/Shell Group's committee of managing directors, then told Reuters in an interview that expansion of the North West Shelf could not be justified without integrating it with another project and that the development of both projects was a viable option.
Royal Dutch/Shell also owns 34 percent of Woodside.
Woodside, the North West Shelf project operator, said the expansion plan was submitted to the project's eight Japanese power and gas utility customers at a meeting in Osaka this week.
LNG is mainly used for fuelling power stations.
"It is a significant step for the expansion of the North West Shelf project," Wedgwood said. The partners have spent A$12 billion on the project since it started in the early 1980s.
Woodside is an equal 16.66 percent shareholder in the project along with some of the world's major oil producers.
The Osaka meeting followed indications from buyers in June of their interest in an expansion of the project, said Woodside.
However, work on the expansion would not start for another two years at least, Wedgwood said.
"The next thing that is likely to be a letter of intent in late 1997 for the development of this expansion proposal," Wedgwood said. He said between now and then there were lots of talks on technical issues surrounding the expansion proposal.
"Following that, would be a purchase agreement between the North West shelf partners and the Japanese buyers, which would be around late 1998," Wedgwood said.
Only after this agreement would work start on the expansion.
The other partners in the North West Shelf are Australia's The Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd, British Petroleum Plc, Chevron Inc of the United States, and Japanese groups Mitsui &amp; Co Ltd and Mitsubishi Corp.
Royal Dutch/Shell and Chevron are also partners in Gorgon along with U.S. oil giants Texaco Inc and Mobil Corp.
(A$1 = $0.79)
The Australian Gas Light Co (AGL) was interested in looking at the Australian assets of Tenneco Inc if the assets were put up for sale, managing director Len Bleasel said on Tuesday.
Tenneco has announced a restructure that includes a proposed merger of its energy arm with El Paso Energy Corp
"But we haven't got a deal in front of us ... but I can tell you we have had more than one knock on our door and say 'if we could put something together would you be interested,' and we say 'come on back when you have got something'," Bleasel said.  
"The whole Tenneco story is yet to unfold," Bleasel told Reuters in a telephone interview.
"There are a lot of rumours in the market that El Paso may not want to hold onto all of the assets," he said.
Bleasel said said AGL, a Australian gas utility and energy group, would wait and see what unfolds with the Tenneco-El Paso restructure, whether assets are sold off or not.
Tenneco's Australian assets include the 1700 km of pipeline in South Australia including the state's primary gas pipeline from Moomba to the Adelaide pipeline system. Tenneco is also building a 760 km gas pipeline in southwest Queensland.  
"I continuously say ... that AGL is interested in every sale whereever it is in the country because we are now a broad based energy company and if the Tenneco assets were to go to the market then we would be interested in how they were going to be presented to the market," Bleasel said.
"The silly thing to say is 'no we are not interested or no there is no possible sale,' then if somebody wants to do a little slick sale then they are not going to come and talk to you because you have said publicly you are not interested."  
However, a Tenneco Australia spokeswoman said Tenneco had made no decision about the future of its Australian assets nor had it told anyone the assets were for sale.
AGL's main market is New South Wales but it has businesses in Victoria, Western Australia and the Nortern Territory.
The Sydney-based group also has interests in China, Poland and Chile. "When you are trying to grow a company like we are, we are interested in everything," Bleasel said.  
Bleasel said he was very optimistic on the company's prospects from Monday's agreement with Santos Ltd and ALISE Energy Australia Pty Ltd for the supply of gas to a proposed cogeneration plant at Botany in Sydney.
"This gives a new revenue stream to AGL," Bleasel said.
He said 20-year agreement would not affect the company bottom line until the project is up and running in about two years time.  
AGL earlier held its annual meeting where the former deputy governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia John Phillips was formally appointed the company's new chairman, replacing Richard Mason who retired.
Shareholders also approved the appointments of Charles Allen, the former managing director of Woodside Petroleum Ltd and Carolyn Hewson, a director of CSR Ltd and wife of former Australian liberal party leader John Hewson.
AGL shares ended four cents up at A$6.64.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Rupert Murdoch, the Australian-born mogul who turned his father's newspaper business into a global media empire, is publicly grooming the next generation to succeed him.
But the 65-year-old who has transformed the industry worldwide still has a few more ambitions to achieve before he passes on the baton to his heirs and settles into retirement.
Instead of rolling up their shirtsleeves and getting inked up on the printing presses as Rupert did, his eldest son Lachlan and daughter Elisabeth will be dealing with the latest in digital technology and multi-channel television satellites.
With the dawning of the digital age, television is the business that Murdoch sees fuelling the next stage of growth of the News Corporation Ltd conglomerate built from the small beginnings of his father Keith's Adelaide newspaper.
The TV business already produces the most revenue of News Corp's five main operations -- newspapers, magazines, films and book publishing. News Corp recorded total revenues of A$13.0 billion (US$10.27 billion) in the year to June 30, 1996.
NEWS CORP, A FAMILY BUSINESS
Lachlan, 25, and Elisabeth, 28, are already familiar with the television business. Elizabeth owned and operated two TV stations in California before selling them earlier this year to join British Sky Broadcasting Plc (BSkyB).
Murdoch's other son, James, and daughter Prudence are not involved in Dad's business, but his wife Anna is on the board of "News", which is about 32-percent owned by the Murdoch family.
"Obviously he is lining up people to help," said a Melbourne based media analyst.
At 65, Murdoch has passed News Corp's own retirement age but with the business just entering a new phase of expansion he is not about to leave yet.
"News Corp is still being formed, that is why there is not much chance of him walking away tomorrow," said the Melbourne analyst, referring to News Corp expansion in satellite and cable TV.
The analyst said either Elisabeth or Lachlan would probably work in News Corp's U.S. business, before they could take over.
At the start of October, Elisabeth was appointed head of programming at BSkyB, which is 40-percent owned by News Corp. The British-based satellite TV operation nearly sank News Corp in debt six years ago, but has become a river of cash.
A week before his sister's promotion, Lachlan was appointed managing director of News Ltd, the Australian arm of News Corp.
"Lachlan's job is to get pay TV up and running (in Australia)," said one Sydney analyst of News Ltd's 50-percent interest in Foxtel, a cable TV network launched last year.
Murdoch has placed both his children under the tutorage of two of his loyal lieutenants, BSkyB managing director Sam Chisholm and News Ltd chairman Ken Cowley.
Most Murdoch watchers see Lachlan as the favourite to step into his father's shoes because of his appointment to the key 12-strong executive committee of News Corp, which is separate from the company's board of directors.
"You can't consider Elisabeth a real contender for the top job until she gets on that board," the Sydney media analyst said. He added that she would have to take Chisholm's job at BSky to get onto the executive committee.
"That is not going to happen for a while, whereas Lachlan has got the job of managing director of Australia and he is on the executive committee -- so that tells you who is the favourite right now," the analyst said.
Lachlan's growing confidence was evident recently at News Corp's annual meeting in Adelaide, where the Princeton graduate and rock climbing enthusiast firmly guided his father away from an impromptu press conference after the annual meeting.
The previous year the young Murdoch stayed firmly in the background as his father spoke about all.
"We have to go, I'm sorry," Lachlan told reporters firmly, ushering his father away once the questioning turned to the thorny matter of Australian media ownership rules.
EXPANSION THE NEW MURDOCH WAY
Since he inherited his father Keith's newspaper stable in 1952, Murdoch built his media empire by raising large slabs of debt -- often to the annoyance of his shareholders.
But in a move welcomed by analysts, Murdoch has said News Corp's future growth is likely to be based on a more conservative financing strategy.
"We now have US$2.5 billion in the bank and we intend to leave it there," Murdoch told News Corp's annual meeting.
This is a far cry from the dark days of late 1990 and January 1991, when Murdoch had to beg his bankers to get them to reschedule US$7.6 billion in debt after News Corp said it would be insolvent if the refinacing package was not completed.
Murdoch said News Corp's multi-billion dollar plans for pay television networks in the United States, Asia, Japan, Latin America and Australia would be financed from cash flow.
Analysts say Murdoch is unlikely to leave until he has widened News Corp's world television network reach and increased the company's reservoir of programming content.
"I think geographically he is almost there. There are only three areas he doesn't have exposure to, they are Canada, Africa and Eastern Europe," said one analyst.
"I don't think he is very interested in Eastern Europe, Canada is very difficult for foreigners from what I understand. But, I think there is a chance at some stage that Africa might be in his sights," the analyst added.
Murdoch will have to build up News Corp's programming further, particularly in film, analysts said. They said News is strong in sports and now news following the launch of the 24-hour a day Fox News channel launched on October 7.
"Sports, movies and news are the focus, but it wouldn't surprise me that he would have something to do with music as well at some stage," said a Melbourne-based analyst. "If you think about the sort of content you can take from one country to another, sports is obviously one, then news and film and the other one to my mind would be music." (A$1 = $0.79)
Australia's largest listed aluminium producer Comalco Ltd reported on Monday a 72 percent slide in net profit for the first half of 1996, due to a weaker metal price and a stronger Australian dollar.
The lower than expected result saw metal analysts trim back their 1996 full-year profit estimates for Comalco, while investors wiped over five percent off the miner's share price.
Comalco, 67 percent owned by the world's largest mining group CRA Ltd/RTZ Corp Plc, reported a net profit of A$43.9 million (US$34.7 million) for the six months to June 30, 1996, down from A$155.1 million a year earlier.
"Lower primary aluminium prices, movements in the exchange rate, softer alumina markets and weaker alumina spot prices affected profit," Comalco chief executive Terry Palmer said in a statement.
The three-month aluminium contract traded on the London Metal Exchange has fallen nearly 13 percent to its current level of US$1,479.0 from the start of the year, while the Australian dollar has risen seven percent to around US$0.7900.  
Comalco's sales fell 31.6 percent to A$806.9 million for the half, due mainly to lower metal prices. The tough market conditions would continue into the second half, Palmer said.
"I think we are already a third of the way through the second half and I think we have got to expect it to be tough because even if the prices (of aluminium) improve next month it would be hard to get much gain out of it," Palmer told Reuters.
Shareholders are likely to be disappointed with the result, as the Melbourne-based miner slashed its dividend to three cents a share for the first half, from 12 cents a year ago. This was well below expectations of five to six cents a share dividend.
"It is a lot lower than what people were expecting," Macquarie Equities metals analyst Peter O'Connor told Reuters.
Investors reacted to the weak result by slicing five percent or 33 cents off Comalco's share price. The stock closed at A$7.10 on Monday, its lowest level since August 1.
Australian aluminium analysts said they would further cut their 1996 full-year profit forecast for Comalco, which produces about 17 percent of the nation's primary aluminium, 10 percent of the country's alumina and 21 percent of its bauxite.  
At the start of 1996, analysts forecast Comalco to report a net profit of between A$255 million and A$265 million for 1996, compared with the 1995 profit of A$232.3 million.
Lower metal prices and a stronger Australian dollar saw analysts trim their full-year forecast to around A$130 million prior to the half-year result.
But in light of Monday's six-month result, analysts further lowered their forecast to around A$90 million for the 1996 year.
"You would have to expect that numbers would be coming down to at least double of what the first half was," O'Connor said.
Canadian media baron Conrad Black said on Wednesday he wanted to increase his stake in Australia's oldest newspaper group, John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, to 50 percent from 25, a day after meeting the prime minister.
However, Black repeated that he would sell out of Fairfax if there was no easing in Australia's current media ownership rules, which he described as "anachronistic".
Black said that although he could not rule out selling his stake to Kerry Packer, the suggested merger plan by Packer between his media empire and Fairfax was unlikely to suceed.  
Black told shareholders at Fairfax's annual meeting that he had said to John Howard in their first meeting since Howard became prime minister that he would like to raise his stake, which is held through Hollinger International Inc.
Black was asked by reporters after Fairfax's meeting just how much he would want to increase his stake to, if allowed. "Fifty percent," he said.
The media baron added that U.S. accounting rules effectively punished companies which had higher than 50 percent stakes in their associates. However, Black repeated that he would sell his Fairfax stake if he was not allowed to raise it further.  
"If the road is truly blocked, then obviously we are going," Black said. He added that Hollinger would not lodge any application for a higher stake until the government ended its study into media ownership and presented new ownership rules.
Under Australia's current media ownership rules, foreigners are prevented from owning more than 25 percent of a newspaper group or 15 percent of a television group. They also prevent a newspaper group owner from owning more than 15 percent of a television station in the same city and vice-versa. "These thing as they are now are very anachronistic," Black told reporters.  
In August, Packer's main media group, Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd (PBL) proposed a merger between PBL and Fairfax only if media ownership rules were liberalised. PBL owns top-rating Nine Network and 15 percent of Fairfax.
Black said PBL's merger proposal was unlikely to succeed while he (Black) was a shareholder. "He (Packer) would have quite a time getting that one through," Black said.
"I don't ever rule out anything, but I think that's fairly improbable. If Mr Packer wants to control Fairfax he's going to have to it the old-fashioned way and pay for it." Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd owns five percent of Fairfax.  
"I know he's averse to doing that," Black said. He added he was not particularly interested in any stock swap deal with Packer which would leave him with a PBL stake.
Black said John Fairfax's profits were starting to improve.
Fairfax reported a 41 percent fall in net profit to A$87.4 million in the year to June 30, 1996.
"It's starting to look a little better now. Profits are affected by increased newsprint, they are affected by increased depreciation because of the plant at Chullora, cash flow rates are starting to improve a little bit," Black said. Fairfax spent A$330 million on a new printing plant at Chullora in Sydney.  
Fairfax chairman Sir Laurence Street told shareholders the slower Australian economy coupled with higher newsprint prices would impact on the group's final results for the 1996/97 year.
"Coupled with the state of the economy, Fairfax, in common with the whole newspaper industry, has had to face high newsprint prices and this, too, will impact upon our final results in the current year," Street said.
At 3.45 p.m. (0435 GMT) Fairfax shares were two cents higher at A$2.69, giving it a market capitalisation of A$2.04 billion.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Building materials, aluminium and sugar group CSR Ltd is expected to report on Monday a net profit before abnormals of between A$146 million and A$160 million for the six months to September 30, analysts said on Friday.
On October 14, CSR said that its 1996/97 first half profit was likely to be 20 percent lower, with the full year down by the same amount if the first half trend continued.  
Analysts have cut their 1996/97 year profit estimates for CSR after last month's profit warning. Annual forecasts now range between A$250 million to A$272 million, compared with around the A$300 million level before the warning.
CSR reported a nine percent fall in net profit before abnormals of A$193.4 million in the 1995/96 first half.
Sean Cooney, a building materials analyst at ANZ Securities, forecast CSR to report a first half pre-abnormals net profit of A$156.6 million. Cooney forecast CSR to report an annual net profit before abnornals of between A$255-A$260 million.  
Greg Burns at BZW Australia forecast A$160 million for the half and A$260 million for the year to March 31, 1997.
Mark Cotton, building materials analyst at Prudential Bache Securities, forecast CSR to report a pre-abnormal net profit of A$160 million for the half and A$272 million for the year.
Michael Brown at McIntosh Securities forecast a net profit before abnormals of A$146 million for the half and around A$250 million for the year. Brown has a hold recommendation on CSR.  
ABN AMRO Hoare Govett's building materials analyst Fabian Babich forecast CSR to report a pre-abnornmal net profit between A$145 million and A$150 million for the half and about A$260 million for the year.
Analysts said the second half for the Sydney-based group was cyclically lower than the first half, as the Australian housing industry slows over December and January for the holiday season. CSR said last month intense price competition and low volumes continued in the Australian building products market were some of the main reasons for the expected profit fall.  
It said in the United States its operation was achieving record profits, but the aluminium group which was a strong performer last year would achieve lower earnings in 1996/97 due to falling metal prices.
It also said sugar profits for the year would be close to that achieved last year despite lower raw sugar prices.
CSR reported a net profit after abnormals of A$330.8 million in 1995/96, compared with A$392.60 million in 1994/95.  
Analysts are forecasting CSR's profit to start to turnaround in the 1997/98 year, on the back of an improving domestic housing market in calendar 1997. The local housing market has been in the doldrums since the end of 1994.
BZW's Burns said the housing market was still on for a turnaround in 1997. "Building approvals seem to be improving from where they were, housing affordability has improved immeasurably, all we need now is a bit of confidence,"
At 11.15 a.m. (0015 GMT), CSR shares were a cent down at A$4.30. They have traded between A$4.06 and A$4.72 this year.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Australia's second largest telephone carrier Optus Communications rang up its first annual profit on Wednesday and is on track for its sharemarket float by the end of the year.
Optus, established at the start of 1992 to compete with Australia's main telephone carrier, state-owned Telstra Corp, reported a pre-tax profit of A$60.3 million (US$47.64 million) in the year to June 30, 1996.
This compares with a loss of A$17.0 million in 1994/95.
"After a tremendous effort during its first few years, Optus is now in a very strong position to capitalise on the many opportunities presented by the rapidly growing telecommunications industry," chief executive officer Zygmunt Switkowski said in a statement.
The profit was within expectations. Telecommunications analysts forecast Optus to deliver a profit before abnormals of between A$55 million and A$65 million.
"I don't think the market will be disappointed," said one Sydney-based analyst. "I think the revenue is a little bit down on what they were talking about."
The results reflected strong revenue growth of 36 percent to A$1.94 billion in 1995/96, with high revenue increases from its three main businesses of mobile telephones, long-distance calls and services to the corporate and government sector, chief operating officer Phil Jacobs said on Wednesday.
Optus, 24.5 percent owned each by U.S. BellSouth Corp and Britain's Cable and Wireless Plc, said in February it expected to achieve A$2.0 billion in revenue in 1995/96.
The Sydney-based group is still expected to make its sharemarket debut by the end of 1996, Switkowski said.
"The float's planned to occur this side of Christmas and the prospectus is progressing to plan, but it is not done," he told reporters after the results anouncement.
The float is expected to raise around A$1.5 billion, making it the largest telecommunications company to list on the Australian Stock Exchange, with up to 40 percent of the company shares to be listed.
Optus will later be joined by Telstra on the stock exchange.
The Australian government plans to raise A$8.0 billion from the sale of one-third of Telstra in 1997/98, which will be just after full deregulation of Australia's telecommunications industry on July 11, 1997.
Despite chalking up its first annual profit, Optus incurred increased losses from its 46.5 percent-owned pay television and local telephone call operator Optus Vision.
Optus said its share of losses from Optus Vision was A$74.0 million, which were mainly due to the start-up of the offshoot, which is spending A$3.0 billion rolling out its nationwide fibre optic cable network to provide pay TV and telephone services.
Optus Vision, which includes Australia's richest man Kerry Packer amongst its shareholders, reported a loss of A$1.54 million in 1994/95, in its first year of operation. The company has not announced its 1995/96 results.
Switkowski was coy about 1996/97 forecasts. Optus Communications was completing its prospectus for the sharemarket float, which would contain revenue and profit forecasts.
However, Switkowski predicted that revenue from its mobile telephone business would exceed revenues from its long-distance calls due to strong local demand, as Australia has one of the highest penetration rates for mobile phones in the world.
(A$1 = US$0.79)
Rupert Murdoch's global media group, The News Corp Ltd, on Tuesday reported an 8.1-percent fall in net profit for the first quarter of 1996/97, in stark contrast to market expectations of a healthy rise.
But analysts said Murdoch's forecast last month at News Corp's annual meeting that the group would achieve a profit lift of 20 percent for the year to June 30, 1997 was still possible.
The film, television, publishing and newspaper conglomerate reported net profits of A$283 million (US$223 million) for the three months ended September 30, down from A$308 million a year earlier.
Analysts had forecast net profit before abnormal items would be around A$320-330 million, up around 15 percent.
Net profit before abnormals came in at A$285 million.
The poor result caused News Corp shares to fall sharply and dragged the whole Australian share market lower.
The share price fall wiped over A$300 million of the group's market capitalisation. The stock closed 18 cents or 2.52 percent lower at A$6.95 with over 4.7 million shares traded.
The weaker profit was a result of poorer returns in U.S. TV, Australian newspapers and book publishing, News Corp said.
"This is not as people were expecting type of result. It was a very flat result," one Sydney-based media analyst said.
News Corp could still report a 20 percent rise in net profits for the 1996/97 year as it was only the U.S. television business that was clearly below forecast, analysts' said. They said this forecast by Murdoch was in U.S. dollar terms.
In U.S. dollar terms, News Corp operating income was seven percent higher in the first quarter.
"Basically, what News has said is 'the first quarter was a bit disappointing but you are still going to get your growth for the year'," one Melbourne-based analysts said after taking part in an analysts' conference telephone call with News Corp.
News Corp said its profit was mainly bolstered by the worldwide box office success of the science fiction movie Independence Day and its British newspapers and book publishing.
Independence Day, a film about invading aliens who launch an attack against the Earth from huge space ships, has grossed more than US$670 million worldwide, making it the third highest-grossing film in box office history.
British newspaper operations enjoyed strong growth with an 18-percent gain in operating profits in the three months to September, News Corp said. The Sun, The Times and The Sunday Times newspapers all posted gains in both advertising and circulation revenues in the first quarter.
"Additionally, the group has benefitted from reduced newsprint costs," the company said.
"Offsetting these gains were weaker results in U.S. television, Australian newspapers and book publishing, which lacked results from the educational division which was sold in March 1996," it said.
News also said continued losses for its Asian satellite broadcaster, STAR TV, were in line with expectations.
The fall in profit in Australian dollar terms also reflected the stronger local currency against the U.S. dollar as about 75 percent of News Corp's revenue is in U.S. dollars.
The first quarter profit drop follows a profit dip for News Corp in the 1995/96 year, when it reported a six-percent fall in pre-abnormals net profit to A$1.26 billion.
(A$1 = $0.79)
The News Corp Ltd is expected to meet the 20 percent rise in net profit before abnormals for the year to June 30, 1997, predicted by its chairman Rupert Murdoch last month, Australian media analysts said on Tuesday.
"They should do it easily," one Melbourne-based analyst told Reuters after taking part in an analysts' conference call with News Corp following the release of its first quarter results.
News Corp earlier reported a lower than expected net profit before abnormals of A$285 million for the three months to September 30, slightly up from A$284 million a year earlier.  
Analysts had forecast net profit before abnormal items would be around A$320-330 million, up around 15 percent.
They said News Corp's results in Australian currency were hit by poor U.S. television results and a stronger local dollar.
In U.S. dollar terms, News Corp operating income was seven percent higher in the first quarter. The analysts said Murdoch's 20 percent profit lift forecast was in U.S. dollar terms.
"They said that growth is still on for in excess of 20 percent and that is in U.S. dollar terms," another Melbourne based analyst said. She said News' Fox Broadcasting U.S. TV network results should start to improve in the second quarter.  
"I think you will find that there is more disappointment from the Australian viewpoint than the U.S. viewpoint," the second Melbourne analyst said.
"I imagine there won't be too much of a downgrade with respect to people's full year forecasts," she said.
"Basically, what News has said is 'the first quarter was a bit disappointing but you are still going to get your growth for the year'," she said after taking part in the conference call.
The film, television, publishing and newspaper conglomerate reported a six percent fall in pre-abnormals net profit to A$1.26 million for the year to June 30, 1996.  
News Corp's net profit before abnormals and preference dividends is seen rising to around A$1.59 billion in 1996/97 according to the Barcep survey of analysts by BZW Australia.
The second Melbourne analyst said the second quarter is traditionally a stronger quarter for Fox Broadcasting and is likely to get a boost from the baseball World Series finals.
"There is definitely room for recovery from the one-off things in this quarter -- if they don't then they have got problems," she said.
"The second quarter is by far their biggest quarter and you wouldn't want to see any problems," she said.  
Analysts said the first quarter is also likely to be the quarter most affected by the stronger Australian dollar, which had averaged US$0.78 in the 1996/97 first quarter, compared with US$0.73 a year earlier.
They said that in the rest of 1995/96, the Australian dollar was mainly around US$0.75. The local unit is currently worth about US$0.78. News has 75 percent of its sales in U.S. dollars. The first Melbourne analyst said News Corp had leverage to earnings growth in its publishing related businesses, (newspapers, book publishing and magazines) which account for 55 percent of earnings, following the fall in newsprint prices.  
The first Melbourne analyst said he is forecasting News Corp to report a net profit before abnormals of A$1.63 billion in 1996/97.
However, one Sydney analyst said he would be likely to cut his full year forecast from A$1.545 billion, excluding abnormals and before preference dividends. "I can see myself shaving that back to about the A$1,500 (million) mark," he said.
At 3.20 p.m. (0430 GMT), News Corp shares were 18 cents or 2.52 percent lower at A$6.95 with just over 3.96 million shares traded, wiping over A$300 million off its market capitalisation.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Rupert Murdoch's global media group, The News Corp Ltd, on Tuesday reported an 8.1 percent fall in net profit for the first quarter of 1996/97, in stark contrast to analysts' forecasts of a healthy rise.
But analysts said Murdoch's forecast last month at News Corp's annual meeting that the group would achieve a profit lift of 20 percent for the year to June 30, 1997 was still possible.  
News Corp reported net profits of A$283 million for the three months ended September 30, down from A$308 million a year earlier. News said the weaker profit was a result of poorer returns in U.S. TV, Australian newspapers and book publishing.
Analysts had forecast net profit before abnormal items would be around A$320-330 million, up around 15 percent.
Net profit before abnormals came in at A$285 million.
"This is not as people were expecting type of result. It was a very flat result," one Sydney-based media analyst said.  
News Corp could still report a 20 percent rise in net profits for the 1996/97 year as it was only the U.S. television business that was below forecast, the analyst said.
The analyst said he would likely cut his full year forecasts for News Corp from the current A$1.545 billion (excluding abnormals and before preference dividends). "I can see myself shaving that back to about the A$1,500 (million) mark," he said.
However, asked if News Corp could meet Murdoch's forecasts, the analyst replied: "I think so, because the rest of the result was perfectly in line with what we were going for, so they will have to work hard and if things go right for them they can."  
News Corp said its profit was mainly bolstered by the worldwide box office success of the science fiction movie Independence Day and its British newspapers and book publishing. Independence Day has grossed more than US$670 million worldwide, making it the third highest-grossing film in box office history.
British newspaper operations enjoyed strong growth with an 18-percent gain in operating profits in the three months to September, News Corp said. The Sun, The Times and The Sunday Times newspapers all posted gains in both advertising and circulation revenues in the first quarter.  
"Additionally, the group has benefitted from reduced newsprint costs," the company said.
"Offsetting these gains were weaker results in U.S. television, Australian newspapers and book publishing, which lacked results from the educational division which was sold in March 1996," it said.
News also said continued losses for its Asian satellite broadcaster, STAR TV, were in line with expectations.
At 1.40 p.m. (0240 GMT), News Corp shares were 16 cents or 2.24 percent lower at A$6.97 with just over 2.30 million shares traded, wiping over A$300 million off its market capitalisation.  
"It seems it's just a knee-jerk reaction to the first quarter, which looks like it was A$40 million below what the market was looking for," a Sydney broker said.
The analyst said the fall in Australian dollar terms also reflected the stronger local currency against the U.S. dollar as about 75 percent of News Corp's revenue is in U.S. dollars.
In U.S. dollar terms, News Corp operating income was seven percent higher in the first quarter.
The film, television, publishing and newspaper conglomerate reported a six percent fall in pre-abnormals net profit to A$1.26 million for the year to June 30, 1996.  
This is seen rising to around A$1.59 billion in 1996/97 according to the Barcep survey of analysts by BZW Australia.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1813
Building products and energy group Boral Ltd said on Monday it had started the 1996/97 year poorly due to continued weakness in the Australian housing market, but it was still coy about the results for the full year.
Chairman Peter Cottrell told shareholders at the annual meeting that Boral's operating profit in the first four months of the current 1996/97 year was in line with budget, but about 20 percent below year ago levels.
Cottrell gave no figures, but said the 1996/97 first half earnings would be above the second half of 1995/96.  
"In summary, operating profit for the first four months is in line with budget and around 20 percent behind last year," Cottrell said. "Happily, this indicates that the half year profit will be substantially above the extremely disappointing result in the second half of last year."
He said most forecasters expected a recovery in demand for home building materials in the second half and this, along with recent interest rate cuts, should give the economy a boost.
"In this context, we expect that the second half profit should be well above the same period in 1995/96." Boral reported a 30 percent fall in its 1995/96 net profit to A$205.69 million.  
Sales fell to A$4.69 billion in the year to June 30, 1996 from A$4.94 billion a year earlier.
One analyst at the Boral meeting said the first four month profit result indicated that the group was currently looking at a flat annual profit for 1995/96.
Cottrell said shareholders would receive a 7.5 cents per share dividend payment for the six months ended December 31, 1996, the same amount paid in the second half of 1995/96.
"...current levels of trading enable the directors to anticipate that the company will be able to maintain the 7.5 cents rate for the 1997 interim dividend," Cottrell said.  
Boral cut its 1995/96 second half to 7.5 cents a share, from 10.5 cents a share, due to the 30 percent fall in net profit to A$205.69 million in the year to June 30, 1996.
Boral's total dividend for 1995/96 fell to 18 cents a share from 21 cents a year earlier.
The meeting was adjourned for two hours after Cottrell called a poll to amend Boral's articles of association giving Boral the authority to issue converting preference shares. Cottrell said 89.15 percent of the shareholders who voted approved the issue. Only 20 percent of shareholders voted.  
Managing director Tony Berg told reporters after the meeting that Boral would issue converting preference share for potential acquisitions, but neither a purchase or an issue was planned.
Cottrell said Boral was reviewing its European assets following poor financial performances from the operations there. "There is a review of the assets at present, some assets have been sold off in the U.K., we are looking hard at those in mainland Europe, primarily Germany," Cottrell said.
However, after the meeting, referring to the European operations, Berg said: "We are about to implement strategies that would result in a good return for shareholders."  
Profits from Boral's European businesses fell 73.7 percent to A$7 million in 1995/96, while sales fell 13.9 percent to A$205 million.
Cottrell and Berg were grilled by shareholders over the group's overall financial performance and its timber logging and woodchipping activities and were faced by environmental protesters outside the hotel where Boral held its meeting.
Berg also said Boral was on target to deliver more than A$80 million in savings in the 1996/97 year and that Boral was ahead of budget for the first quarter with savings of over A$20 million being achieved.  -- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Australian mineral sands and base metals miner RGC Ltd reported on Thursday that it had doubled annual operating profit for the 1995/96 year, thanks largely to a boom in demand for aircraft and golf clubs.
RGC, 40 percent owned by British conglomerate Hanson Plc, reported a 101 percent rise in operating profit to A$108.57 million (US$85.99 million) for the year ended June 30.
And it said it was on the lookout for expansion opportunities in Bolivia, India, Sri Lanka and the Ukraine.
The higher profit was due to improved mineral sands demand and prices, together with a stronger tin price and output, chairman Tony Cotton told reporters on Thursday.
"It was a good result and was in line with market expectations," Pru-Bache Securities mining analyst Quek told Reuters. "The mineral sands division did very well and there was an improvement in the tin business too," he said.
The higher mineral sands and tin prices helped lift sales 54 percent to A$986.39 million in 1995/96.
RGC, which tussles with South African miner Richards Bay Minerals for the title of the world's largest mineral sands miner, has about 30 percent of the world market for titanium dioxide (Ti02), which is used to make titanium metal.
"With Ti02 we have good news and bad news," RGC managing director Mark Bethwaite told reporters. "The good news is that U.S. growth forecast is very strong, around three to four percent, and there is strong titanium metal demand particularly because of some aviation growth and also of golf clubs.
"Titanium is now a favourite material to make golf driver heads," Bethwaite said.
As for the bad news, Bethwaite said: "In the U.S. and in Asia there is something of a price war going on.
"So prices are taking quite a battering," he said.
RGC, which has operations in Australia, the United States, Papua New Guinea (PNG) and Indonesia, was also keen on expanding to other countries, including Bolivia, India, Sri Lanka and the Ukraine, for mineral sands and base metal exploration, he said.
"What we are saying there is that we are ready and able to joint venture particularly with junior (small miners) and governments, where they seek a strong partner in both financial and technical capacity," he said.
The Sydney-based miner said it was one of three companies on the short-list to buy the tin assets of the Bolivian state-owned COMIBOL mining corp, which include a tin smelter and two mines.
"We are on the short-list for what is called the capitialisation of COMIBOL tin assets. There were four parties, there are now three, including RGC as one," Bethwaite said.
If RGC was successful with its tender to acquire the tin assets in the land-locked South American nation it would become one of the world's largest tin miners, he said.
RGC produced about 16,000 tonnes of tin in concentrate in the 1995/96 year. The two Bolivian tin mines up for sale would increase the group's annual tin output to over 35,000 tonnes.
The world's largest tin miner is Tambang Timah of Indonesia, which is expected to produce 41,500 tonnes in 1996.
Despite the better-than-expected profit, RGC shares rose just one cent to A$5.94 on light volume.
(A$1 = US$0.7920)
Australia's information technology and telecommunication industry (IT&amp;T) on Tuesday welcomed a decision by Asia-Pacific leaders that would lead to a substantial reduction in tariffs.
"It is certainly welcome, as the telecommunications area has some very strong barriers in many markets," said Fleur Bayley, export manager of the Australian Informational Industry Association (AIIA).  
Bayley told Reuters that Australia has no trade barriers on IT&amp;T equipment, whereas local companies have to compete in markets that have high tariff barriers.
The meeting in the Philippines of 18 leaders of Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) economies endorsed a United States plan to free the annual US$500 billion global trade in computers, memory chips and telecommunications equipment.
However, most IT&amp;T observers wanted more details about the tariff plan before they could assess its implications for the Australian sector.  
One computer industry analyst said the APEC plan is likely to benefit Australian IT&amp;T exports, but is unlikely to stimulate growth of technology imports into Australia.
"One would have thought with the relative maturity of our market that exports could increase faster than imports," the analyst said.
He said there could be a mild boost in demand from home users of computers, but it is unlikely to affect the demand in the corporate market.  
But another analyst said most of Australia IT&amp;T exports are from multinational corporations with operations in Australia and these companies are the ones that are most likely to benefit.
Australia exported more than A$2.5 billion in IT&amp;T goods in the 12 months to September this year but imported around A$9.6 billion worth of IT&amp;T goods over the same period.
U.S. computer giant International Business Machines Corp lBM exports about A$500 million of its computers from Australia to Asia, making it the country's single largest technology exporter.  
French telecommunictaions equipment maker Alcatel Alsthom is another multinational with large export volumes from Australia.
AIIA's Bayley said the association has a target of A$10 billion in IT&amp;T exports by the year 2000.
A decade ago, Australia's IT&amp;T exports were negligible.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Australian government plans to toughen the rules for the rollout of optic fibre cable could make Optus Communications' cable rollout plans uneconomic, said Optus chief executive officer Zygmunt Switkowski.
"We looked at the technology and the economics of underground cabling and we can't make the business case work for us," Switkowski told Reuters, before addressing a luncheon at the Committee for Economic Development of Australia.
"It could certainly add hundreds of millions of dollars to our cost base," Switkowski said.  
Last week, the Australian government said Optus and Telstra Corp would need the approval of a local council before it could install cables in its jurisdiction.
Optus, through its 46.5 percent owned Optus Vision, is rolling out fibre optic cables overhead on mainly existing telephone poles to carry pay television and telephone services at a cost of around A$3.0 billion.
Switkowski said there was no overall figure on how much extra it would cost Optus for the underground cables.
"It can be three to six times more costly to roll out an underground cable than it is to roll out an aerial cable."  
However, Switkowski said the government's decision had not affected the group's cable rollout programme.
Optus has targetted 2.3 million homes to be cabled by the end of 1996. "Everything is going according to plan," he said.
Switkowski played down newspaper reports that the telecommunications group would take the government to court over its change in policy.
"I think the suggestion that the rules under which have established this corporation should change earlier than expected is an unsettling one," he said.
The new cable rollout rules start on July 1, 1997.  
This is the same day that Australia's telecommunications industry will be liberalised, allowing overseas telephone carriers to provide local telephony services.
Australian Communications Minister Richard Alston announced the cable rollout changes last week, following lobbying by some lcoal councils and back-benchers in his own conservative Liberal party who wanted the roll-out restricted or stopped.
Alston said cable operators would not be able to install overhead cables where there had previously been no overhead cables and would have to go underground when above-ground power cables in that street went underground.  
Several councils have taken Optus Vision to court, but the rollout has continued because it is permitted under the current telecommunications regime.
Switkowski said he could make no comment on Optus Communications planned sharemarket float, which is scheduled to list by the end of this year, but has been delayed by legal action between Optus Vision and Seven Network Ltd.
Optus Communications is 25 percent owned by Mayne Nickless Ltd, BellSouth Corp and Cable and Wireless Plc both have a 24.5 percent stake in the Sydney-based group.
The balance is owned by Australian institutions.  
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Australia's second largest bank Westpac Banking Group renewed its interest in Asia on Wednesday through an alliance with British-based Standard Chartered Bank, 3-1/2 years after its sold a swag of its Asian units.
The move signals Westpac is ready to expand in Asia again after largely withdrawing from the region to focus on Australia and New Zealand during the last Australian recession.
Under the alliance Westpac and Standard Chartered would share banking services for medium-to-large scale corporate customers in their respective dominant markets of Australia and New Zealand and Asia.
Westpac chief executive Bob Joss said in a statement that the initiative was of major importance to Westpac.
"It is a good strategic fit for our future growth," he said. Standard Chartered group chief executive Malcolm Williamson said his bank was committed to "ensuring this new relationship with Westpac is of significant long-term benefit to both companies".
The venture would focus primarily on Singapore, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Thailand and Malaysia, before expanding into Vietnam and China in about six months, said David Morgan, group executive of Westpac's Institutional and International Banking.
"Initially the main purpose of this relationship is to provide select Asian banking services to Westpac's medium to large customers -- including cash management services, local Asian currency lending, local transaction facilities and trade finance facilities," the banks said in a joint statement.
The banks expect quick success from the alliance.
"We expect it to be a fairly rapidly growing revenue stream," Morgan told Reuters.
Westpac reported a A$16 million (US$12.8 million) profit in the year to September 30, 1996 from its Asian operations compared with A$10 million in 1994/95.
But, Morgan said he could not say how much revenue the alliance would produce in its first year of business or how much Westpac had invested in the venture, which started on Wednesday.
"We have made a substantial investment already, but it is going to be a continuing investment as we expand our capabilities across Asia," Morgan said.
The move was a cheap way of getting into Asia by Westpac, banking analysts said. "It gives them access to markets in a fairly cost effective way," said Graham Maloney, banking analyst at brokers Macquarie Equities. "It's a good thing. It gives them exposure to an area that is very fast growing."
Westpac has banking licences is some Asian countries, but its activities are limited, Westpac's Morgan said.
Traders welcomed news of the alliance pushing Westpac shares up two cents to A$7.36, while the overall market was lower.
The link with Westpac follows Standard Chartered's Asian pact formed with the U.S. First Chicago NBD Corp last week.
"They (Standard Chartered) are obviously looking around the region for alliances," one Melbourne-based analyst said.
Westpac's alliance with Standard Chartered also comes ahead of an inquiry into Australia's finance and banking industry, which could see further deregulation and some mega-mergers.
The inquiry's final report is due next March.
Last month, speculation mounted that Standard Chartered was looking at a merger with another Australian bank, the Australia and New Zealand Banking Group (ANZ), but this was denied by Melbourne-based ANZ. (AUD=US$0.80)
Westpac Banking Group, the second largest bank in Australia, announced plans on Wednesday to expand its Asian activities through an alliance with British-based Standard Chartered Bank Plc.
The move signals Westpac is ready to expand in the region again after putting most of its Asian activities up for sale 3-1/2 years ago to focus on Australasia.
At the time a recession was biting deeply into profits and the share register held potential predators such as Australia's richest man Kerry Packer and Lend Lease Corp Ltd.  
Westpac chief executive Bob Joss said in a statement the deal with Standard Chartered was of major importance.
"It is a good strategic fit for our future growth," he said. Standard Chartered group chief executive Malcolm Williamson said his bank was committed to "ensuring this new relationship with Westpac is of significant long term benefit to both companies".
The venture would focus primarily on Singapore, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Thailand and Malaysia, before expanding into Vietnam and China in about six months, said David Morgan, group executive of Westpac Institutional and International Banking.
Westpac Banking Corp said on Wednesday it expected rapid revenue growth from the alliance it had formed with Standard Chartered Bank Plc for banking services in Asia.
"We expect it to be a fairly rapidly growing revenue stream," said David Morgan, group executive of Westpac's Institutional and International Banking Group.  
However, Morgan said he could not say how much revenue the alliance would produce in its first year of business or how much Westpac had invested in the venture, which officially started on Wednesday.
The banks said earlier there would be no exchange of equity between the two.
"We have made a substantial investment already, but it is going to be a continuing investment as we expand our capabilities across Asia," Morgan told Reuters by telephone.  
Westpac has no plans to extend the alliance beyond Asia to the Middle East and Africa, where Standard Chartered also has operations.
"We are going to purely focus it on Asia," Morgan said.
The venture would focus primarily on Singapore, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Thailand and Malaysia, before expanding into Vietnam and China in about six months, Morgan said.
Canadian gold mining giant Placer Dome Inc on Thursday announced plans to expand its presence in the Asia-Pacific region through takeover offers worth a total of US$600 million for two Australian-listed gold miners.
Placer Dome launched takeover offers for Papua New Guinea (PNG) miner Highlands Gold Ltd and a mop-up offer for its Australian offshoot Placer Pacific Ltd.
If Placer Dome succeeds with both bids it will have control of PNG's biggest gold mine. PNG's Porgera mine is expected to produce over 940,000 ounces of gold in calendar 1996.
"It (the takeover) recognises the prospectivity that we see of the Asia-Pacific region and our desire to take full advantage of any opportunities that exist here," said Placer Dome's chief executive officer John Willson.
However, there were no plans to acquire more assets in the Asia-Pacific region, he said. However, Placer Pacific has stepped up its exploration activity in Asia in recent years with programmes in China, Indonesia and the Philippines.
The takeover bids were well received by investors on the Australian share market, with both Highlands and Placer Pacific shares soaring in active trade on the bid announcements, which were made before Thursday's market open.
However, the bids were not so welcomed by Highlands, which said Placer Dome's offer of 75 cents (US$0.61) for each Highlands shares was inadequate. However, Placer Pacific was more coy, it advised shareholders to take no action on the bid.
The Sydney-based Placer Pacific was partly floated in 1986 by its parent, which in turn now plans to buy-out the rest of the 24.6 percent it does not own through a share swap of one Placer Dome share for every 15 Placer Pacific shares.
Placer Dome, a Vancouver-based miner and one of the world's top three gold producers, plans to finance its A$425 million Highlands purchase through the issue of prefered shares.
"When we are done with this acquisition assuming it goes ahead, we will have debt of about US$1.0 billion and equity of US$1.7 billion," Willson said
"We will then refinance the Highlands gold purchase through a preferred share issue and we look at asset sales to bring our equity close to US$2.0 billion and with debt below $1.0 billion, we will be well within our range on a debt-to-equity basis."
Highlands has stakes in two potentially large mining projects in PNG. The Nena/Frieda River copper/gold project and the Ramu nickel-cobalt deposit, both projects are estimated to cost a total of US$1.5 billion to develop.
In regards to Highlands non-gold assets, Willson said: "We don't know much about them or what we are going to do with them, to develop them, sell them, or swap them."
Australian gold analysts said the Canadian gold miner was likely to succeed with its two bids. "I think they will walk it in," said David Kauler, gold mining analyst at ANZ Securities.
Analysts said the offers are probably opportunistic, given that Placer Pacific and Highlands share prices were both earlier this year above Placer Dome's offer prices. But both have fallen with the gold price, which is currently around 2-1/2 year lows.
Highlands shares closed 17 cents or 29 percent higher at 75 cents, Placer Dome has amassed a 33 percent stake in Highlands over the past two days. Placer Pacific shares closed 42 cents or 29.37 percent higher at A$1.85 with 5.5 million shares traded.
(A$1=US$0.80)
Canadian gold giant Placer Dome Inc's takeover bids for its Australian offshoot Placer Pacific Ltd and Papua New Guinea gold miner Highlands Gold Ltd are likely to be successful, analysts said on Thursday. A takeover of the two miners would give Placer Dome control of the big Porgera gold mine in Papua New Guinea (PNG).
"I think they will walk it in," said David Kauler, gold mining analyst at ANZ Securities.
Placer Dome had amassed a 33 percent stake in Highlands in the 24 hours before launching a 75 cents a share bid.  
The Vancouver-based miner is offering one of its shares for every 15 Placer Pacific shares. Placer Dome said its offer for Highlands represented a 36 percent premium to the price of the the shares on November 26. The offer for the 24.6 percent Placer Dome does not own in Placer Pacific represents aa 50 percent premium on the November 26 price, the Canadian miner said.
The shares of both Placer Pacific and Highlands soared after Placer Dome unveiled its offers before the market opening.
At 12.50 p.m. (0150 GMT) Placer shares were 47 cents or 32.87 percent higher at A$1.90 while Highlands shares were 16 cents or 27.59 percent higher at 74 cents.  
Australian gold analysts said they did not expect Placer Dome to raise its bid prices, with both Placer Pacific and Highlands directors likely to recommend shareholders to accept the offers in the absence of any higher bids.
"At the moment, the advice would be not to sell," Highlands company secretary Phillip West told Reuters. "But the directors are considering the offer and are expected to make a statement later today," West said.
Analysts said the speed at which Placer Dome picked up a third of Highlands indicated there were plenty of sellers of the stock at these levels.  
Highlands has been in play since MIM Holdings Ltd put its 65 percent stake up for sale at 65 cents a share in April, but underwriter to the offer ANZ Securities, was left with 40 percent of Highlands, as investors neglected the offer.
"When you have someone offering 75 cents and not too long ago nobody was buying at 65 (cents) then its no wonder they are queuing up to sell," said Keith Goode at Bell Securities.
Analysts said Highlands needed a partner to help develop the Nena/Frieda River copper/gold project and the Ramu nickel-cobalt deposit, both in PNG. The two projects are estimated to cost US$1.5 billion to develop.  
"Highlands was really under pressure as its needed around A$500-A$600 million to finance its share of the Frieda and Ramu projects and that is pretty difficult for a company that is capitalised at A$350 million," ANZ's Kauler said.
Analysts said the offers are probably opportunistic, given that Placer Pacific and Highlands share prices were both earlier this year above Placer Dome's offer prices. But both have fallen with the gold price, which is currently around 2-1/2 year lows.
"It is opportune, with the gold price falling, but neither Placer (Pacific) or Highlands share prices have been going anywhere for most of this year," Kauler said.  
Gold analysts said Placer Dome was unlikely to mop up the remaining stake in Kidston Gold Mines Ltd, which is currently 75 percent owned by Placer Pacific.
"I don't expect there to be bid for Kidston, I think they will let that run its course," said one Sydney gold analyst.
The takeover bids for the Porgera partners, also boosted Goldfields Ltd share price, which owns 25 percent of the PNG mine and most of the gold sector despite a weaker gold price, which is currently trading at US$373/50 an ounce.
At 1.35 p.m. (0235 GMT), Goldfields shares were 24 cents or 9.76 percent higher at A$2.70. --Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Investment bank Macquarie Bank Ltd reported on Monday a record result for the six months ended September 30, and started the second half optimistically.
Macquarie Bank, which is 13.4 percent owned by the Brunei Investment Agency (BIA), reported a 21.3 percent rise in first half net profit to A$46.03 million in the first half of 1996/97.
"This was a very solid first half result and one which reflects more even contributions fom business groups across the bank," executive chairman David Clarke said.  
"Although it is too early to make a forecast, we are optimistic about the second half," Clarke said.
While the 1995/96 second half was very strong, he said the bank was hopeful it could at least match the result.
"There has been nothing to change that view following the trading for the first two months of this half."
Managing director Allan Moss said the equities, treasury and commodities group accounted for most of the first half rises.
"The Treasury and Commodities Group's first half result is the best since the formation of the group in 1993," Moss said.  
"The strong result in the Equities Group reflects good performances from institutional and corporate stockbroking and underwriting," Moss said.
Moss said the near 400 percent increase in profit from its stockbroking arm, Macquarie Equities Ltd, was due partly to an increase in market share, but mainly due to market volume.
Macquarie's Direct Investment division, which manages the Macquarie Investment Trusts, also had a good result, Moss said.
The bank was currently very active right across all its operations, Moss said. "We are busy right across the board. There is a lot of activity in all our operations," he said.  
Macquarie said total operating income rose to A$232.69 million in the half, from A$190.21 million a year earlier.
The Brunei government-owned BIA became Macquarie's largest shareholder after it bought Lloyds TSB Plc's 13.4 percent stake for A$151.7 million last week.
Macquarie's chairman said there had been a good reaction to the link with BIA.
"We have had a very positive reaction from a number of existing clients, particularly in southeast Asia. I think it has been widely acclaimed in southeast Asia that it would lead to more business in the region," Clarke said.  
Macquarie, which listed in late July, reported a net profit of A$93.17 million in the year to March 31, 1996, up from A$76.07 million a year earlier.
Clarke said Macquarie had no plans to return capital to shareholders or to make a takeover due to its high capital adequacy ratio (CAR). Macquarie's CAR was 13.6 percent at September 30, down from 15.4 percent at March 31, 1996.
This ratio compares with the Reserve Bank of Australia's minimum requirement of eight percent.
"As far as any prospect of share acquisition or buy-back, we have nothing in mind yet," Clarke said.  
"I think it is the nature of our business to have a capital adequacy ratio that is higher than the trading banks because we are very dependent on counter-party limits from other banks, they in turn are quite dependent on ratings...it is a healthy capital adequacy ratio and I think we can expect to be well and truly above the basic minimum," Clarke said.
At 2.00 p.m. (0300 GMT), Macquarie shares were 11 cents lower at A$8.55 with about 160,000 shares traded in a generally weaker Australian sharemarket.
The shares listed on the local bourse in July at A$6.95.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Buildings materials group James Hardie Industries Ltd is expected to report on Friday a net profit before abnormals of between A$23 million and A$30 million for the six months ended September 30, 1996.
James Hardie reported a pre-abnormal net profit of A$31.4 million in the 1994/95 first half. In October, it said the depressed local housing market would cause a deterioration in first half profits, while the 1996/97 year would also be lower.  
BT Securities building materials analyst Chris Haynes forecasts James Hardie to report a net profit before abnormals of A$27 million in the first half.
Haynes, who has a hold recommendation for James Hardie, said the building materials supplier was likely to pay a 6.5 cents a share dividend, unchanged from a the 1994/95 first half.
A Sydney-based building material analyst forecast James Hardie to report a net profit before abnomals of A$23 million for the first half and about A$50 million for the year.  
J.B. Were &amp; Son's building materials analyst, John North, forecasts a first half pre-abnormal net profit of slightly below A$30 million.
But he added: "I would be disappointed if they came in below A$27 (million) or A$28 (million)," North told Reuters.
North forecast an annual profit of A$55 million.
BZW Australia forecast the Sydney-based group to report a net profit before abnormals of A$26.6 million for the half and about A$54 million for the 1996/97 year.  
ABN AMRO Hoare Govett building materials analyst Fabian Babich estimated James Hardie to report a pre-abnormal net profit of A$26 million for the half.
Analysts said James Hardie results are likely to turn around in the 1997/98 year, with an expected pick up in the Australian housing industry during the 1997 calendar year. The group reported a pre-abnormal net profit of A$58.4 million in 1995/96.
"The market will almost ignore these results, all the focus will be on the future and what they are doing in the U.S.," said one building materials analyst. "People are not buying Hardie for 1997 earnings its a 1998 story," the analyst said.  
ABN AMRO's Babich said the market would also welcome any comments on further business divestments, so that the company has a tighter focus on its core fibre-cement operations.
"I think the market would react positively to any comment on the possible sales of the bathroom products and pipeline business and the windows business, all of which are estimated to be operating at a loss at the moment," Babich told Reuters.
James Hardie said on Tuesday it had completed the sale of its irrigation business and its fire protection and building automation operations. The sale of these businesses are unlikely to be shown in the first half accounts, analysts said.  
Most building materials analysts have a hold recommendation on James Hardie due to the strong rise in its share price over the past 12 months, although they said the outlook for the group is positive, particularly with its expected grow in the U.S.
James Hardie shares have risen about 66 percent to a record of A$3.50 last week from around A$2.10 in November 1995.
The shares closed three cents up at A$3.43 on Wednesday.
James Hardie is 27.23 percent owned by Brierley Investments Ltd's Australian offshoot Australian Consolidated Investments Ltd.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1813
Building materials group James Hardie Industries Ltd reported on Friday a first half net profit in line with expectations, but comments on the second half by the group is likely to see full year earnings forecasts trimmed.
James Hardie, 27.23 owned by New Zealand's Brierley Investments Ltd, reported a 12.1 percent fall in net profit before abnormals to A$27.6 million for the six months ended September 30, 1996, in line with analysts' forecasts.
But managing director Keith Barton said he expected the second half result to be significantly down on the first half.  
Analysts at the company's results briefing said Barton's comments on the second half meant that estimates for pre-abnormal net profit for the 1996/97 year would be trimmed back to around A$50 million from A$53-A$54 million.
They welcomed the company's statement that outlook for its U.S. businesses were very positive for the 1996/97 second half and into 1997/98.
"In contrast, the outlook for Australian operations remains bleak in the short term," it said.  
"In view of the immediate prospects, the company maintains its previously stated position that profit for the full year will reflect a marked deterioration on last year's results," the company said.
"Growth prospects for the following year remain very positive," James Hardie said.
Keith Barton said the first half downturn reflected a fall in earnings from Australian building products due to lower housing starts.  
"Reduced activity in the housing sector had an adverse impact on both volumes and margins for the Australian building boards, windows and bathroom products businesses," he said.
Continued strong performances from the fibre cement and gypsum businesses in the United States as well as solid performances from New Zealand had however helped the result.
"U.S. fibre cement production sold out during the six months to September and we continue to ship significant volumes of product from Australian and New Zealand plants to satisfy demand," Barton said.  
Hardie had just increased U.S. fibre cement production capacity by more than 40 percent to 480 million square feet through the commissioning of a third line at Plant City in Florida.
However analysts said the market would not be worrying too much about 1996/97 results, which are widely expected to be down on the A$58.4 million pre-abnormal net profit reported in the year to March 31, 1996.
Barton said he expected a rebound in profit in the year to March 31, 1998, following an expected fall in profit in the 1996/97 year.  
"I expect it to be higher, but it is too early to say if it will be significantly higher," Barton later told reporters.
Analysts forecast James Hardie to have pre-abnormal net profit earnings of about A$90 million in 1997/98.
Barton also revealed that the Sydney-based group was conducting a study of the European fibre cement market, but had made no decison to enter any European countries yet.
"We are going to have a look, it is a large market," Barton said. "It is early days, we are just having a look to see if we can understand the market."  
Sales for the first half rose 2.7 percent to A$913.9 million, while the dividend remained unchanged at 6.5 cents per share.
At 1.10 p.m. (0210 GMT), James Hardie shares were six cents lower at A$3.40 in a weaker Australian sharemarket that has been hit by a slump in the local bond market.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
The recent surge in the Australian dollar and higher jet fuel prices are going to hurt exporters of fresh food in particular, according to Australian Federation of International Forwarders (AFIF) chief executive Brian Lovell.
"With the rise in the fuel price and the higher Australian dollar it is going to affect a lot of exporters," Lovell said.
"The hardest hit are going to be the perishible exports," Lovell said, referring to Australia's fresh food exporters to mainly to Asian countries.
Lovell said exporters, who had entered contracts before the recent freight rate hike, could now be finding they cannot meet their contract obligations due to the extra charge.
"This can really affect things as you might have signed the contract and then suddenly realised that you can't afford to move it," Lovell told Reuters in an interview.
"There are some people that won't be able to get out of a binding contract," Lovell said.
Lovell said many AFIF members were surprised by the freight rate rises by some local air carriers, due to the strength of the local dollar, which had given carriers greater buying power.
"They are buying fuel now more cheaply," Lowell said.
Qantas Airways Ltd has increased its jet fuel surcharge, while Ansett Airlines Ltd has kept its freight rates unchanged.
The Australian dollar has risen four percent to its current level of US$0.8000 over the past five months.
Lovell said that although airfreight volumes had been growing over recent years, there was now a move by exporters to transport perishable goods to Asia by fast ferry.
"I would say in the next 10 years we will see a lot more freight carried by fast ferries, as it is more economical to carry them by ferry than plane as fuel costs are lower."
Lovell said some of the AFIF's 250 members were in dispute with some of the airports over the management of cargo terminals, but this had not impeded freight movement.
AFIF was formed in October following the merger of Australian Dederation of Air Freight Forwarders and the International Forwarders Association of Australia.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Australian fast ferry and transport group Holyman Ltd plans to further expand operations in Europe before moving into the Asian market, managing director Christopher Butcher said in an interview.
"We currently have operations in North America and northern Europe and we can't see any reason why we can't start doing the same thing in the Mediterranean," Butcher told Reuters.
Butcher said Holyman was likely into expand into Asia in the future as the cost structure for operating fast ferries improved in some markets in the region.
"We could be seeing the cost structure changing in Asia, so we are likely to move into some markets in north Asia and south east Asia," Butcher said.
He said that as incomes rose in Asia the amounts charged for ferry services would rise, making it more economical for operators like Holyman to enter the market.
Holyman company secretary Simon Lennon said the company was also looking at fast ferry services from Darwin to Indonesia, but he did not expect a decision to be made for at least a year.
"It is one of a number of projects we are looking at in the region," he said. He said Holyman had looked at particular routes within China and Indonesia, but they did not fit within the company's plans. "I would imagine in a few years we would have something up there (in Asia)," Lennon said.
Holyman shares have had a lacklustre performance in its first year of listing, but since January this year the shares have more than doubled making the stock one of the strongest sharemarket performers over the past year.
The shares listed in April 1994 at A$2.00 and hit a high of A$6.00 on November 11 and are currently trading around A$5.06.
The Sydney-based group was floated on the local bourse in April 1994, as part of a spin-off from TNT Ltd, when the transport group was selling assets to trim its high debts.
"The stock really took some time to get off the ground," Butcher said.
"I think there has been a lot of hard work done over the past year to educate shareholders in what the company is doing and where the company is going as there was a perception out there that we were a mismash of businesses," Butcher said.
Holyman's main activities are its fast ferry services in Australia, across the North Sea between Britain and Europe, New York and in Denmark. It also operates a gas pipeline, bulk commodity handling and freight forwarding businesses.
"There are a number of different projects and businesses, we found there are quite a lot of common threads going through," Butcher said. "I think these operations all have their own place and there are opportunties to expand these further," he said.
Butcher was with TNT for 25 years before taking charge of Holyman when it split from TNT.
Butcher said the group had no plans to raise capital to fund the expected expansion, as the company was well financed.
In October, Holyman bought a fast passenger ferry for A$43 million. He said there was no plans for any immediate purchases of further ferries following the latest purchase.
Butcher said he could not comment on its trading performance or earnings forecasts.
Holyman reported a net profit of A$16.09 million in calendar 1995. The group posted a net profit of A$15.03 million in the six months to June 30, 1996, up from A$6.79 million earlier.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Australian fast ferry and transport group Holyman Ltd plans to further expand operations in Europe before moving into the Asian market, managing director Christopher Butcher said in an interview.
"We currently have operations in North America and northern Europe and we can't see any reason why we can't start doing the same thing in the Mediterranean," Butcher told Reuters.
Butcher said Holyman was likely into expand into Asia in the future as the cost structure for operating fast ferries improved in some markets in the region.  
"We could be seeing the cost structure changing in Asia, so we are likely to move into some markets in north Asia and south east Asia," Butcher said.
He said that as incomes rose in Asia the amounts charged for ferry services would rise, making it more economical for operators like Holyman to enter the market.
Holyman company secretary Simon Lennon said the company was also looking at fast ferry services from Darwin to Indonesia, but he did not expect a decision to be made for at least a year.  
"It is one of a number of projects we are looking at in the region," he said. He said Holyman had looked at particular routes within China and Indonesia, but they did not fit within the company's plans. "I would imagine in a few years we would have something up there (in Asia)," Lennon said.
Holyman shares had a lacklustre showing in its first year of listing, but since January this year the shares have more than doubled to make the stock one of the strongest sharemarket performers over the past year.
The shares listed in April 1994 at A$2.00 and hit a high of A$6.00 on November 11 and are currently trading around A$5.06.  
The Sydney-based group was floated on the local bourse in April 1994, as part of a spin-off from TNT Ltd, when the transport group was selling assets to trim its high debts.
"The stock really took some time to get off the ground," Butcher said.
"I think there has been a lot of hard work done over the past year to educate shareholders in what the company is doing and where the company is going as there was a perception out there that we were a mismash of businesses," Butcher said.  
Holyman's main activities are its fast ferry services in Australia, across the North Sea between Britain and Europe, New York and in Denmark. It also operates a gas pipeline, bulk commodity handling and freight forwarding businesses.
"There are a number of different projects and businesses, we found there are quite a lot of common threads going through," Butcher said. "I think these operations all have their own place and there are opportunties to expand these further," he said.
Butcher worked with TNT for 25 years before taking charge of Holyman when it split from TNT.  
Butcher said the group had no plans to raise capital to fund the expected expansion, as the company was well financed.
In October, Holyman bought a fast passenger ferry for A$43 million. He said there was no plans for any immediate purchases of more ferries.
Butcher said he could not comment on its trading performance or earnings forecasts.
Holyman reported a net profit of A$16.09 million in calendar 1995. The group posted a net profit of A$15.03 million in the six months to June 30, 1996, up from A$6.79 million earlier.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Australian airlines and tourist operators are worried about Australia's falling share of the growing number of Japanese taking overseas holidays, so much so that they have formed an action plan to halt the decline.
However, details of the action plan are secretly guided by the carriers, Qantas Airways Ltd and Ansett Airlines Ltd, as they don't want to be giving away their strategic plans to the opposition.
Ansett is jointly owned by News Corp Ltd and Air New Zealand Ltd.
Both Qantas and Ansett also face lower yields as they cut air fares on the Japan route to entice holidaymakers down-under.
"We have to arrest the decline as soon as we identify it, because it might be even worse next year and then we are in trouble," said Col Hughes, Qantas' group general manager Pacific and Japan.
Hughes said the decline in Japanese market share is serious for the A$14-billion Australian tourism industry.
"Our share of the Japanese market has fallen 0.5 of a percentage point over the past eight months, so our share of a growing market is falling and that is not good news to have a decline in a market share, because once you have a decline it could have further ramifications," Hughes told Reuters.
Hughes said Australia is losing its share of the Japanese tourist market to Europe and the United States, in particular Hawaii.
He added these markets have raised their promotion budgets to attract Japanese tourists, while Australia was cutting its marketing budget.
The Australian government plans to cut 25 percent of the budget for the industry's top body, the Australian Tourism Commission (ATC).
Fellow Australian airline Ansett Airlines Ltd sees raising capacity on the Japan route as a way to tourist numbers, said Ansett's general manager of international services, Craig Wallace.
"There has been a great expansion of capacity on the European route (from Japan)," Wallace told Reuters.
"What I would like to see is an increase in our (Ansett) capacity, so we can fly daily to Japan, which would create more flexibility with tour operators and may stimulate demand."
Ansett, which started its international operations in September 1994 with its inaugural flight to Osaka, has five flights a week to Japan's second largest city.
Aviation analysts said the entry of Ansett into the Japan market has put more pressure on Qantas' Japanese routes.
"Qantas is hurting as there is more competition on the Japanese route, with Ansett coming in and airfares going down, said Peter Harbison, managing director of aviation consultants Centre for Asia-Pacific Aviation.
Qantas said in August that results from its Japan routes had weakened in the six months to June 1996.
Revenue from the Japanese route fell to A$742.1 million in the year to June 30, 1996, compared with A$797.3 million a year earlier, but the route still generated the most revenue of Qantas' overseas routes. Qantas also flies to the UK and Europe, southeast Asia, northeast Asia and the U.S. and the Pacific.
However, the number of Japanese tourists coming to Australia is still projected to grow, albeit at a slower rate.
The Australian government's Tourism Forecasting Council predicts that 849,000 Japanese tourists will come to Australia in 1996, up from 783,000 in 1995, and this is expected to grow to 923,000 in 1997.
The number of tourists from the rest of Asia, excluding Japan, is forecast to grow to 1.32 million in 1996, from 1.12 million in 1995, and to grow further to 1.53 million in 1997.
"The market is still growing, but it's just not as fast as some people would like it," Harbison said.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Australian government-owned airport operator Federal Airports Corp (FAC) sees some life after the planned privatisation of its 22 airports, chief executive officer Barry Murphy said.
"We will eventually go out of existence if all 22 airports that we currently own and operate are eventually disposed of to other owners," Murphy told Reuters in a telephone interview.
"One thing we do hope will survive is our service group called the FAC Airport Consultancy, which we are trying to build into a viable business for the long run," Murphy said.
Murphy said FAC Airport Consultancy would be a group of 20 or 30 people, with specialist knowledge of the aviation industry and property management.
"We hope to sell those services at arm's length to the remaining airports and to new airport owners," Murphy said.
The Australian government has 10 consortiums shortlisted for bidding in its first sale phase which consists of 50-year leases for Melbourne, Brisbane and Perth airports. These are expected to sold in early 1997.
The sale of Adelaide lease was supposed to be part of the first phase, but was delayed for an upgrade.
The remaining 18 airports, including Sydney and the yet-to-be-built second airport at Sydney, will be sold in one or more future tranches.
"By the year 2000 I would imagine that they would have all gone with the possible exception of Sydney, if that is held back because of the Olympics," Murphy said.
Sydney will host the 2000 Olympics Games.
Murphy said the sale timetable was uncertain and the whole process was quite unsettling for FAC staff, as one of the major problems for the corporation was staff leaving to join the various consortiums.
Former FAC chief executive Jack Moffatt is the acting chief executive of Australian Airports Ltd, a consortium bidding for Brisbane, Melbourne and Perth.
In late November, FAC reported a 14.5 percent rise in net profit to A$78.1 million in the year to June 30, 1996 on a 14.6-percent rise in revenue to A$579.3 million, while passenger volume at the airports grew 7.3 percent.
"Passenger growth seems to be holding up quite well and we are expecting a continuing strong performance in that area...and we are hopeful that kind of growth rate will continue," Murphy said.
"We are confident that revenue growth would follow similar growth."
Murphy said the FAC would try to minimise capital expenditure ahead of its privatisation, although Sydney airport may need to be upgraded. "We do expect significant work at Sydney to cater for terminal growth within in the two years."
Sydney is Australia's busiest airport.
Murphy said the FAC had been in talks with freight operators with a view to expand freight facilities at some of Australias airports.
"It is apparent now that freight is attracting more interest," Murphy said. However, he added any expansion of freight facilities was unlikely to involve major sums of money.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Sydney Harbour Casino Holdings Ltd said on Wednesday it wanted to grab a slice of the lucrative Asian high-roller market but first had to win a tax break from the state government.
The company holds a 12-year licence to operate the only legal casino in Australia's largest city but has battled with the New South Wales (NSW) government for the past 15 months to receive the same tax concession that its interstate rivals have.
"I am hopeful, but I can't say anything concrete at this stage," chief executive officer Neil Gamble told Reuters in an interview. The Sydney casino is 26.3 percent owned by U.S. casino operator Showboat Inc.
(Corrects to add Gamble's first name and title)
Without the 10 percent tax concession on winnings made by the high-rollers, the Sydney casino could only watch as rich Asian customers headed to casinos in Melbourne, Perth and on the Gold Coast, Gamble said.
"As far as the high-rollers are concerned it makes us totally uncompetitive." Gamble said the high-rollers also required other incentives to be lured to Sydney.
"The professional gamblers would have about A$100,000 (US$80,000) to spend on a weekend, some would go up to A$2 million or A$3 million, some go up to tens of millions of dollars, but that is rare."
If the Sydney casino could have its big gamblers tax reduced from more than 27 percent at the moment, it would then open a network of marketing offices around Asia, he said, adding to its representation in Hong Kong and Singapore.
So far its revenue from high rollers is negligible as 90 percent of the 12,000 people that visit the casino daily are considered locals.
The Sydney casino currently operates out of temporary premises but plans to open a A$1 billion permanent casino late next year, with 1,500 gaming machines and 200 gaming tables, a hotel and two theatres.
The casino has posted a string of disappointing results since it opened its doors in September 1995, with Gamble largely attributing this to over-optimistic forecasts in the prospectus.
"I think the prospectus forecast was too bullish," Gamble said "I don't think that was a failure of mangement to achieve I think it was an over estimate of reality by any comparsion with other parts of this industry."
The casino floated on the local bourse in June 1995 and forecast an operating profit after tax of A$37 million for the 1995/96 year. It reported an actual net loss of A$4.68 million in the financial year to June 30, 1996.
The recent sell down by international financier and founding shareholder George Soros was not a vote of no-confidence in the group, Gamble said. Soros now has under five percent down from 9.8 percent at the time of the float.
Since Soros sold down his stake in mid-November, Sydney casino shares have fallen eight percent. Sydney Harbour Casino shares closed steady at A$1.78 on Tuesday.
(A$1 = US$0.80 cents)
Sydney Harbour Casino Holdings Ltd, which has posted a string of disappointing results since it listed in June 1995, was too optimistic in its prospectus, chief executive officer Neil Gamble said on Tuesday.
"I think the prospectus forecast was too bullish," Gamble told Reuters in an interview. "I don't think that was a failure of management to achieve, I think it was an over-estimate of reality by any comparsion with other parts of this industry."  
The company is 26.3 percent owned by U.S. casino operator Showboat Inc and holds a 12-year monopoly to operate the only legal casino in Australia's largest city.
It forecast an operating profit after tax of A$37 million for 1995/96 but reported an actual net loss of A$4.68 million in the year to June 30, 1996.
The casino, which opened a temporary site in September 1995 and plans to open a permanent casino late 1997, changed its balance date to December 31 from June 30 earlier this year.
Gamble said the casino was recording a slow and steady improvement in results, but would not give any forecasts.  
In October, the Sydney casino said it expected the December quarter profit to be higher than the September quarter.
"Basically we are building the business and there is not a exponential increase, there is a slow steady improvement in the results each month as we go along," Gamble said
"We think that the actual threshold leaps will start during the first and second quarter of next year," he said.
Gamble said the casino had expected the recent sell down by international financier and founding shareholder George Soros and was not a vote of no-confidence in the group.  
But investors have taken a contrary view, with the share price falling eight percent since Soros sold down his stake in mid-November.
Gamble said he met with George Soros representative on the Sydney casino board Steven Gilbert, who had said that Soros was a trader and would sell out from time to time. Soros now has less than five percent from a high of 9.8 percent at the time of the float.  
"He sold 25 percent of his holding, which is very prudent and was totally expected on our part, he still owns 30 million shares, which is very sizeable and he is still very much involved with the company," Gamble said.
He said the largest shareholder, Showboat, had no plans to sell its stake, despite frequent rumours about a takeover for either the Sydney casino operator or its parent.
"If the price is right, Showboat could sell, but I don't see any sign of that at this point in time," said Gamble, who joined joined the casino in October.  
"If an operator wanted to take over the casino, they would have to take over the management contract and if that were to happen Showboat is the gatekeeper," said Gamble, the former chief executive officer of Australis Media Ltd.
Showboat has the management contract to operate the Sydney casino. Australian newspapers have speculated that the nation's richest man and biggest gambler Kerry Packer was keen on buying the Sydney casino or Showboat.
"The rumour about Packer came around the time I joined. That has dissipated now, but that will probably come around another time," Gamble said.  
Packer lost to the Showboat-Leighton Holdings Ltd consortium in 1994 for the Sydney casino licence.
Gamble said the casino's plans to list on the NASDAQ exchange in the United States was still going to plan and would be listed by April 1997.
"That is progressing satisfactorily, we have had a lot of other priorities on and we expect during the first quarter of calendar 1997 to compete that ADR listing on NASDAQ," he said.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Sydney Harbour Casino Holdings Ltd chief executive officer Neil Gamble said on Tuesday he was still hopeful the casino would receive tax concessions on earnings from big-betting foreign gamblers, despite previous knock-backs.
The casino operator, which holds a 12-year monopoly to operate the only legal casino in Australia's largest city, has battled with the New South Wales state government for the past 15 months to get a similar tax rate to other Australian casinos.
"I am hopeful, but I can't say anything concrete at this stage," Gamble told Reuters in an interview.  
Gamble, appointed to his current position in mid-October after leaving struggling pay television operator Australis Media Ltd, said he had held talks with NSW state premier Bob Carr, who planned to make a decision early 1997.
He said that without the 10 percent tax rate concession it wanted from the government, the Sydney casino was unable to compete in the high-roller market with rival casino operators Crown Ltd, Jupiters Ltd and Burswood.
"As far as the high-rollers are concerned it makes us totally uncompetitive," Gamble said. He added the high-rollers require incentives to be brought into play at a casino.  
"The professional gamblers would have about A$100,000 to spend on a weekend, some would go up to A$2 million or A$3 million, some go up to tens of millions of dollars, but that is rare," the South African-born executive said.
Gamble said the high-roller market was worth about A$200 million to Australian casinos with Sydney's share about A$100 million and A$10 million to the casino's bottom-line profit.
Australia's share of the worldwide high-roller market could potentially be worth about A$300 million, Gamble said.
But he added this would be dependent on Sydney getting the tax concessions its desires.  
If the Sydney casino was to get the go-ahead from the NSW government to lower the tax rate from the current rate of around 27 percent, it would open up a string of marketing offices around Asia to attract high-rollers to its casino, he said.
The Sydney casino currently has marketing offices in Hong Kong and Singapore. But so far the casino's revenue from high rollers is negligible, as 90 percent of the 12,000 people that visit the casino daily are considered locals, Gamble said.
The rest of the casino's patrons are tourists, but Gamble said this part of the market would grow once the A$1 billion permanent casino opens in late 1997.  
The permanent casino would be complete with 350 hotel rooms, 140 serviced apartments, lyric and showroom theatres.
Gamble said the Sydney casino was not in a saturated market. Last week international ratings agency Standard and Poor's said the local casino industry had reached saturation point.
"We are sitting here with a 12-year monopoly in a city of 3.5 million people. With two million tourists a year I don't see it as a particular issue for us," Gamble said.  
Gamble said it was too early for him to comment on whether the Australian gaming industry would have a debt profile similar to that of the U.S. gaming industry, where 80 percent of the gaming company ratings fall within the 'BB' and 'B' category.
U.S.-based Showboat Inc  owns 26.3 percent of Sydney Harbour Casino and has a contract to run the casino, which is located on the outskirts of Sydney's central business district.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
U.S.-owned express freight carrier United Parcel Service (UPS) could start flying its own planes to Australia if growth in the Australian market continued at the current rate, a senior company official said on Friday.
UPS, which started serving Australia in 1991, currently uses commercial airlines to carry packages in and out of the country, UPS general manager Australia Terry Hales said in an interview.
"If things continue the way they are I could see very quickly the realisation of that ...", Hales said.
"It is certainly not beyond the terms of possibility at all. I would say that we have a plan that it would happen in the next five years," he said.
UPS does not use its own planes, which currently total 300 worldwide, to fly to Australia as there was not enough export business from Australia, he said.
"We don't fly planes into Australia. The market is not yet large enough to warrant bringing in an airplane every day full up and then turn them around and fly them back," Hales said.
"We have no problems filling them up coming in. Going out is another matter on a regular basis," he said.
Hales said Australia imports four times as much air freight as it exports. However, he said UPS projects large export growth, albeit from a low base in Australia.
"Our volume of revenue forecasts are in the region of 34 percent (growth) in calendar 1997," he said.
The import business is seen growing at a more modest pace.
"We still feel fairly bullish that we will still grow in the (import) market, probably seven or eight percent which is reasonable for the business," he said.
UPS uses Australia as a service centre rather than a hub for the Asia Pacific. Hales said UPS was spending US$400 million on its Asia Pacific hub terminal in Taiwan, which was chosen due to its proximity to other Asian nations and the United States.
"When you sit down and work out the best location to service the customers, in our case we came out with Taiwan as the best location for the Asia Pacific," Hales said.
However, he did not rule out Australia becoming an Asian Pacific hub in the future.
UPS currently uses Honolulu as a connection point for freight bound for Australia.
Cargo is transferred to a Qantas Airways Ltd flight to carry it the rest of the way to Australia.
But this could change in the future if growth continued at the current pace, Hales said.
Atlanta-based UPS is privately owned.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
The aggressive cost cutting programmes planned by Australia's two major airlines Qantas Airways Ltd and Ansett Airlines Ltd can be achieved without affecting services, analysts said.
Both Qantas and Ansett face pressure on profits because of the stronger Australia dollar, higher fuel prices, a soft domestic market and competition in the international market.
"Australian airlines are seen as high cost operators compared with the rest of world," said Peter Harbison, managing director of the Centre for Asia Pacific Aviation consultancy service.
"So I suppose there is scope there to reduce the cost base," Harbison told Reuters.
Qantas, which is 25 percent owned by British Airways Plc, announced at its annual meeting last month that it will increase its cost cutting programme by about A$100 million for the 1996/97 year on the previous target of A$330 million.
Ansett, which is a joint venture between News Corp Ltd and Air New Zealand Ltd, said three months earlier that it plans to cut A$150 million from its annual cost base of A$3 billion.
"They will have to reduce their costs along with every other airline in the world and that will continue to happen for some time," Harbison said.
Investors are focusing on Qantas, which is cutting costs more aggressively so that it can meet profit estimates.
Qantas has said it aims to cut costs right across the airline, without specifying particular areas.
Analysts said Qantas will have plenty of scope to cut costs, using its alliance with major shareholder British Airways to share facilities.
"They have got a lot of inefficiences, they can outsource some of their engineering and maintenance," said Greg Ward, aviation analyst at First Pacific Stockbroking.
Analysts said the Australian flag carrier will also cut costs in areas where it is not so noticeable to customers, such as in the accounts and marketing and sales departments.
"It's the tail that Qantas will hack into, Qantas will not hack into the sharp end," said David Turner, analyst at Shaw Stockbroking, referring to accounts and sales areas as the tail, while the sharp end was the flight services.
He said Qantas is very competitive with other world airlines in terms of its pilot performance and aircraft ultilisation, so there is little change seen in those areas.
Analysts said Qantas has to focus on cutting costs in order to grow profits and release funds for the expansion of services and purchase of new aircraft.
"They haven't got the capacity to go out and buy planes and fill them up and fly hundreds more routes so the focus is on improving their balance sheet and generating more profits to do that," one Melbourne-based aviation analyst said.
However, analysts said both Qantas and Ansett run a risk in cutting costs as it may affect staff morale, which in turn affects customer service and in turn customer loyality.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
The Australian Stock Exchange's transport sector is likely to see more modest gains over the next year after a sharp rise over the past year, analysts said.
The transport index has risen about 30 percent during 1996, while the broader market has increased six percent this year.
"Brambles and Mayne's have had a extraordinary run over the last eight to 10 months, and the impression of the market is that they have reached their short term value," said Paul Xavier transport analyst at BNP Equities.
Over half of the transport sector is made up by Brambles Industries Ltd and Mayne Nickless Ltd.
"In the last 12 months the sector has outperformed quite significantly," Pru-Bache Securities transport analyst Andrew Mullholland said.
It is outperforming because of a lot of stock specific issues," Mulholland said.
"You look at Mayne - it's because of Optus and healthcare and if you look at Brambles it's all to do with a turnaround in earnings," he said.
"If you look at TNT it is all to do with the bid," he said.
TNT Ltd, which was seen as a laggard among the majors, has been taken over by Dutch post and telcoms group PTT Nederland NV through its A$2 billion bid.
Mayne Nickless plans to sell its 25 percent stake in Optus Communications through the planned float of the telecommunications group in 1997, raising around A$1.0 billion.
Analysts said the Qantas Airways Ltd share price has underperformed the transport sector, with the stock trading for most of 1996 below its A$2.26 price at the start of January.
"If you look at Qantas they have underperformed, but they represent good value at these levels," Mullholland said.
Qantas shares are currently trading just above the A$2.00 price institutional investors paid for the shares in the airline's float in mid-1995.
However, analysts said that given the diverse operations of Mayne Nickless and Brambles the transport index is no longer seen as by investors as a leading indicator of economic activity and so not much attention is paid to the movement of the index.
"I have always seen the transport index as a bit of a misnomer, it is kind of a diversified hybrid," Pru-Bache's Mullholland said.
If investors want pure exposure to the domestic transport sector they would have to look at medium sized groups Finemores Holdings Ltd, Scott Corp Ltd and Toll Holdings Ltd, analysts said.
"If you want to be in transport in Australia, you are better off looking at the medium sized players not the big players," one Melbourne-based transport analyst said.
Analysts said that although transport companies represent some leverage to a slower growing Australian economy. But this leverage is limited as much the economic growth is seen in the service sector and not traded goods, which use transport.
"Economy growth is seen in telecommunications, media and entertainment and hardly any growth in the traded sector and that limited growth in the traded goods sector means that there isn't that much growth in the transport side," one analyst said.
Analysts said in the future the transport sector may start to represent more of a transport infrastructure index as Australian government's are expected to privatise airports, railways and shipping ports over the next few years.
The Australian government is expected to complete the first phase of its airport privatisation programme in the first half of 1997 with the sale of Melbourne, Brisbane and Perth airports.
The aggressive cost cutting programmes planned by Australia's two major airlines Qantas Airways Ltd and Ansett Airlines Ltd can be achieved without affecting services, analysts said.
Both Qantas and Ansett face pressure on profits because of the stronger Australia dollar, higher fuel prices, a soft domestic market and competition in the international market.  
"Australian airlines are seen as high cost operators compared with the rest of world," said Peter Harbison, managing director of the Centre for Asia Pacific Aviation consultancy service.
"So I suppose there is scope there to reduce the cost base," Harbison told Reuters.
Qantas, which is 25 percent owned by British Airways Plc, announced at its annual meeting last month that it will increase its cost cutting programme by about A$100 million for the 1996/97 year on the previous target of A$330 million.  
Ansett, which is a joint venture between News Corp Ltd and Air New Zealand Ltd, said three months earlier that it plans to cut A$150 million from its annual cost base of A$3 billion.
"They will have to reduce their costs along with every other airline in the world and that will continue to happen for some time," Harbison said.
Investors are focusing on Qantas, which is cutting costs more aggressively so that it can meet profit estimates.
Qantas aims to cut costs across the board but has not revealed specific areas.  
Analysts said Qantas will have plenty of scope to cut costs, using its alliance with BA to share facilities.
"They have got a lot of inefficiences, they can outsource some of their engineering and maintenance," said Greg Ward, aviation analyst at First Pacific Stockbroking.
Analysts said the Australian flag carrier will also cut costs in areas where it is not so noticeable to customers, such as in the accounts, and marketing and sales departments.  
"It's the tail that Qantas will hack into, Qantas will not hack into the sharp end," said David Turner, analyst at Shaw Stockbroking, referring to accounts and sales areas as the tail, with the sharp end being flight services.
He said Qantas is very competitive with other world airlines in terms of pilot performance and aircraft ultilisation, so there is little change seen in those areas.
Analysts said Qantas has to focus on cutting costs in order to grow profits and release funds for the expansion of services and purchase of new aircraft.  
"They haven't got the capacity to go out and buy planes and fill them up and fly hundreds more routes so the focus is on improving their balance sheet and generating more profits to do that," one Melbourne-based aviation analyst said.
However, analysts said both Qantas and Ansett run a risk in cutting costs as it may affect staff morale, which in turn affects customer service and in turn customer loyality.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
The Australian Stock Exchange's transport sector is likely to see more modest gains over the next year after a sharp rise over the past year, analysts said.
The transport index has risen about 30 percent during 1996, while the broader market has increased six percent this year.
"Brambles and Mayne's have had an extraordinary run over the last eight to 10 months, and the impression of the market is that they have reached their short term value," said Paul Xavier, transport analyst at BNP Equities.  
More than half of the sector is made up by Brambles Industries Ltd and Mayne Nickless Ltd.
"In the last 12 months the sector has outperformed quite significantly," Pru-Bache Securities transport analyst Andrew Mullholland said.
"It is outperforming because of a lot of stock specific issues," Mulholland said.
"You look at Mayne - it's because of Optus and healthcare and if you look at Brambles it's all to do with a turnaround in earnings," he said.
"If you look at TNT it is all to do with the bid," he said.  
TNT Ltd, which was seen as a laggard among the majors, has been taken over by Dutch post and telecoms group Koninklijke PTT Nederland NV through its friendly A$2 billion bid.
Mayne Nickless plans to sell its 25 percent stake in Optus Communications through the planned float of the telecommunications group in 1997, raising around A$1.0 billion.
Analysts said Qantas Airways Ltd's share price has underperformed the transport sector, with the stock trading for most of 1996 below its A$2.26 price at the start of January.  
"If you look at Qantas they have underperformed, but they represent good value at these levels," Mullholland said.
Qantas shares are currently trading just above the A$2.00 price institutional investors paid for the shares in the mid-1995 price.
However, analysts said that given the diverse operations of Mayne Nickless and Brambles the transport index is no longer seen by investors as a leading indicator of economic activity and therefore less attention is paid to the index.  
"I have always seen the transport index as a bit of a misnomer, it is kind of a diversified hybrid," Pru-Bache's Mullholland said.
If investors want pure exposure to the domestic transport sector they would have to look at medium sized groups Finemores Holdings Ltd, Scott Corp Ltd and Toll Holdings Ltd, analysts said.
"If you want to be in transport in Australia, you are better off looking at the medium sized players not the big players," one Melbourne-based analyst said.  
Analysts said transport companies represent some leverage to a slower growing Australian economy. But this leverage is limited as much as the economic growth is seen in the service sector and not traded goods, which use transport.
"Economy growth is seen in telecommunications, media and entertainment and hardly any growth in the traded sector and that limited growth in the traded goods sector means that there isn't that much growth in the transport side," one analyst said.  
Analysts said in the future the transport sector may start to represent more of a transport infrastructure index as Australia's federal and state governments are expected to privatise airports, railways and shipping ports over the next few years.
The Australian government is expected to complete the first phase of its airport privatisation programme in the first half of 1997 with the sale of Melbourne, Brisbane and Perth airports.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
British Airways Plc (BA) said on Tuesday that it had no plans for new alliances over the next few years, but would extend its global reach by franchising its popular brand name to smaller airlines.
British Airways has an alliance with Australian carrier Qantas Airways Ltd and formed an alliance with American Airlines in June, although this is subject to regulatory approvals and a legal suit by USAir Group, in which BA holds 24.6 percent.
"One of the great challenges of alliance development is the management challenge and I think it would be unwise to take on any more than we can absorb at any one time," BA chief executive Robert Ayling said at an industry luncheon in Sydney.
Reports that BA would look to an alliance with a Japanese airline, notably Japan Airlines, were quashed by Ayling in a speech to the National Aviation Press Club in Sydney.
"I think the Japanese airline industry is an independent industry and I think it will remain a strongly independent industry. If there are opportunities in the future for developing relationships there with other carriers then obviously we will do that," Ayling said.  
However, Ayling said the airline's four-year experiment with franchising its brand name to smaller airlines was successful and would be an area of future growth, providing safety and customer service standards were met.
"It is a way of bringing extended services to customers and of allowing operators of smaller airlines, who would have found it very difficult to survive in this world of global networks, to be more successful," Ayling said.
In June, BA signed its first franchise agreement outside of the European Union with South Africa's largest independent carrier, Comair. Under the deal Comair's eight-jet fleet will use the British Airways name and livery.
Under the existing rules it would have been impossible to acquire or invest more than 50 percent in an airline in South Africa, said Ayling. "South Africa is a part of the world which would not be open to us if we didn't have this deal," he said.
Ayling is visiting Australia to look at the operations of BA's 25 percent stake in Qantas, the national carrier.
Under the alliances with American Airlines and Qantas, BA and its partners fly to over 500 destinations in about 100 countries. Ayling said BA's global alliance could lead to opportunities in other parts of the world.  
"We may see, although this may be some way off, fleet acquisition opportunities, which would make a significant impact on procurement of aircraft," said Ayling.
"Once these agreements are put in place and they are being effectively managed, we will be able to see some things we are not able to see at the moment," he said.
Two weeks ago, BA reported an 11.1 percent rise in first quarter profits to 150 million sterling (US$231 million) on sales of 2.103 billion sterling. It forecast another record year in the year to March 1997.
Corporate Australia is likely to continue its thirst for takeovers in 1997 with banks, media and resources tipped to feature prominently.
Brokers estimate there were about A$8.5 billion ($6.8 billion) worth of takeovers and share buy-backs in 1996, up from A$5.9 billion in 1995 and A$2.0 billion in 1994. Takeovers and share buy-backs are both seen as ways to boost growth in earnings per share.
The biggest deal this year was the A$2.0 billion agreed takeover of freight transporter TNT Ltd by Dutch postal and telecoms group Koninklijke PTT Nederland NV.
"Almost across the board there is rationalisation and international interest in our industries," said Chris Mackay, executive director at broker SBC Warburg.
SLOWING AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY SPURS RATIONALISATION
Analysts said Australia's low inflation and low economic growth prospects also made conditions ripe for takeovers.
"With low levels of inflation, companies have difficulty pushing through cost increases, so they have got to look for efficencies in order to increase profitability and to do that, some companies acquire others," said Merv Peacock, the Australian Mutual Provident Society's head of marketable securities.
Profits have been falling across the board for the past 18 months, with industrials hit by the slowing economy and resource companies severely affected by lower commodity prices.
GOLD TO SHINE IN RESOURCE TAKEOVER ACTIVITY
"Gold is an area where we could see a lot of takeover activity," said Craig Drummond from leading broker J.B. Were &amp; Son. "The gold valuations have fallen a long way this year," he told Reuters.
The Australian gold index is currently 22 percent down from its 1996 high in February, while the broader market has risen six percent over the same period.
"The scope still exists for both domestic takeovers and in particular foreign takeovers of Australian gold assets," Drummond said.
The Australian gold sector was one of the most active sectors during 1996. The largest takeover in this group was the A$3.0 billion merger among the Normandy Mining Ltd group of companies.
Foreign gold miners were also keen to snare Australian gold producers in 1996, a trend which analysts say will continue next year.
Last month, Canadian gold mining giant Placer Dome Inc unveiled a US$600 million plan to buy the rest of its local offshoot Placer Pacific Ltd and Papua New Guinea Highlands Gold Ltd.
Australian gold analysts said other North American gold miners keen on expanding their presence in the region are Battle Mountain Inc and Coeur d'Alene Corp.
However the rest of the resource sector is unlikely to see much takeover activity in 1997.
"There is not a lot left in the oil sector and in the base metals sector there are few options so it's primarily the gold sector where there is going to be more activity," Drummond said.
Australian oil assets were vigorously snapped up in 1996 by overseas predators. The biggest deal was the Mobil Corp's A$1.78 billion purchase of Ampolex Ltd.
INDUSTRY INQUIRIES MAY SPARK MORE TAKEOVERS
The Australian government is holding inquiries into the media and banking industries, with analysts tipping banking as the more probable of the two sectors to see merger activity.
The Wallis inquiry into Australia's financial system, which is looking at the possibility of a relaxation of rules that stop big bank mergers and takeovers by foreign banks, is due to hand down its recommendations in March 1997.
There have already been several regional bank takeovers in 1996, but the outcome of the largest deal -- the A$2.65 billion friendly bid by St George Bank Ltd for fellow Sydney-based Advance Bank Australia Ltd -- will be known early next year.
The Liberal-National government, elected in March, has ordered a review of media ownership laws which currently limits cross ownership of newspapers and television.
But the review is not examining foreign ownership rules, which could limit any expansion plans Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd has pencilled in for Australia. Upmarket newspaper publisher John Fairfax Holdings Ltd remains the most likely target in this sector -- with Kerry Packer already holding a sizeable stake.
"In relation to media and banks, subject to the conclusion of the respective inquiries, there could well be more activity in those two sectors," SBC Warburg's Mackay said.
But some analysts said any liberalisation of the banking sector could find opposition from the anti-monopolies watchdog -- the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC).
($1 = 0.7960)
Corporate Australia is likely to continue its thirst for takeovers in 1997 with banks, media and resources tipped to feature prominently.
Brokers estimate there were about A$8.5 billion ($6.8 billion) worth of takeovers and share buy-backs in 1996, up from A$5.9 billion in 1995 and A$2.0 billion in 1994. Takeovers and share buy-backs are both seen as ways to boost growth in earnings per share.
The biggest deal this year was the A$2.0 billion agreed takeover of freight transporter TNT Ltd by Dutch postal and telecoms group Koninklijke PTT Nederland NV.
"Almost across the board there is rationalisation and international interest in our industries," said Chris Mackay, executive director at broker SBC Warburg.
SLOWING AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY SPURS RATIONALISATION
Analysts said Australia's low inflation and low economic growth prospects also made conditions ripe for takeovers.
"With low levels of inflation, companies have difficulty pushing through cost increases, so they have got to look for efficencies in order to increase profitability and to do that, some companies acquire others," said Merv Peacock, the Australian Mutual Provident Society's head of marketable securities.
Profits have been falling across the board for the past 18 months, with industrials hit by the slowing economy and resource companies severely affected by lower commodity prices.
GOLD TO SHINE IN RESOURCE TAKEOVER ACTIVITY
"Gold is an area where we could see a lot of takeover activity," said Craig Drummond from leading broker J.B. Were &amp; Son. "The gold valuations have fallen a long way this year," he told Reuters.
The Australian gold index is currently 22 percent down from its 1996 high in February, while the broader market has risen six percent over the same period.
"The scope still exists for both domestic takeovers and in particular foreign takeovers of Australian gold assets," Drummond said.
The Australian gold sector was one of the most active sectors during 1996. The largest takeover in this group was the A$3.0 billion merger among the Normandy Mining Ltd group of companies.
Foreign gold miners were also keen to snare Australian gold producers in 1996, a trend which analysts say will continue next year.
Last month, Canadian gold mining giant Placer Dome Inc unveiled a US$600 million plan to buy the rest of its local offshoot Placer Pacific Ltd and Papua New Guinea Highlands Gold Ltd.
Australian gold analysts said other North American gold miners keen on expanding their presence in the region are Battle Mountain Inc and Coeur d'Alene Corp.
INDUSTRY INQUIRIES MAY SPARK MORE TAKEOVERS
The Australian government is holding inquiries into the media and banking industries, with analysts tipping banking as the more probable of the two sectors to see merger activity.
The Wallis inquiry into Australia's financial system, which is looking at the possibility of a relaxation of rules that stop big bank mergers and takeovers by foreign banks, is due to hand down its recommendations in March 1997.
There have already been several regional bank takeovers in 1996, but the outcome of the largest deal -- the A$2.65 billion friendly bid by St George Bank Ltd for fellow Sydney-based Advance Bank Australia Ltd -- will be known early next year.
The Liberal-National government, elected in March, has ordered a review of media ownership laws which currently limits cross ownership of newspapers and television.
But the review is not examining foreign ownership rules, which could limit any expansion plans Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd has pencilled in for Australia. Upmarket newspaper publisher John Fairfax Holdings Ltd remains the most likely target in this sector -- with Kerry Packer already holding a sizeable stake.
"In relation to media and banks, subject to the conclusion of the respective inquiries, there could well be more activity in those two sectors," SBC Warburg's Mackay said. ($1 = 0.7960)
Canadian gold giant Placer Dome Inc on Tuesday agreed to a deal with Papua New Guinean (PNG) miner Highlands Gold Ltd that gives Placer control of the vast PNG Porgera gold mine and ends a bitter feud between the two miners.
The deal also keeps the Highlands group as a listed company free to develop base metal and gold projects in the resource rich South Pacific nation.
Under the complex plan the Vancouver-based miner would pay Highlands A$316.1 million (US$249.7 million) to buy Highlands' 25 percent stake in the Porgera mine, which is estimated to have produced 850,000 ounces of gold in calendar 1996.
Placer had previously offered Highlands A$276.8 million for its Porgera stake after building up a 40-percent stake in Highlands through a hostile takeover bid.
"We are pleased that Placer has accepted our offer," Highlands managing director Ian Goddard said in a statement.
The restructuring plan involves all shares in Highlands other than those held by Placer being cancelled and holders receiving a capital return of 65 cents cash per share and one share in Highlands Pacific.
"It's good for Placer Dome because it gets what it really wanted, it's good for Highlands shareholders because they get more than 75 cents, they get 65 cents cash plus they have the share in the new company," one source close to the deal said.
Highlands will spin-off a new company, Highlands Pacific Ltd, which would hold the Ramu nickel/cobalt and Frieda-Nena copper/gold projects as well as its exploration porfolio in PNG and Indonesia.
"There has been strong institutional interest in our proposal, which unlocks the value of Ramu, Frieda-Nena and Highlands' extensive exploration interests," Goddard said.
Under the restructure of the Highlands group about A$160 million would be raised through a mixture of new equity and the planned sale by Placer Dome of the shareholding it would inherit in Highlands Pacific.
The new equity issue in Highlands Pacific would be at 30 cents per share, Highlands Gold said. The newly-formed company would have a market capitalisation of about A$250 million when it lists on the Australian Stock Exchange in March.
Placer Dome already has effective control over the 25 percent stake in Porgera through its Australian offshoot Placer Pacific Ltd, which the Canadian miner plans to buy-out the remaining 24.6 percent stake in the Australian miner.
Placer Dome's orginal bid of 75 cents per Highlands share launched on November 28, 1996 was rejected by the PNG miner, which valued Highlands at A$423 million. Highlands had also threaten Placer with court action over its initial bid.
Investors welcomed the new deal.
In early afternoon trade Highlands shares were two cents up at 81 cents on active trade of about 14 million. While fellow Porgera partner Orogen Minerals Ltd touched a record high of A$3.05 on the news. Orogen holds 15 percent of Porgera.
(A$=US$0.7900)
Canadian gold giant Placer Dome Inc on Tuesday agreed to a deal with Papua New Guinean (PNG) miner Highlands Gold Ltd that gives Placer control of the giant PNG Porgera gold mine and ends a bitter feud between the two miners.
The deal also keeps the Highlands group as a listed company free to develop base metal and gold projects in the resource rich South Pacific nation.
Under the complex plan the Vancouver-based miner would pay Highlands A$316.1 million (US$249.7 million) to buy Highlands' 25 percent stake in the Porgera mine, which is estimated to have produced 850,000 ounces of gold in calendar 1996.
Placer had previously offered Highlands A$276.8 million for its Porgera stake after building up a 40-percent stake in Highlands through a hostile takeover bid.
"We are pleased that Placer has accepted our offer," Highlands managing director Ian Goddard said in a statement.
The restructuring plan involves all shares in Highlands other than those held by Placer being cancelled and holders receiving a capital return of 65 cents cash per share and one share in Highlands Pacific.
"It's good for Placer Dome because it gets what it really wanted, it's good for Highlands shareholders because they get more than 75 cents, they get 65 cents cash plus they have the share in the new company," one source close to the deal said.
Highlands will spin-off a new company, Highlands Pacific Ltd, which would hold the Ramu nickel/cobalt and Frieda-Nena copper/gold projects as well as its exploration porfolio in PNG and Indonesia.
"There has been strong institutional interest in our proposal, which unlocks the value of Ramu, Frieda-Nena and Highlands' extensive exploration interests," Goddard said.
Under the restructure of the Highlands group about A$160 million would be raised through a mixture of new equity and the planned sale by Placer Dome of the shareholding it would inherit in Highlands Pacific.
The new equity issue in Highlands Pacific would be at 30 cents per share, Highlands Gold said. The newly-formed company would have a market capitalisation of about A$250 million when it lists on the Australian Stock Exchange in March.
Placer Dome already has effective control over the 25 percent stake in Porgera through its Australian offshoot Placer Pacific Ltd, which the Canadian miner plans to buy-out the remaining 24.6 percent stake in the Australian miner.
Placer Dome's orginal bid of 75 cents per Highlands share launched on November 28, 1996 was rejected by the PNG miner, which valued Highlands at A$423 million. Highlands had also threaten Placer with court action over its initial bid.
Investors welcomed the new deal.
In early afternoon trade Highlands shares were two cents up at 81 cents on active trade of about 14 million. While fellow Porgera partner Orogen Minerals Ltd touched a record high of A$3.05 on the news. Orogen holds 15 percent of Porgera.
(A$=US$0.7900)
Standard Chartered Plc group chief executive Malcolm Williamson said on Thursday he expected the British-based bank to form more strategic alliances in Asia with U.S. and European banks.
In 1996, Standard formed joint ventures in Asia with Westpac Banking Corp, First Chicago NBD Corp and Massachusetts-based Fleet Financial Services.
"We have another string of deals lined up in Europe and America which we are hoping to execute along similar lines," Williamson told Reuters in a telephone interview.  
The bank will make further annoucements on the planned ventures when it releases its 1996 year results in late February or early March, Williamson said.
Standard has a network of branches throughout Asia and Africa along with offices in London, New York and Sydney.
Williamson said it was difficult for foreign banks to enter Asia as bank licences were hard to get from regulatory bodies.
There was no limit to the amount of ventures Standard could set up with banks that want to enter the Asian market as it could offer the services of its bank partner through the Standard Asian branch network, Williamson said.  
However it was unlikely that Standard would do another deal with an Australian bank which could jeopardise its newly-formed relationship with Westpac, said Williamson, who is on a visit to the bank's Australian operations.
Williamson said Standard was not interested in any equity swap with any banks it forms a strategic alliance with.
"Reports there might be about a share exchange with Westpac would not be relevant to us because we wouldn't want to get into a special relationship with one party when you are trying to deal with many parties in other parts of the world," he said.  
Williamson said Standard was on track to achieve his target set three years ago to double the bank's profit.
He said three years ago the bank made 400 million stg annual profit.
"We made 400 million (stg) in the first six months of this year (1996), so that puts us well on target for reaching our goal," he said.
The bank plans to launch consumer finance operations and credit card services in Asia, where it has had operations since the 1850s, he added. "There is a lot of investment we want to make in order to protect the bank's future," he said.  
The bank had to make more investment into cash management systems and the corporate banking market in Asia, he said.
"We see no surplus of capital in the foreseeable future as we are ploughing so much back into the business," he said.
He said Standard had no plans to exit its African business.
"We make good profits out of Africa and we intend on staying there, because we get a very good return for our shareholders," Williamson said.
He also said the bank was no longer a takeover target as it was in the early 1990s when its share price was languishing.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Australia's biggest gambler Kerry Packer, a patron of Las Vegas casinos, on Monday raised his stakes in the local burgeoning casino industry with the acquisition of management control at Sydney Harbour Casino.
Packer's media group Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd said it would spend A$340 million on a 10 percent stake in Sydney Harbour Casino Holdings Ltd (SHC) and 85 percent of the management contract of the casino from U.S. casino operator Showboat Inc.  
PBL's investment both in the management contract and the shares of SHC would show very attractive financial returns over time, PBL chairman Brian Powers said in a statement.
"This transaction represents a major move into the gaming industry for PBL and provides us with an ideal base from which to build a substantial business in this dynamic industry," Powers said.
"This advances our strategic goal of building a third core business alongside our television and publishing businesses," he said. PBL also has a option over part of Showboat's remaining 16.1 percent stake in SHC.  
Showboat president and chief executive officer Kell Houssels said in the statement the transaction provided an opportunity to realise a superior return on its investment, while maintaining a major ownership position in the Sydney casino.
Packer, Australia's richest man, has sought control of the Sydney casino for the past three years. In 1994 Packer led a consortium to bid for the 12-year Sydney casino licence, but lost out to the Showboat led consortium in December 1994.
Since losing the Sydney casino license bid, Packer interests have launched several legal actions against Showboat for the award of the licence by the New South Wales (NSW) government.  
Packer's punt on SHC shares have already made him a profit as shares in both the casino owner and PBL rose strongly after the deal was announced before Monday's sharemarket open.
In early afternoon trade, SHC shares were at a record high of A$2.27, a 34 cent or 17.61 percent rise in active trade, while PBL shares were 25 cents higher at A$6.35.
The deal was good for both companies as Packer's influence was likely to yield a tax-concession for the casino on the high-roller market, which is seen boosting cash flow for both the casino and PBL, Australian market analysts said.  
SHC owns the only legal casino in Sydney and has battled the New South Wales state government for the past 16 months to get a similar tax rate to other Australian casinos.
"I think Packer will probably get the tax-break from the government," one Sydney-based casino analyst said. "I expect there will be some tax-break announcement this month," he said.
The Sydney casino is seeking a 10 percent tax concession from the state government on big spending gamblers, mainly from Asia, compared with the present tax rate of 27 percent.  
PBL is also expected to end the disappointing run of operating results the casino has reported since it opened a temporary casino in September 1995. The casino is expected to open a A$1.0 billion permanment casino later this year.
Packer also has a 10 percent stake in Melbourne casino operator Crown Ltd and about 20 percent of Hudson Conway Ltd, which in turn owns 37 percent of Crown.
"Given the Packer-Hudson Conway type of relationship it looks like there is a bit more to come out of this one," said Richard Wolf, a casino analyst at Bell Securities.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
