Analysts said on Monday they were expecting UK electronic business information company M.A.I.D Plc to launch new screen-based products that would rival services offered by real-time financial news services.
M.A.I.D declined to comment on a newspaper report that it was working on new online products that would undercut the prices of international news and information group Reuters Holdings Plc and financial news group Bloomberg LP.
The company's executives are on a roadshow in the U.S. for about a week. But a company spokesman said: "We never comment on market speculation regarding product development."
The Sunday Times said M.A.I.D was poised to unveil a screen-based real time news service at sharply lower prices than services from Reuters or Bloomberg. Other products could include transmitting financial data to hand-held devices using mobile-telephone technology, the newspaper added.
Analysts had heard a deal was on the cards between MAID and Finnish group Nokia to start a mobile share price service and expected a similar deal with Psion Plc.
Experts said they had also been waiting for Reuters and MAID to launch more similar, rival services.
"I'm totally unsurprised at the article," said Keith Woolcock, analyst at Merrill Lynch. "MAID and Reuters are going to be competing more in the future. Their products are going to become more similar, I think,"
Reuters Business Briefing, the Reuters service against which MAID is expected to compete, offers mainly online business news and share price data at the moment, whereas about 70 percent of MAID's data is market research information.
But analysts expect soon to be able to set up a customised service on MAID systems so that they are alerted to pre-selected requested headlines as stories appear on MAID's news services.
"I know they have been working on that," noted one analyst who declined to be named. "The big deal is having the alerts built in. The key thing about this is what they are going to charge for it in America...
"If they offer this new alert service for free then it's very hot and will make it very hard for anyone to compete." Analysts expect MAID to tie up a deal with the Financial Times, adding it to French news agency Agence France Presse and U.S. services as well as direct links to other newspapers.
Reuters Business Briefing, meanwhile, is branching out into market research.
Market research group Datamonitor said it has signed a deal with Reuters since ending a similar contract with MAID.
From November no Datamonitor research will be available on MAID anymore, a Datamonitor spokesman said.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7987
Scotland-based hotels and casinos group Stakis on Thursday said it will buy Lonrho Plc's five Metropole hotels, funding the 327 million pound ($530 million) deal with a huge cash call on shareholders.
Stakis, which operates 46 British hotels and 22 casinos -- and whose current market value is only about 472 million pounds -- said it wanted to raise 222 million pounds via a heavyweight four-for-seven rights issue, set at 82 pence per share.
"We've found a reasonable and sensible price for a very good, perhaps unique, product," Stakis chief executive David Michels told a news conference.
Lonrho, which is in the throes of a demerger, said in a separate statement that the disposal would generate net proceeds of 316 million pounds as well as payments of 63 million pounds in dividends and tax relief that it will receive from the chain.
"The proposed sale of Metropole Hotels represents an important step in the separation of Lonrho's mining and non-mining assets...," said Lonrho chairman John Leahy, adding that the firm was continuing to make progress with its demerger.
Last month, Lonrho shelved plans for a 700 million pound flotation of its Metropole and its North American-based Princess luxury resort hotels because of the level of interest it had received from potential buyers.
Saudi billionaire Prince al-Waleed bin Talal has been tipped as the most likely buyer of the 10 five-star Princess hotels. Lonrho expects to announce the sale in about three weeks.
The sale of the hotels, which will be followed by the divestment of the group's African trading operations, is part of Lonrho's plans to turn itself into a focused mining company and ends 30 years of empire building by founder Tiny Rowland.
Stakis had been the front-runner to buy the conglomerate's Metropole chain -- four-star hotels with extensive conference facilities -- since rival Millennium &amp; Copthorne Hotels pulled out of the bidding race earlier this month.
The hotels group said it expected the acquisition to boost earnings from the first year and forecast 1996 group profit before tax and exceptionals would be over 30.6 million pounds.
Stakis also forecast a final dividend of 1.2 pence per share, giving a total payout of 2.15 pence for the full year -- 23 percent more than last year.
The company, which had been in acquisition talks with Lonrho for about 15 months, plans to cut costs at the hotels and boost profits by boosting occupancy -- currently at about 68 percent.
Analysts welcomed the deal. "The numbers stack up. I have no problem with their strategy," said Matthew Nayler, leisure analyst at brokers Williams de Broe.
Analysts estimate that Stakis will have to boost profits at the hotels -- in the cities of London and Birmingham and the seaside resorts of Brighton and Blackpool -- by at least 12 percent for the purchase to be profitable.
In an innovative move by investment bank Schroders that will save Stakis some money on commissions, the bank is arranging a partial tender for sub-underwriting of the rights issue by investment institutions in which sub-underwriters will be allowed to tender at lower commissions for additional sub- underwriting above their initial allocations.
Schroders will then cut the primary underwriting commission charged to Stakis at the same rate as any reduction in total sub-underwriting charges.
"We may lose money but we think change (to commission rates) is inevitable," Schroders' Robert Swannell told reporters.
The market is now awaiting news on Lonrho's sale of the Princess hotels, which include resorts in Acapulco, Mexico, the Caribbean and the U.S.
A Lonrho spokesman said news on this was expected in approximately three weeks.
Financial sources in the Gulf said earlier this month that the Saudi prince had exclusive rights to negotiate a deal and that the price was $300 million. The prince's key western investments include stakes in New York's luxury Plaza hotel, the Four Seasons hotel group, banking group Citicorp and the Disneyland Paris theme park.
($1=.6165 Pound)
Scotish-based hotels and casinos group Stakis Plc launched a huge cash call to fund a 327 million pound ($530 million) acquisition of British conglomerate Lonrho's five Metropole hotels announced on Thursday.
Stakis, which has about 46 British hotels and whose current market value is only about 472 million pounds, said it wanted to raise 222 million pounds via a four-for-seven rights issue, set at 82 pence per share.
Last month, Lonrho shelved plans for a 700 million pound flotation of its Metropole and its North American-based Princess luxury resort hotels because of the level of interest it had received from potential buyers.
Saudi billionaire Prince al-Waleed bin Talal has been tipped as the most likely buyer of the 10 five-star Princess hotels.
Lonrho, which is in the throes of a demerger, said in a separate statement that the disposal would generate net proceeds of 316 million pounds as well as payments of 63 million pounds in dividends and tax relief that it will receive from the chain.
"The proposed sale of Metropole Hotels represents an important step in the separation of Lonrho's mining and non-mining assets...," said Lonrho chairman John Leahy.
"The board of Lonrho continues to make progress with the next steps of the separation process," he added in a statement.
The sale of the hotels, which will be followed by the divestment of the group's African trading operations, is part of Lonrho's plans to turn itself into a focussed mining company and ends 30 years of empire building by founder Tiny Rowland.
Stakis had been the front-runner to buy the conglomerate's Metropole chain -- four-star hotels with extensive conference facilities -- since rival Millennium &amp; Copthorne Hotels  MLC.L pulled out of the bidding race earlier this month.
In a profit forecast, the hotels group said its profit before tax and exceptionals would be not less than 30.6 million pounds in the year to September 30.
Stakis, which said returns on the acquisition were expected to enhance earnings from the first year, also forecast a final dividend of 1.2 pence per share, giving a total payout of 2.15 pence for the full year -- 23 percent more than last year.
Analysts welcomed the deal that helped strengthen Stakis' share price 1.5 pence to 100 pence.
"The numbers stack up. I have no problem with their strategy," said Matthew Nayler, leisure analyst at brokers Williams de Broe.
But some analysts said that Stakis would have to boost profits at the five hotels -- in the cities of London and Birmingham and the seaside resorts of Brighton and Blackpool -- by at least 12 percent for the purchase to be profitable.
Analysts, who have said a sale of the hotels is easier and cleaner than a float amid a glut of companies coming to Britian's market, are now awaiting news on whether Prince al-Waleed has clinched a deal to buy the Princess hotels, which include resorts in Acapulco, Mexico, the Caribbean and the U.S..
Financial sources in the Gulf said earlier this month that the prince had exclusive rights to negotiate a deal and that the price was $300 million. The prince's key western investments include stakes in New York's luxury Plaza hotel, the Four Seasons hotel group, banking group Citicorp and the Disneyland Paris theme park. ($1=.6165 Pound)
British Telecom unveiled the largest merger in Britain's corporate history on Sunday, linking up with MCI Communications, the number two U.S. long-distance phone company, to create a $54 billion group.
Six months after alliance talks failed with BT's British rival Cable and Wireless, BT announced that its deal with MCI, to be called Concert Plc, would create one of the world's largest telecoms groups with 43 million business and residential customers in 70 countries.
BT already owned 20 percent of MCI with which it has created the Concert joint venture, providing a whole range of communications services to customers in more than 50 nations.
"The merger combines the substantial financial resources and global position of BT with the growth momentum and market expertise of MCI, known for its success in the competitive U.S. long distance market," BT said in a statement.
Under the deal, which has yet to be agreed by regulatory authorities on either side of the Atlantic, shareholders in MCI would receive up to $3.8 billion in cash as well as 0.54 new Concert American Depositary Shares for every MCI share held.
Under the proposed deal, BT is paying its shareholders a special dividend bonanza of 35 pence a per share, worth an estimated two billion pounds.
BT did not immediately give figures for the total value of the proposed deal, details of which started leaking into the markets late on Friday.
Analysts expect the deal to be worth about $22 billion.
The new telecoms giant, incorporated in Britain, would have headquarters in London and Washington and operate under the BT and MCI brand names.
BT has been looking for a major acquisition since its proposed merger with British rival Cable and Wireless failed in May. BT had been keen to forge that deal because it would have given it access to the lucrative Asian telecoms market -- the world's fastest growing market.
Analysts now expect BT and MCI to start making overtures to major Asian players such as Japan's giant Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp, the world's largest telecoms group. The company said in a statement that the proposed deal would create a world leading communications power house with annual cash flow of about 7.5 billion pounds.
BT expects the merger would yield savings from combining overlapping services of 1.5 billion pounds ($2.46 billion) over the first five years and 500 million pounds per year before tax after that.
BT also forecast dividends of 19.85 pence per share for the year to March 31, 1997 -- a rise of six percent over last year -- excluding the 35p per share special dividend.
BT, which will release full year results on November 14, has declared a half year dividend of 7.90 pence payable in November, six percent more than in the same period last year.
The deal is believed to be the second largest ever involving a U.S. company -- topped only by the 1989 buyout of RJR Nabisco by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts and Co.
Analysts said a combined company would be a good fit in the ultra-competitive U.S. long-distance phone industry, where MCI's major competitors are AT&amp;T Corp and Sprint.
Current market leader AT&amp;T, which would be the hardest hit by a fiancially muscular new enlarged rival, said on Friday it was confident any MCI/BT deal would receive proper scrutiny by the U.S. government.
One potential problem is a media joint venture between MCI and Robert Murdoch's News Corp. BT would end up with MCI's 13 percent non-voting stake in News Corp and this could cause regulatory difficulties in Britain, analysts say. ($1=.6096 Pound)
British Telecom (BT) made corporate history on Sunday by unveiling a $20 billion merger with America's MCI Communications in a coup that ensures it a leading position in the world's biggest telecoms market.
The giant merger with MCI, in which BT already has a 20 percent stake, is to be called Concert Plc and marks a vital step in BT's plans to expand overseas as world markets begin to liberalise, following in the steps of America and Britain.
By joining forces with the second-largest U.S. long-distance carrier, BT -- which already has six joint ventures in the top six European markets worth $135 billion -- has placed itself well to tap into the corporate market for long-distance calls, data and mobile services.
BT, which sweetened the alliance for its own 2.4 million shareholders with a 2.2 billion pound ($3.6 billion) special dividend, has been angling to get a foothold in the $200 billion U.S. telecoms market, where it sees tremedous growth prospects.
Concert, a $54 billion group with annual revenues of over 25 billion pounds, will have a significant market share in the world's two most competitive markets as well as being well-placed to gain access to leading-edge technology.
MCI, which has the biggest Internet backbone in the U.S. -- carrying 40 percent of worldwide traffic -- is estimated to have a 20-22 percent share of the U.S. long-distance telephone market and has been dubbed by newspapers "one of the most admired technology and marketing companies in the U.S.".
The MCI deal, which will challenge rival alliances led by U.S. telecoms giant AT&amp;T and Deutsche Telekom, could trigger a fresh round of deal-making between local telecoms alliances ahead of the deregulation of European telecoms markets in 1998.
But BT also has its sights on Asia Pacific markets, the world's fastest growing market, which was worth about $125 billion in 1996. With the MCI deal in the bag, BT said it hoped to be better able to address that market.
Since its plans were foiled six months ago to merge with British rival Cable and Wireless and link up with its "global digital highway" and telecoms businesses in Hong Kong, Japan and Australia, BT has been struggling to find an alternative route into Asia.
Chief executive Sir Peter Bonfield denied that the deal with MCI, which comes without any real presence in Asia-Pacific, was the second best. "It's not the second best -- it's the first best choice," he insisted.
Analysts now expect the enlarged BT/MCI group to start making overtures to major Asian players such as Japan's giant Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp, the world's largest telecoms group.
"(BT) have made no secret of their ambitions in Asia," said Laurence Heyworth, telecoms analyst at Robert Fleming Securities. "The problem is...NTT is being courted by everybody in terms of international alliances. But as a consequence of this merger, Concert has a stronger potential," he added.
Bonfield said that although he would like to talk to NTT, the company would probably want to devote attention to deregulating its home market before seeking any deals.
BT's deal with MCI depends on both American and British regulatory approval. The U.S. Federal Communications Commission and has to approve foreign ownership of every deal involving more than 25 percent of a company.
However, it has allowed the French and German carriers -- France Telecom and Deutsche Telekom -- to take stakes in Sprint, America's third-largest long-distance provider, and form Global One.  ($1=.6096 Pound)  REUTER
British Telecom (BT) made corporate history on Sunday by unveiling a $20 billion merger with America's MCI Communications in a coup that ensures it a leading position in the world's biggest telecoms market.
The giant merger with MCI, in which BT already has a 20 percent stake, is to be called Concert Plc and marks a vital step in BT's plans to expand overseas as world markets begin liberalise, following in the steps of America and Britain.
British Telecom unveiled the largest transatlantic deal in history on Sunday, linking up with America's MCI Corp in a $20 billion merger that catapults it into second place in the world's international telecoms market.
The deal with MCI -- the number two U.S. long-distance phone company after U.S. telecoms giant AT &amp; T Corp -- creates a $54 billion group to be called Concert Plc, which will have 43 million business and residential customers in 70 countries.  
"Tomorrow begins a new era for all of us as we go forward in Concert and harmony," Gerald Taylor, MCI's president and chief operating officer told a news conference as journalists were plied with champagne.
In an attempt to keep one step ahead of rivals as world telecom markets are liberalised, BT is taking on a partner with a powerful position in the world's biggest telecoms market, generating about 40 percent of the world's long-distance calls.  
Under the deal, which has yet to win regulatory approval on both sides of the Atlantic, MCI shareholders would receive up to 2.3 billion pounds cash and new Concert American Depositary Shares. For each MCI share, investors will get 5.4 new BT shares and $6.0 cash, valuing MCI shares in the mid $30 each.
BT is also paying its 2.4 million shareholders a special dividend bonanza of 2.2 billion pounds ($3.6 billion), or 35p per share, which is not dependent on any completed merger.
The company also said it would ask shareholders to approve plans for its first ever share buy-back at an extraordinary meeting to approve the MCI deal.  
BT, whose motto "It's good to talk" appears to have paid off since alliance talks failed with British rival Cable and Wireless six months ago, already owns 20 percent of MCI.
Sir Peter Bonfield, BT's chief executive, denied that the deal with MCI was the second best choice for BT, which has been keen to get access to the world's fastest growing telecoms market -- Asia -- via Cable and Wireless' 57.5 percent stake in highly profitable Hong Kong Telecommunications.
"It's not second best, it's first best," he told the news conference.  
BT already has a joint venture with MCI called Concert, which provides a whole range of communications services to customers in more than 50 nations. MCI also carries 40 percent of the worldwide traffic on the Internet.
"The merger combines the substantial financial resources and global position of BT with the growth momentum and market expertise of MCI, known for its success in the competitive U.S. long distance market," BT said in a statement.  
The new telecoms giant, which will have annual cash flow of about 7.5 billion pounds, will be incorporated in Britain with headquarters in London and Washington and operate under the BT and MCI brand names in Britain and America.
BT expects the merger, after an initial five percent earnings dilution, to yield savings from combining overlapping services of 1.5 billion pounds ($2.46 billion) over the first five years and 500 million pounds pre-tax annually after that.
BT also forecast dividends of 19.85 pence per share for the year to March 31, 1997 -- a rise of six percent over last year -- excluding the 35p per share special dividend.  
BT, which will release full year results on November 14, has declared a half year dividend of 7.90 pence payable in November, six percent more than in the same period last year.
The deal is believed to be the second largest ever involving a U.S. company -- topped only by the 1989 buyout of RJR Nabisco by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts and Co.
Analysts said a combined company would be a good fit in the ultra-competitive U.S. long-distance phone industry, where MCI's major competitors are AT&amp;T Corp and Sprint.
Current market leader AT&amp;T, which would be the hardest hit by a financially muscular new enlarged rival, said on Friday it was confident any MCI/BT deal would receive proper scrutiny by the U.S. government. ($1=.6096 Pound)
British Telecom Sunday formally announced its agreement to acquire the rest of U.S. long distance phone company MCI Communications, creating a worldwide telecommunications powerhouse.
The merged company, to be called Concert Plc, creates the world's second-largest telecommunications group, behind Japan's NTT, and presents a powerful rival to U.S. leader AT&amp;T.
British Telecom already owned 20 percent of Washington,D.C.-based MCI, the No. 2 U.S. long telecommunications company. The deal values all of MCI at a total $25.2 billion, but as British Telecom already owns 20 percent, it will issue Concert stock and cash worth $20.1 billion for the 80 percent it does not own.
The deal would be the largest between a British and American company.
Analysts said a combined company would be a good fit in the ultra-competitive U.S. long-distance phone industry, where MCI's major competitors are AT&amp;T and Sprint. AT&amp;T, which would be the hardest hit by a financially muscular enlarged rival, said Friday it was confident any MCI/British Telecom deal would receive proper scrutiny by the U.S. government.
Concert Plc would be one of the world's largest telecommunications companies, with 43 million business and residential customers in 70 countries.
"The complementary strengths and skills of BT and MCI will enable Concert to take full advantage of the great opportunities provided by the forthcoming liberalisation of the telecommunications market in the U.S. and Europe," said Sir Iain Vallance, British Telecom's chairman.
"This is an industry with a voracious appetite for capital," Gerald Taylor, MCI president and chief operating officer, told a news conference in London. "We have been living and working together for nearly three years ... we know our strengths and weaknesses ... I believe we will be a winning team."
MCI and British Telecom were to hold another news conference at 2 p.m. EST in New York.
Under the terms of the agreement, which has yet to be approved by regulatory authorities on either side of the Atlantic, MCI shareholders would receive 0.54 new American Depositary Shares in the new combined group for every MCI share. Each Concert ADS is equivalent to one British Telecom American Depositary Share and $6 cash.
British Telecom's ADSs closed at $55.50 in New York on Friday, giving a value of $30 per MCI share, plus $6 in cash per share before the effect of a buyback by British Telecom that is part of the deal, MCI Chief Financial Officer Doug Maine told Reuters.
British Telecom said Concert will buy back up to 10 percent of its shares after the deal closes. The maximum buyback would increase the value of the deal to MCI shareholders to $39.60 per MCI share. MCI's stock closed Friday at $30.25 on Nasdaq.
The new company, incorporated in Britain, would have headquarters in London and Washington and operate under the British Telecom and MCI brand names.
British Telecom has been looking for a major acquisition since its proposed merger with British rival Cable and Wireless failed in May. It had been keen to forge that deal because it would have given it access to the lucrative Asian telecoms market -- the world's fastest-growing market.
Analysts now expect British Telecom and MCI to start making overtures to major Asian players such as Japan's giant Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp.
One potential problem is a media joint venture between MCI and Robert Murdoch's News Corp. British Telecom would end up with MCI's 13 percent non-voting stake in News Corp, and this could cause regulatory difficulties in Britain, analysts say.
British Telecom unveiled the largest transatlantic deal in history on Sunday, linking up with America's MCI Corp in a $20 billion merger that catapults it into second place in the world's international telecoms market.
The deal with MCI -- the number two U.S. long-distance phone company after U.S. telecoms giant AT&amp;T Corp -- creates a $54 billion group to be called Concert Plc, which will have 43 million business and residential customers in 70 countries.
"Tomorrow begins a new era for all of us as we go forward in Concert and harmony," Gerald Taylor, MCI's president and chief operating officer told a news conference.
In an attempt to keep one step ahead of rivals as world telecoms markets are liberalised, BT is taking on a partner with a powerful position in the world's biggest telecoms market, generating about 40 percent of the world's long-distance calls.
Under the deal, which has yet to win regulatory approval on both sides of the Atlantic, MCI shareholders would receive up to 2.3 billion pounds ($3.77 billion) cash and new Concert American Depositary Shares. For each MCI share, investors will get 5.4 new BT shares and $6.0 cash, valuing MCI shares in the mid $30 each.
BT is also paying its 2.4 million shareholders a special dividend bonanza of 2.2 billion pounds, or 35 pence per share, which is not dependent on any completed merger.
The company also said it would ask shareholders to approve plans for its first ever share buy-back at an extraordinary meeting to approve the MCI deal.
BT, whose motto "It's good to talk" appears to have paid off since alliance talks failed with British rival Cable and Wireless six months ago, already owns 20 percent of MCI.
Sir Peter Bonfield, BT's chief executive, denied that the deal with MCI was the second best choice for BT, which has been keen to get access to the world's fastest growing telecoms market -- Asia -- via Cable and Wireless's 57.5 percent stake in the highly-profitable Hong Kong Telecommunications.
"It's not second best, it's first best," he told the news conference.
BT already has a joint venture with MCI called Concert, which provides a whole range of communications services to customers in more than 50 nations. MCI also carries 40 percent of the worldwide traffic on the Internet.
"The merger combines the substantial financial resources and global position of BT with the growth momentum and market expertise of MCI, known for its success in the competitive U.S. long distance market," BT said in a statement.
The new telecoms giant, which will have annual cash flow of about 7.5 billion pounds, will be incorporated in Britain with headquarters in London and Washington and operate under the BT and MCI brand names in Britain and America.
BT expects the merger, after an initial five percent earnings dilution, to yield savings from combining overlapping services of 1.5 billion pounds over the first five years and 500 million pounds pre-tax annually after that.
BT also forecast dividends of 19.85 pence per share for the year to March 31, 1997 -- a rise of six percent over last year -- excluding the 35 pence per share special dividend.
BT, which will release full year results on November 14, has declared a half-year dividend of 7.90 pence payable in November, six percent more than in the same period last year.
The deal is believed to be the second largest ever involving a U.S. company -- topped only by the 1989 buyout of RJR Nabisco by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts and Co.
Analysts said a combined company would be a good fit in the ultra-competitive U.S. long-distance phone industry, where MCI's major competitors are AT&amp;T Corp and Sprint.
Current market leader AT&amp;T, which would be the hardest hit by a financially muscular new enlarged rival, said on Friday it was confident any MCI/BT deal would receive proper scrutiny by the U.S. government. ($1=.6096 Pound)
LONDON - Shares in British Telecommunications (BT) surged on both sides of the Atlantic on Monday as traders furiously dealt the stock higher in the wake of a $20 billion mega-merger with America's second biggest carrier, MCI Communications.
Analysts said the deal with MCI, which turns the BT/MCI combine into the world's second largest international telephone group with annual revenues of over 25 billion pounds ($41 billion), was mainly welcomed because it would force BT to become more capital efficient by increasing its borrowing.
Weekend news of the biggest transatlantic deal in history, linking Britain's dominant telecoms company with a major American player, also prompted some analysts to reassess BT's growth prospects.
Just under 82.5 million BT shares exchanged hands in London on Monday and the stock ended a sharp 22.5 pence higher at 373.5 pence, having touched 392 pence during trade.
Some analysts recommended buying BT shares up to 400 pence on the back of the tremendous growth prosepects in the telecoms market, one of the world's most rapidly changing industries.
The deal, which creates the world's fourth largest telecoms group in terms of sales after Japan's Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp (NTT), America's AT&amp;T and Germany's Deutsche Telekom also allows BT to limit its dependence on the heavily regulated British telecoms market.
"This deal will force people to look at BT in a new light; look at the international operations, look at the international alliances in Europe, look at what they could be doing with the Internet because MCI is a big player there," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
"All these much higher growth and much more exciting elements of BT in which the company has been quietly building value will come much more to the fore," he added, noting that he was pitching the stock's value at nearer 430 pence.
The merger, which was sweetened with a 2.2 billion pound special dividend for BT shareholders, helps lift the company's debt-to-equity ratio, or gearing, to 65 percent from under five percent.
Analysts have been valuing BT, which had a market value of about 22.6 billion pounds before the MCI deal was announced on Sunday, as a British utility that had about 60 percent of its revenues governed by a regulatory price cap.
But having lined up six European joint-ventures, BT's share of the population in Europe alone for which it may win a licence could rise to 90 million. Armed with MCI, it also hopes to be better placed to win market share in Asia -- possibly with NTT.
"In one year's time, only 15 percent of BT's revenues will be covered by a price cap. And, with their European operations getting off the ground, they will have a very substantial business in international markets," said one analyst.
BT and MCI's alliance, dubbed Concert Plc, still needs to win regulatory clearance in both America and Britain.
Britain's Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) said that it was still unclear whether the merger, which BT believes will be cleared in about 12 months, would fall under its remit for clearance or under that of the European Commission.
One of the issues that determines which regulatory authority rules on the merger will be the turnover of the new company. However, any EC decision would be made in conjunction with advice from Oftel, the British telecoms regulator, and the DTI.
Most analysts believe that while there are hurdles to the deal, the merger is likely to be shown the green light.
Under U.S. rules, a 25 percent stake limit in U.S. communication companies can be lifted if it is in the public interest. Concert Plc, as a major competitor both in the U.S. and internationally, would help drive down call rates. ($1=.6107 Pound)
The UK telecoms market is one of the world's most competitive and any attempt to block a planned $20 billion merger between British Telecom and U.S. firm MCI on grounds of restricted trade will fail, analysts said on Monday.
The merger partly hinges on how open the UK market is deemed to be because U.S. rules bar foreign groups from buying more than 25 percent of a U.S. firm unless their home market is deemed to be as competitive as that of the United States.
If it is approved, the merger between BT and America's MCI announced on Sunday to create Concert Plc will represent the largest cross-border takeover in history and the world's second biggest international telephone group.
U.S. telecommunications market leader AT&amp;T, which stands to lose most from such a new heavyweight rival, has urged regulatory authorities to give the planned deal with MCI, the number two U.S. carrier, the "scrutiny it deserves."
But analysts said it was unrealistic for AT&amp;T, British Telecom's arch-rival in international markets, to say that the British market was not competitive enough.
One industry analyst, asked whether he thought the proposed deal would be cleared, said: "Ultimately, I think it will be approved. But some tinkering may be required."
"I don't think it's realistic for AT&amp;T to argue that the market in the UK isn't open -- or that the market in the U.S. is any better," said one analyst who declined to be named.
Britain's market is more open than those of its European neighbours, most of which will only abolish state monopolies over telecoms services by January 1, 1998.
The European Commission cleared the BT's acquisition of its initial 20 percent stake in MCI three years ago.
The merger between BT and MCI to form Concert Plc will have to be approved by the U.S. Department of Justice, the U.S. Federal Communications Commission and Britain's Department of Trade and Industry.
Although BT still controls more than 90 percent of all local UK telephone connections, analysts said there were few barriers to foreign companies wanting to compete here.
AT&amp;T is already planning to establish a foothold in the UK market since the international partnership between BT and Cable and Wireless unit Mercury ended earlier this year.
AT&amp;T has also been tipped as likely to forge alliances with UK cable companies in the local market as well as with mobile networks and new operators such as Cambridge-based Ionica.
A spokeswoman for UK telecoms regulator Oftel said it was too early to say which obstacles stood in the way of BT and MCI completing the proposed deal by the end of next year.
British Telecommunications' shares, which surged on Monday after weekend confirmation that the telecoms giant had merged with MCI of the U.S., should be valued at around four pounds each, analysts said on Monday.
News of the biggest trans-Atlantic deal in history, linking Britain's dominant telecoms company with America's second largest international carrier, has helped instititions on this side of the Atlantic reassess BT's growth prospects.
By 1306 GMT, almost 56 million shares had exchanged hands as the stock surged 28.5p to 379.5 pence down from an earlier 386p.  
"This deal will force people to look at BT in a new light; look at the international operations; look at the international alliances in Europe; to look at what they could be doing with the Internet because MCI is a big player there," said one analyst who asked to be named.
"All these much higher growth and much more exciting elements of BT in which the company has been quietly building value will come much more the fore," he added, noting that he was pitching the stock's true value at nearer 4.30 pounds.  
Analysts were split on how much of the share price rise was attributable to the $20 billion MCI merger, which included a 2.2 billion stg special dividend for BT shareholders.
But they said the market had been valuing the 22.6 billion stg group more as a UK utility, with 60 percent of its revenues governed by a regulatory price cap. However, having lined up six European joint-ventures, BT's share of the population in Europe for which they will have a licence could rise to 90 million.  
"In one year's time, only 15 percent of BT's revenues will be covered by a price cap. And, with their European operations getting off the ground, they will have a very substantial business in international markets," the analyst added.
Another analyst said that news of the special dividend alone had helped lift BT's shares by as much as 22 pence. Analysts have welcomed the move by BT, which has negligible gearing, to increase borrowing to make it more capital efficient.
"I think its a four-pound stock," he said. "The market did want to see capital restructuring."
The deal helps lift BT's gearing to around 65 percent.  
"The majority of the share price rise is a function of what is happening to the balance sheet rather than it being an indication that MCI was the right thing to buy," he added.
One analyst at brokers Deutsche Morgan Grenfell said that the MCI deal yielded a leverage benefit of about 0.4-0.5 percentage points off the weighted average cost of capital through BT being more highly geared.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7987
Shares in Cable and Wireless, Britain's second biggest telecoms group, lost more ground on Tuesday as analysts said the $20 billion creation of Anglo-U.S. Concert Plc had thrown the group its biggest challenge to date.
Uninspiring results from Cable and Wireless' (C&amp;W) lucrative Hong Kong subsidiary, Hong Kong Telecommunications Ltd, on which the British group relies for about 75 percent of attributable profits, also helped depress the stock.
C&amp;W, faced with a change of government in Hong Kong next July and growing competition in the territory, has also been dogged by talk that it may have to sell part of its Hong Kong stake in return for a worthwhile position in China. "I think the Hong Kong Telecom figures this morning served to remind people that that is where most of the money comes from," said John Tysoe, telecoms analyst at SG Strauss Turnbull. "Not a particularly sparkling set of figures."
The Hong Kong unit lifted net profits 12.1 percent, under some analysts' expectations, to HK$5.39 billion.
While C&amp;W's shares ended five pence lower at 470.5p, executives of its Hong Kong unit insisted that they were unconcerned by the mega-merger, announced over the weekend, between British Telecommunications and MCI Communications to form the second biggest international carrier.
But analysts said the huge merger, creating a $54 billion company, posed a substantial threat to telecom rivals and could make it harder for C&amp;W to expand in the United States.
"What we saw at the weekend has thrown down the gauntlet to everyone else," Tysoe said. "It is a challenge to absolutely every other operator and I'm not sure that half of those other guys have got a coherent response."
Had Cable and Wireless' own merger talks with BT not broken down in May, that deal, valued at about 33 billion pounds ($54.54 billion), as a deal would have easily eclipsed the BT/MCI merger.
But BT's new strategic plans makes it one of the biggest players in America behind market leader AT&amp;T.
Cable and Wireless' own U.S. operation brings in annual revenues of about 0.5 billion pounds -- a far cry from BT's share, which now jumps to around $18 billion a year.
Analysts agree that BT has proved to the market that Cable and Wireless (C&amp;W) is bid proof, partly because it is hard to value its Hong Kong stake. What the do see happening however, is that C&amp;W will seek to increase its foothold in the increasingly competitive U.S. telecoms market and link up with new partners.
"The important thing for C&amp;W is to get more of a presence there and my guess is that they will do that in an alliance," Tysoe said.
Few industry analysts took market rumours seriously that BT's latest expansion plans would prompt its arch-rival in the international market, AT&amp;T, to bid for C&amp;W -- or even launch an immediate takeover of mobile phone operator Vodafone.
As for an alliance partner for C&amp;W, the bets were on NYNEX Corp. Its subsidiary NYNEX CableComms is the largest minority shareholder in Cable and Wireless Communications, an alliance creating Britain's largest cable operator.
NYNEX also has an international diversification strategy centered around the Far East, similar to that of C&amp;W. Other potential U.S. partners could be Pacific Telesis (PacTel), which is being taken over by SBC Communications. However, PacTel is more interested in central or south America, analysts said. ($1=.6051 Pound)
The UK telecoms market is one of the world's most competitive and any attempt to block a planned $20 billion merger between British Telecom and U.S. firm MCI on grounds of restricted trade will fail, analysts said.
The merger partly hinges on how open the UK market is deemed to be because U.S. rules bar foreign groups from buying more than 25 percent of a U.S. firm unless their home market is deemed to be as competitive as that of the United States.
If it is approved, the merger between BT and America's MCI announced on Sunday to create Concert Plc will represent the largest cross-border takeover in history and the world's second biggest international telephone group.
U.S. telecommunications market leader AT&amp;T, which stands to lose most from such a new heavyweight rival, has urged regulatory authorities to give the planned deal with MCI, the number two U.S. carrier, the "scrutiny it deserves."
But analysts said it was unrealistic for AT&amp;T, British Telecom's arch-rival in international markets, to say that the British market was not competitive enough.
One industry analyst, asked whether he thought the proposed deal would be cleared, said: "Ultimately, I think it will be approved. But some tinkering may be required."
"I don't think it's realistic for AT&amp;T to argue that the market in the UK isn't open -- or that the market in the U.S. is any better," said one analyst who declined to be named.
Britain's market is more open than those of its European neighbours, most of which will only abolish state monopolies over telecoms services by January 1, 1998.
The European Commission cleared the BT's acquisition of its initial 20 percent stake in MCI three years ago.
The merger between BT and MCI to form Concert Plc will have to be approved by the U.S. Department of Justice, the U.S. Federal Communications Commission and Britain's Department of Trade and Industry.
Although BT still controls more than 90 percent of all local UK telephone connections, analysts said there were few barriers to foreign companies wanting to compete here.
AT&amp;T is already planning to establish a foothold in the UK market since the international partnership between BT and Cable and Wireless unit Mercury ended earlier this year.
AT&amp;T has also been tipped as likely to forge alliances with UK cable companies in the local market as well as with mobile networks and new operators such as Cambridge-based Ionica.
A spokeswoman for UK telecoms regulator Oftel said it was too early to say which obstacles stood in the way of BT and MCI completing the proposed deal by the end of next year.
Virginia-based Dominion Resources executives Tuesday began merger talks with British utility East Midlands Electricity in an effort to agree on a takeover price.
Dominion's chairman, chief finance officer and attorneys began meeting in London with East Midlands Chairman Nigel Rudd, Chief Executive Norman Askew and their advisers -- the merchant bank Schroders -- a source close to the British regional electric company said.
No further details were immediately available.
Richmond, Va.-based Dominion Resources owns Virginia Power.
Dominion and East Midlands agreed to talk despite East Midlands' insistence it would reject any offer from Dominion Resources pitched at around 6.08 pounds sterling per share ($10.05), which would value the British company at 1.2 billion pounds ($2 billion).
In the fifth potential U.S. bid for one of Britain's 12 cash-rich regional electricity companies, Dominion said last week that it was considering an offer "at a price not much in excess of 608 pence per share."
But East Midlands, the first of its wealthy peers to launch a stock buy-back in an attempt to redistribute cash to shareholders, scorned the price as undervaluing the Nottingham-based utility's prospects.
East Midlands, the target of consistent bid speculation as seven of 12 regional electricity companies have fallen to predators and an eighth, Northern Electric, is facing its second hostile bid, saw its stock end 8.5 pence (14 cents) higher at 6.12 pounds ($10.12).
Dominion's stock closed up 12.5 cents at $39.75 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Some traders and analysts said the London market remained unconvinced the American utility would launch a bid.
Nigel Hawkins, utilities analyst at the Yamaichi brokerage, said Dominion would need to start merger talks at 650 pence ($10.74) per share, but added East Midlands was unlikely to recommend a bid much below 7 pounds, or 700 pence ($11.57).
"I do not believe East Midlands would recommend a bid siginficantly below 700p per share," he said. "I am not saying they would refuse it at the 690p ($11.40) level."
Traders also emphasised that Dominion could still walk away from the talks amid regulatory and political uncertainties.
A Dominion Resources spokesman has said the U.S. company was well aware of the uncertainties that surround the purchase of a British electrical utility.
A lull in a wave of bids for electric companies came to an abrupt halt last month when CE Electric -- jointly owned by CalEnergy Co. and Peter Kiewit Sons' Inc. -- launched a hostile 650 million-pound ($1.07 billion) bid for Northern Electric.
The Nebraska-based utility has built up a stake of around 29.5 percent in a series of market raids on Northern Electric, which became the first regional electric company to be faced with a takevoer attempt in December 1994.
A costly shareholder package in defence against the unwanted attentions of conglomerate Trafalgar House left Northern Electric with high debts.
The top executives of U.S. utility Dominion Resources were locked in their first bid talks with British power supplier East Midlands Electricity on Tuesday to try and hammer out a takeover price.
A source close to the British regional electricity supplier said a meeting between Dominion's chairman, chief finance officer and lawyers and East Midlands' chairman Nigel Rudd and Norman Askew, the chief executive, and their advisers -- merchant bank Schroders -- was starting in London at 1700 GMT.
No further details were immediately available.
Talks were agreed despite East Midlands' insistence that it would reject any offer from the Virginia-based utility pitched at around 608 pence per share, which would value the British company at 1.2 billion pounds ($2 billion).
In the fifth potential U.S. bid for one of Britain's 12 cash rich regional electricity companies (RECs), Dominion said last week that it was considering an offer "at a price not much in excess of 608 pence per share".
But East Midlands, the first of its wealthy peers to launch a share buy-back in an attempt to redistribute cash to shareholders, scorned the price, stating that it would undervalue the Nottingham-based power supplier's prospects.
East Midlands, the target of consistent bid speculation as seven of 12 RECs have fallen to predators and an eighth, Northern Electric, is facing its second hostile bid, saw its shares end 8.5 pence higher at 612 pence.
But some traders and analysts said the market remained unconvinced that the American utility would launch a bid.
Nigel Hawkins, utilities analyst at brokers Yamaichi, said Dominion would need to start bid talks at 650 pence per share, but added that East Midlands was unlikely to recommend a bid much below 700 pence.
"I do not believe East Midlands would recommend a bid siginficantly below 700p per share," he said. "I am not saying they would refuse it at the 690p level."
Traders also emphasised that Dominion could still walk away from the bid talks amid regulatory and political uncertainties.
A spokesman for Dominion Resources has said the U.S. group was well aware of the uncertainties that surround the purchase of a British electricity company.
The popular opposition Labour Party has threatened to impose a windfall tax on utilities if it comes to power in the next general election, due by May 1997.
But the U.S. group may feel its bid will win approval from regulators. Britain has so far cleared three U.S. bids for regional electricity companies.
A lull in a wave of bids for electricity companies was brought to an abrupt halt last month when CE Electric -- jointly owned by CalEnergy Co and  Peter Kiewit Sons' Inc -- launched a hostile 650 million pound bid for Northern Electric.
The Nebraska-based utility has built up a stake of around 29.5 percent in a series of market raids in Northern Electric, which became the first REC to be faced with a takevoer attempt in December 1994.
A costly shareholder package in a defence against the unwanted attentions of conglomerate Trafalgar House, now owned by Norway's Kvaerner, has left Northern Electric with high debts. ($1=.6050 Pound)
British Telecommuncations Plc, the telecoms giant, beat even the most optimistic analyst forecasts on Thursday with robust second quarter and first half profits and insisted it was growing despite ever stiffer competition.
BT, which plans to merge with America's MCI to create one of the world's biggest telecoms groups, said profits before tax, redundancy and restructuring charges rose 7.4 percent in the second quarter and 5.2 percent in the first half.
But after a hefty 235 million pound ($388.2 million) redundancy charge and a 60 million pound charge for the repurchase of government-held bonds, half year pretax profits came in at 1.6 billion pounds and 730 million pounds in the second quarter -- slightly below figures for the same periods in 1995.
"The results for the half year show an encouraging position with sustained high growth in demand for our telephony services and significant sales increases in our new markets and advanced products," said chairman Sir Iain Vallance.
BT, whose shares jumped 8.5 pence to 369 pence in heavy trade, has managed to hang onto its 20.5 million residential customer lines over the last 12 months despite predictions that competition from cable companies would dent its market share.
The group also said its biggest business, inland calls, grew one percent to over seven percent in the quarter on a 12 month moving average basis after price cuts and marketing initiatives.
"We're growing, we're not going backwards," finance director Robert Brace told Reuters in an interview, noting that turnover in the six months rose 4.5 percent to 7.37 billion pounds.
"I think telecoms is one of the most exciting growth industries in the world...When we open (the markets) up, drop the prices, raise the quality of service and really market hard, the growth levels are double digit."
BT, which has formed six joint ventures worth $135 billion to gain access to the European markets, said it planned to "get very aggressive" in the next two years as the continental telecoms markets are opened up to competition, around 1998.
Asked where BT saw the main profit growth, Brace said:
"All prices in France and Germany are very high compared with the UK. If markets open up and we compete, prices will come down. But we will take substantial market share, particularly in the business area where quality of service really matters."
BT has operations in 30 countries and employs about 130,000 staff worldwide. Since privatisation in 1984, about 110,000 jobs have gone. The firm, which cut another 3,200 staff in the first half of this year, expects about the same number of voluntary redundancies in the second.
As part of its European offensive, BT has won a licence in the Netherlands, plans to win both fixed and mobile licences in Germany and has bought into a mobile licence in France where it also thinks it will win the second fixed licence.
Brace said high-speed digital ISDN (Integrated Services Digital Network) lines and overseas operations were growing at about 50-100 percent per year and that the company had high hopes for its intranet initiative with software giant Microsoft Corp, where it also sees booming demand.
BT said on Wednesday that it and MCI, whose proposed merger is the biggest transatlantic deal in history, were linking up with Microsoft to offer transnational firms private communications networks based on the internet.
Asked whether BT, which announced its $20 billion merger with MCI on November 3, planned similar deals, Brace said few other large communications groups offered the same prospects.
"I'm not sure that there are similar deals as MCI -- because there aren't many companies that size in the world one would wish to merge with."
As previously announced, BT is raising its interim dividend by six percent to 7.9 pence. As part of the MCI deal, BT is also paying a special dividend of 35 pence which it expects to pay in September 1997 at the same time as the final dividend.
($1=.6054 Pound)
British Telecommications beat even the most optimistic analyst forecasts on Thursday with robust second quarter and first half profits and insisted it was growing despite ever stiffer competition.
BT, which plans to merge with America's MCI to create Concert, one of the world's biggest telecoms groups, said profits before tax, redundancy and restructuring charges rose 7.4 percent in the quarter and 5.2 percent in the first half.
But after a hefty 235 million pound ($388.2 million) of redundancy costs and a 60 million pound charge for the repurchase of government-held bonds, half year pretax profits came in at 1.6 billion pounds and 730 million pounds in the second quarter -- slightly below the corresponding 1995 figures.
BT, whose shares were 8.5 pence higher at 369p in heavy trade after a high on the day of 371, managed to hang onto its 20.5 million residential customer lines despite predictions that competition from cable companies would dent its market share.
"We're growing, we're not going backwards," finance director Robert Brace told Reuters in an interview, noting that turnover in the six months rose 4.5 percent to 7.37 billion pounds.
"I think telecoms is one of the most exciting growth industries in the world," he said. "When we open (the markets) up, drop the prices, raise the quality of service, and really market hard, the growth levels are double digit."
The group also said its biggest business, inland calls, grew one percent to over seven percent in the quarter on a 12 month moving average basis after price cuts and marketing initiatives.
But chief executive Sir Peter Bonfield told a news conference BT was probably losing one to two percentage points of a growing British telecoms market, and that this trend was likely to continue, forcing BT to turn abroad for profit growth.
"BT will lose profits in the short term," said James Ross, telecoms analyst at ABN AMRO Hoare Govett, who expects BT to post a full year pretax profit of 2.1 billion pounds. But he said BT was well placed to fight competition at home and abroad.
"They are the group that has done the best (abroad) so far and in the UK, they have protected their position," he said.
Brace said BT planned to "get very aggressive" in the next two years as European telecoms markets are opened around 1998.
BT expects to win more than 30 percent of revenues from its six continental European joint ventures after liberalisation. Those ventures, worth about $135 billion, could start contributing profits after five to seven years, Bonfield said.
The group plans to take a substantial market share of the lucrative big business, data and mobile services markets.
Bonfield said BT, which expects 1996/97 capital expenditure to be around 2.7-2.8 billion pounds, still saw a link-up with a partner such as Japan's Nippon Telegraph and Telephone a high, long-term priority for a ticket into booming Asia.
"I'd really hate to be knocked out by another competitor just because we weren't treading the boards," he said.
While Japan was mulling the future structure of NTT, BT would make sure it was "parading outside the door", he said.
BT operates in 30 countries and employs about 130,000 staff worldwide. Since privatisation in 1984, about 110,000 jobs have gone. Another 3,200 staff left in the first half of this year with about 3,000 more voluntary redundancies expected this year.
Asked whether BT planned similar deals to its $20 billion MCI merger, Brace said: "I'm not sure that there are similar deals as MCI -- because there aren't many companies that size in the world one would wish to merge with," he said.
BT had already planned a six percent half year dividend rise to 7.9 pence. As part of the MCI deal, BT is also paying a 35p special dividend in September 1997 on top of the final dividend. ($1=.6054 Pound)
After 11 days of number crunching, telecoms analysts remain split over the financial merits of British Telecommunications's (BT) $20 billion proposed merger with America's MCI Communications.
Some insist the deal is at best neutral, with synergy benefits just about offsetting the 30 percent premium BT paid.
BT, which posted second quarter pretax profits ahead of expectations at 730 million pounds ($1.21 billion) on Thursday, has been traditionally considered a less inspiring stock than faster-growing, smaller UK rivals like Cable &amp; Wireless.
But when the telecoms giant announced on November 3 its plans to link up with MCI to form one of the world's biggest international telecoms groups, some brokers promptly recommended buying BT's shares up to 400 pence.
However the stock failed to rise substantially on the MCI move -- and some analysts changed their "buy" recommendations back to "hold".
MCI investors, bailing out after the deal with the larger and slower BT, have also been blamed for BT's lagging shares.
But some analysts said they thought the shares were now fairly valued and brushed aside BT projections of double digit growth from the new enlarged BT/MCI group, to be called Concert.
"(The deal) changes the way BT looks but it doesn't change the price it should be at," noted one analyst.
But not all analysts are so bearish. Daiwa's telecoms analyst John Clarke said he believed the deal would boost BT's five year earnings per share compound growth from 5.5 percent in 1996/97 to between seven and eight percent.
"The problem is that the benefits from the acquisition won't become apparent for a couple of years," he said. "But it has given BT the confidence to signal that it can increase the rate of its dividend growth (to six percent), which presumably it wouldn't have done otherwise."
BT is paying its shareholders a 35 pence special dividend as part of the deal, as well as forecasting a final 1995/96 dividend rise of 6.1 percent to 19.85 pence.
The split in analysts' views on the merger, trumpeted as the biggest transatlatic deal ever, highlights the complexities of valuing telecoms stocks.
BT, whose long-distance businesses are faced with ever fiercer competition, is pitched against companies such as Vodafone, whose sole business as a mobile telephone operator is booming. Vodafone is also seen as a potential takeover target.
BT's relative performance has lagged rivals in the FTSE telecoms sector by almost six percent since early June 1995 and the wider FTSE All-Share index by over 20 percent.
Although BT is a prolific cash generator, its gross dividend yield has topped seven percent in the past year, reflecting the opportunity cost of investing in a highly regulated stock where growth prospects may be limited.
Analysts polled by Edinburgh Financial Publishing, a third party data provider, see the dividend yield slipping to near six percent in the year to March 1998. But it remains stubbornly above smaller rivals.
C&amp;W and Vodafone's gross dividend yield is nearer 2.5 percent, according to EFP.
According to Reuters 3000 analysis, BT's price earnings ratio (PE) is currently only 11.5 compared with Vodafone's hefty 24, while C&amp;W, with its prize Hong Kong Telecommunications stake, has a PE of 17.4.
A sector rating of nearly 21 -- against a market PE of around 15.25 -- underlines the growth prospects as well as the possibilities of takeovers or demergers that some investors see in some parts of the telecoms industry.
But some analysts argue that comparing PE ratios is no longer a valid way of deducing future earnings potential.
"For companies other than mega carriers like BT, it's not really a PE story anymore, it's a strategic value story," said Andrew Harrington, telecoms analyst at Salomon Brothers.
"When assessing the growth potential moving forward, you've got to look at each stock with reference to the operating environment compared to the others," he added.
Harrington doubts BT's predictions of double digit growth for Concert, pitching growth forecasts nearer 8-9 percent, dented by a loss of margin and earnings suffered by BT at home and abroad in the face increasing competition.
"Just as it makes a lot of sense for BT to invest a lot of money in the U.S., so it makes a lot of sense for other big international carriers to invest a lot of money in the UK.
"At the end of the day, BT is not going to compensate for the fact that there's going to be another turn of the screw in tariff declines in the next five years in the UK," he said. ($1=.6054 Pound)
Twelve years as a privatised business have left British Telecommunications Plc (BT) leaner and more efficient, with its staff halved -- but with few growth prospects in one of the world's most competitive markets.
Persistent wrangles with industry regulator Don Cruickshank over uncompetitive practices have helped depress BT's relative market performance. Its shares have lagged rivals in the FTSE telecoms sector by almost six percent since early June 1995 and the wider FTSE All-Share index by over 20 percent.
But analysts say the millions of hopeful investors signing up for the latest European telecommunications sell-off -- Germany's $12 billion sale of about 23 percent of Deutsche Telekom -- have little to fear under a more lenient regulatory regime than that faced by its British counterpart.
"The overall spirit of Deutsche Telekom's regulatory regime is supportive," says broker ABN AMRO Hoare Govett in London. "The current regime provides investors with a high level of earnings visibility. It runs until 2001, whereas most European regulatory arrangements expire in 1998."
BT, which first stepped onto the privatisation launchpad in November 1984, now employs about 130,000 staff and has a gearing level, or debt-to-equity ratio, of around seven percent. Since 1994, around 110,000 jobs have gone. BT LOOKS ABROAD
Ever fiercer competition at home has forced BT to seek growth abroad. This month, the company launched an assault on America's $100 billion a year local telephone market with a $20 billion merger with MCI Communications. The deal would create the world's second biggest international carrier.
BT still controls nine-tenths of the UK residential market, but stiff competition for international and business calls and tough regulation have helped the group forge a deal -- however defensive -- analysts say may turn it into a world class firm.
"BT has exploited its lead...in doing a deal with MCI while the UK is squeaky clean as far as open markets are concerned -- certainly by comparison with anyone else," said one analyst.
As the technological revolution sweeps the market and the cost of delivering an ordinary telephone call plunges, customers can already avoid excessive international charges by using several sorts of wireless telephone, cable telephony in some countries, callback services and Internet telephony.
Since 1991, the British international telecoms duopoly between BT and its much smaller rival Cable and Wireless' Mercury Communications unit was ended, allowing rivals to carry calls by leasing BT and Mercury lines.
International competition will be complete from January 1, 1997, when all 46 rivals to BT and Mercury, such as U.S. telecoms giant AT&amp;T, will be free to build and operate their own infrastructure without having to make costly settlement payments for using other networks.
The rest of Europe is only due to break up telecoms monopolies, which have relied on national and international restrictions to shore up their profits, by January 1998. EASIER REGIME FOR DEUTSCHE TELEKOM
While BT has to cut its prices under an inflation minus 7.5 percent (RPI-7.5) formula at the moment, a cap that will be eased to RPI-4.5 percent from August 1997, Deutsche Telekom will operate under a price cap requiring it to cut tariffs by only three percent below inflation in each of two years to 1998/99.
Deutsche Telekom, due to start trade next week, revealed to analysts during syndicate meetings that past high investment levels have left it with a gearing level of more than 400 percent. It will cut staff to 170,000 from 207,000 by 2000.
But the company is now generating five to 10 billion marks ($3.32-$6.64 billion) of net cash annually, and analysts in London expect interest costs to fall by an average of 0.5 billion marks per year.
While restructuring and other factors have depressed Deutsche Telekom's net profits, earnings are expected to recover strongly during 1997 and beyond, analysts say.
($1=1.5059 Mark)
Vodafone Group, Britain's biggest mobile phones firm, posted a sharp 21 percent rise in first half profits on Tuesday and insisted that the mobile market was likely to maintain a robust 20-25 percent growth rate next year.
Vodafone also announced it was buying The People's Phone Company, its biggest high-street retailer and service provider of mobile phones, for about 77 million pounds ($129 million).
Vodafone, which is licenced to serve over 250 million people in 13 countries, now has five wholly-owned service providers which, along with investments in another four, represent over 70 percent of its subscriber base with more than 410 branded shops.
Pretax profits in the first half of the year rose to 252 million pounds -- after a 17.2 million pound exceptional credit on asset disposals -- on sales of 771.5 million pounds, 16 percent higher than last time.
The dividend, up 20 percent at 2.36p per share, also came in at the top-end of expectations, helping the shares to close 11 pence higher at 254.5 pence.
Outgoing chief executive Sir Gerald Whent dismissed newspaper articles heralding what he called "doom and gloom" in the mobile phone market, saying that he expected a similar growth in net new connections to this year.
"Vodafone has only just begun," he stated.
His successor, Chris Gent, told a news conference that the total market for mobile communications grew by 1,428,000 in the first six months of the year -- six percent less than in the same period last year.
The group netted 2,654,000 subscribers at the end of September 1996 in its core British market, with overall growth in the period of 203,000 compared to 371,000 last year.
But Gent said the rate of decline was slowing and figures for October and November indicated a better quarter than the last two -- even before the key Christmas period.
"It may be that in previous years figures were inflated by customers attracted to cellular before they were ready to make a long term commitment," he said.
Despite a 1.3 percent dip in market share as rivals such as smaller digital mobile phones group Orange leave their indelible mark, Vodafone said it still had 42 percent of the mobile phone market and remained the market leader.
Vodafone's total customer base has swollen to 2,654,000 on its analogue network and 945,000 digital customers.
"Vodafone rarely disappoints and it certainly hasn't this time around," said Evan Miller, telecoms analyst at brokers CS First Boston. "Rumours of the demise of the UK mobile phone market have proved premature. There is life in the market and Vodafone is taking more than its fair share of it."
Vodafone, which celebrated its fifth anniversary as a fully independent company last month, has generated robust profits which last year amounted to 473 million pounds with operating cash flows of 621 million pounds.
A proposed $20 billion merger between British Telecommunications and America's MCI sparked rumours that U.S. telecoms giant AT&amp;T may want to increase its presence in Britain by acquiring Vodafone.
But Gent told Reuters in an interview that the group had not had talks with AT&amp;T and doubted such a deal would emerge. "Anything is possible, but we haven't been approached," he said.
As the British mobile market becomes increasingly competitive, Vodafone has invested in mobile businesses through western Europe and the Pacific Rim which contributed a maiden 9.9 million pound profit before interest, tax and a 3.9 million pound charge for its Hong Kong operation.
Foreign interests, including a stake in France's Societe Francaise du Radiotelephone (SFR), a stake in the German operator E-Plus Mobilfunk, and operations in Australia, South Africa, Greece and Hong Kong, turned in a loss of about 17 million pounds in the first half of last year.
But the company is on track for reaping 30 percent of profits from overseas operations by 2000, Gent said.
($1=.5970 Pound)
U.S./Canadian mobile satellite communications group Odyssey Telecommunications is near securing $600-$800 million of the $3.2 billion it needs to launch 12 satellites into orbit from 2001, an industry source said.
The group -- the joint project of U.S. aerospace giant TRW Inc and Canada's telecoms firm Teleglobe Inc -- is one of four main rivals that want to allow subscribers to receive voice, faxes and paging services anywhere in the world using only a pocket telephone.  
"We're pleased with the progress we have made in bringing together a global team of national service operators."
OTI declined to name the companies attending the meeting, citing concerns for confidentiality. But it said there were representatives from companies in Asia, Europe and North and South America.
So far, the company has received letters of intent, which are non-binding until the initial round of financing is closed.  
Although the company has dismissed speculation that it has had difficulties finding backers for its system, its plans to launch the satellites have been delayed by around three years.
However, after representatives from 12 strategic partners in the company met in London to review the planned project, the source told Reuters: "The first round of financing is expected to be completed in three to four months."
"This meeting marks the first time we have all met around the same table," said Odyssey Telecommunications International (OTI) managing director Marc Leroux in a statement.  
"Participants in the meeting were enthusiastic and confident about Odyssey's business plan and system design," Bruce Gerding, a managing director of OTI said in a statement.
The second and third phase of funding is expected to include further equity and an element of debt finance, the source said.
The worldwide market for personal satellite telephones (satphones), that seeks to replace the cumbersome suitcase-sized terminals costing up to $10 per minute to use, has been estimated by some analysts to be worth $12 billion in global annual revenues by 2004.  
The main contenders for their share of the hand-held satphone market are Iridium, backed mainly by U.S. technology gaint Motorola Inc, U.S. aerospace firm Loral Corp's and Qualcomm's Globalstar and ICO Global, a spin-off of international telecom consortium Inmarsat.
Odyssey wants to launch its satellites into "medium-Earth" orbit -- about 10,000 kms from the earth's surface. Seven Earth stations, linked by a global fibre-optic network, are also part of the patented Odyssey system.  
The company has started legal proceedings against ICO Global for alleged infringement of its medium earth orbit technology patents.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7987
A war of words between Northern Ireland Electricity (NIE) and its watchdog broke out on Friday after the company rejected stringent price cut proposals and asked for a Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC) referral.
Charles Coulthard, Northern Irish deputy director general for electricity supply, accused NIE of trying to raise prices by rejecting his plans that would chop more than 300 million pounds ($467 million) off revenues over a five-year period.
"...when I had expected that NIE would be working with me to tackle the problem of Northern Ireland's high electricity costs they instead have chosen for the first time since privatisation to deliberately seek to increase the price which customers in Northern Ireland must pay for electricity," he stated.
Patrick Haren, NIE chief executive, scorned the statement as "garbage" and "quite disgraceful". He reminded Coulthard that under NIE's proposals, average domestic customer power bills would fall by 35 pounds next year, rising to 50 pounds per year by 2002.
"I have never heard anything so oustandingly outlandish," he told reporters. "Where on earth the man got this...from is beyond me. We unreservedly refute the nonsense of it."
"If this is what passes for dialogue at Offer (the Office of Electricity Regulation) it is quite obvious why we need to have our review assessed by the MMC."
NIE's troubled shares hit another year low of 322 pence, a loss of 11 pence. Most analysts had been surprised at the savage review, but did not believe the group would risk further uncertainty by asking for a lengthy MMC investigation.
Nigel Hawkins, utilities analyst at Yamichi, said the MMC referral may prompt a similar move by National Grid, the electricity transmission network, which last week urged its shareholders to help fight its own price review.
"They (NIE) have a stronger balance sheet than National Grid, so if they think they have a lousy deal then National Grid could well follow suit," Hawkins said. NIE chairman David Jefferies is also the chairman of the National Grid.
NIE is proposing a 22 percent one-off price cut next year followed by a three percent cut in power bills in each of the next four years -- a level it calls tough but sustainable.
However Offer's Northern Irish office wants prices across NIE's three main businesses cut by an average one-off 31 percent, or 68 million pounds, next April followed by a two percent cut in annual charges in the following years.
Bills in Northern Ireland have traditionally been about 20 percent higher than in England and Wales, partly because of the sparse population in the area. It has around half the customers of the smallest English and Welsh regional electricity groups.
NIE also blames escalating oil prices and the high prices independent generating companies charge. They account for about 60 percent of customer bills.
($1=.6420 Pound)
British Telecommunications (BT) and its American partner MCI will "move heaven and earth" to link up with Japan's restructured telecoms giant Nippon Telegraph and Telephone (NTT), analysts said on Friday.
BT welcomed news that the Japanese government had decided to split NTT into three parts under one holding company as part of its efforts to reach a compromise while liberalising the world's second biggest telecoms market.
"BT...welcomes the news that NTT is to be given the opportunity to operate on a truly international basis," a company spokesman told Reuters.
The British telecoms giant, which announced last month that it wanted to merge with America's second biggest long-distance carrier MCI to create Concert Plc, has openly stated that the enlarged group should give it more clout to woo NTT as part of its ticket into the booming Asian telecoms markets.
But he declined to say whether news that Japan will restructure NTT into two regional and one long-distance group would help BT in its quest to link up with the Japanese titan.
"We've always said we'd like NTT to be our partner in Japan," he said, but added: "We can't say whether this makes it easier and better..."
Analysts said that Japan's decision to restructure NTT, the world's biggest telecoms company, had been well flagged and it was now up to BT, MCI and their proposed combined company, dubbed Concert Plc, to forge a deal.
But the difficulty was how to establish partial ownership of an asset in Japan without significant earnings dilution.
"If BT can form a partnership with this new holding company structured NTT -- with access to the international market -- then that's game, set and match," said John Tysoe, telecoms analyst at brokers Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull.
"My feeling is that Concert will probably move heaven and earth try and do a deal with NTT now -- and NTT would probably be crazy to take on anyone else as a partner. Concert has got the product set which everyone wants."
Taking any significant stake in NTT would not only be hugely expensive but dilute earnings. Foreign companies would find themselves paying a lot of money for few earnings simply because the price earnings ratio of NTT is so high, analysts noted.
"There are still foreign ownership restrictions on NTT which will not be lifted until next year," said Andrew Harrington, telecoms analyst at Salomon Brothers.
"But we do know BT wants to establish some form of global alliance with NTT, be it in the form of a marketing agreement, some sort of equity swap or a straightforward equity stake.
"I dont think BT knows what it is going to do yet."
If the creation of Concert wins regulatory approval next year, it will be one of the largest end-to-end telecoms services providers for multi-national companies as the worldwide telecoms market is rapidly being liberalised.
Rivals include French and newly-floated German telecoms groups France Telecom and Deutsche Telekom, that have linked up with U.S. long-distance carrier Sprint to form Global One -- and U.S. telecoms giant AT&amp;T, which has set up World Partners with 16 companies.
NTT, which currently is a purely domestic operator with a stranglehold on the domestic Japanese market, has a market capitalisation that at around $120 billion, eclipses all others.
Japan's Posts ministry said earlier today that the NTT restructuring may not be put into place until 1999-2000.
Britain's Airtours proved on Wednesday that package holidays is a sunny business by beating forecasts with record profits and looking to spend up to 250 million pounds ($413 million) on further acquisitions.
Pretax profits in the year to the end of September soared 46.1 percent to 86.8 million pounds, topping even the most optimistic forecasts of 82 million pounds.
Earnings per share jumped 39 percent to 45.63 pence and Airtours raised dividends for the year 14.3 percent to 16 pence.
As the summer holiday buying season gets into full swing, Airtours -- one of Britain's three big quoted tour operators -- has seen bookings rise a sharp 57.2 percent on last year.
With winter bookings up 12.6 percent in Britain, a sharp 92 percent higher in Scandinavia and 58.9 percent up in Canada, chairman and chief executive David Crossland predicted an encouraging outlook for all the group's major markets.
"They were very good figures," said one analyst, adding that he had nudged up his full year forecasts for 1997 to 103 million pounds from 100 million pounds. Airtours's shares bucked a weak market trend and rose nine pence to 712 pence.
Crossland told Reuters that the group was keen to boost its cruising business, buy a new U.S. or Canadian company or find another country in Europe where it could have a similar businesses to those it already owns in Scandinavia and Britain.
"We're probably in a position to spend between about 200 and 250 million pounds on the right sort of acquisition," he said, adding: "We have the resources to be able to do that today."
Airtours, whose dividends are covered more than three times by earnings, has a robust balance sheet and about 425 million pounds of cash. It said there would be significant opportunities for expansion which it would "exploit as they arise".
Record profits were fuelled by strong results from its Scandinavian operations where Airtours owns Premiair, the largest leisure airline in the region, and careful pricing in Britain with fewer packages on offer, the firm said.
Summer 1997 will see about the same number of packages as this year, but they will attract more long haul, flight and cruise and "all inclusive" holiday makers -- packages which have a higher sales price and better margins, Crossland said.
"We shall maintain our capacity at or about the same level as summer 1996 and if this position is maintained across the industry the rewards could be substantial," he noted.
The thee big operators -- Airtours, First Choice Holidays and Inspirations -- have tried to encourage early bookings and load prices on late bookings for both the 1995 and 1996 summer seasons.
But last month saw Francis Baron, the chief executive of loss-making First Choice, ousted and Inspirations issue a profit warning due to troubles with its Caledonian Airways arm and a setback in tour operations caused by aircraft delays.
The operators' future is also clouded by a government decision last month to refer the industry for a monopolies probe in a row about promoting package holidays through their travel agency arms and offering holiday discounts in exchange for expensive travel insurance.
Chancellor Kenneth Clarke's latest budget also jacked up holiday insurance tax from 2.5 to 17.5 percent from April and doubled airport departure tax from next November.
But Crossland said holiday makers seemed unperturbed. "People are bringing their buying position forward because there were less late deals in the market last year and they are tending to buy the more expensive products as well," he said.
($1=.6047 Pound)
Telefonica de Espana, the leading telephone group in the Spanish speaking world, on Friday dismissed concerns that new rivals would force its prices and profits down and said it saw robust growth.
"The wind is behind us. The growth is there," Juan Villalonga Navarro, Telefonica's new chairman and chief executive, told Reuters in an interview in London.
The $20 billion company, which serves a market of more than 300 million customers mainly in Spain and South America, faces its first home competitor in the form of state broadcaster Retevision SA next year.
The Spanish government, which also plans to float the last 21 percent tranche of Telefonica early next year, will award a third licence in early 1998, completing telecommunications liberalisation by the end of the same year.
Villalonga, 43, who joined Spain's biggest company in June, insisted that the firm would weather the uncertainty of rivals moving into its markets by streamlining businesses and riding on a wave of increased demand -- especially for mobile telephones.
Spain's mobile telephone market was growing faster than any in Europe and in four years, penetration would jump from seven to 27 percent, he said.
Double digit growth is also expected in South America. In Peru, it is forecast to rise to 10 percent from six percent, Chile will see growth of 21 percent from a current 14 percent and growth in Argentina will jump to 28 percent from 10 percent.
"Obviously we will lose market share (through competition) but this will be compensated for by the growth of the market and an increase in efficiency," Villalonga stated.
Telefonica plans to slash its 69,000-strong workforce in Spain by 11,000 over the next four to five years.
Telefonica has been long hailed by analysts, who have called it both "one of the best stocks in Spain" with a rising income stream and falling financial costs and "one of the best strategically positioned operators in Europe".
Villalonga thanks what he calls the company's "unbelievable track record of success" for its strategy of breaking into new markets by taking minority stakes, keeping the old management and linking up with "very, very strong local partners".
Analysts say Telefonica's robust third quarter profits in August confirm 20 percent earnings growth estimates for the year -- a second year of high growth.
But rather than a one-off to impress prior to the final sale of government stock, analysts such as brokers UBS say they believe the company is more than able to sustain high earnings growth and say the shares, that have surged more than 20 percent since October, should be bought up to 3,300 pesetas.
The stock ended trade at 2,875 pesetas on Friday.
There have been delays in releasing details about the impending flotation of the state's last 197 million Telefonica shares -- at current share prices worth about 566 billion pesetas ($4.3 billion). Spain's financial media is tipping a 60 percent of the total offer will go to retail investors.
While Villalonga declined to comment on the sell-off, newspapers say five to six percent of the offer will be put aside for Spanish institutional buyers, with the rest going to foreign institutions.
Broker Morgan Stanley, global coordinator for the international tranche of the offer, argues that competition will take longer to become a harsh reality than suggested by the official European Union January 1, 1998 timetable and in the meantime investors face "years more of nice, fat cash flows".
But the broker noted recently: "We think we are right on this, although we are becoming distinctly more nervous."
($1=130.0 Peseta)
Britain on Thursday opened its doors to 44 new international telephone operators, saying it would create a fully open long-distance telecommunications market 12 months ahead of the rest of Europe.
U.S. telecoms giant AT&amp;T, Channel Tunnel operator Eurotunnel and the Global One alliance between Deutsche Telekom, France Telecom and Sprint are now among those free to compete against dominant players British Telecommunications (BT) and Mercury.
While the rest of Europe is only aiming for telecom liberalisation in 1998, a rash of new rivals -- mainly from the United States -- will be able to offer a full range of telecoms services between Britain and the rest of the world from January 1, 1997.
"The UK has proved to the world that liberalisation pushes down prices and improves services," Science and Technology Minister Ian Taylor said in a statement.
"Phone prices are down 40 percent overall since 1984, and I expect these new licensees to put further downward pressure on international rates," added Taylor, who is keen for a more open telecommunications market to attract inward investment.
In the largest single move towards opening up the international telecom market, which BT values at just under 2.0 billion pounds ($3.33 billion), 46 companies applied for licences in July, 44 of which have now been granted.
Until now, international rivals to BT and Mercury -- which is owned by Britain's second largest telecoms operator Cable and Wireless -- have only been able to operate by paying to lease lines from two British companies.
But own-facilities services are cheaper to provide.
The move may also help dampen opposition by AT&amp;T, America's largest long-distance carrier, to BT's proposed $20 billion merger with America's MCI Communications Corp.
Regulatory clearance hinges on how open the authorities deem Britain's telecom market is. With BT keen to take on the U.S., the world's largest telecoms market -- worth about $200 billion -- regulators are keen to ensure that the same competitive benefits are available to U.S. companies.
BT welcomed its new rivals, adding that it was hopeful of winning approval for its U.S. mega-merger. "This (move) indicates how open the UK market is," a spokesman said.
Analysts say that expectations of growing competition and the inevitable falling margins at home have already been discounted in telecom companies' share prices.
"This has been very well flagged," noted one.
Mobile telephone operator Vodafone Group, having clinched its licence, jumped 6.5 pence to 246.5p.
BT's shares rose four pence to 397p and Cable and Wireless' stock added 1/2p 474.5 pence by early afternoon.
Analysts have found it hard to predict how hard revenues will be hit by BT and Mercury's loss of market share as telecoms companies turn their attention overseas to help boost earnings.
But Cable and Wireless' Mercury is expected to suffer more than BT because international traffic makes up a much higher proportion of traffic -- and thus contributes a higher proportion of profits.
($1=.6003 Pound)
Orange Plc said on Monday its customers will be able to use their mobile phones to chat, transfer data and send faxes in Germany, France, Switzerland, Malaysia, Thailand and Singapore by the end of 1997.
Announcing a roaming agreement with Swiss state-owned telecoms monopoly Swiss PTT, Orange Group technical and operations director Colin Tucker said he hoped customers would also soon be able to "roam" freely in Hong Kong and Scandinavia.
"I suppose the thing to say is, Watch this space," he told a news conference in Geneva.  
The introduction of digital equipment has helped fuel the battle to add value to the basic mobile telephone by allowing free roaming from country to country and far more reliable and secure connections.
Orange's 573,000 subscribers will be able to sign up for these enhanced services if they pass stringent credit checks and pay a 250 stg deposit to help curtail the fraud that has dogged similar previous agreements.
Orange already has a full roaming agreement in Germany and a partial one in France, centred on Paris. Talks are under way to add a number of European and Asian nations to the list.  
As with all roaming agreements, the financial details of the Swiss deal remain a trade secret. Initially, only subscribers in Geneva will be able to use Swiss PTT's Natel City network but Orange aims to boost coverage to Basel and Zurich by early 1997.
Orange says its offer of roaming services between the UK and other countries is part of its aim to provide customers with the best value for money. It notes that a significant proportion of users regularly use its established German services.
"Adding Geneva as another roaming service demonstrates our commitment to providing an international continuity of service," Tucker said.  
The system that Orange uses is much like that of market leaders Vodafone Group and British Telecom's 60 percent-owned Cellnet, in that they are based on the GSM (global system for mobile communications) sister technology called DCS-1800, which operates at 1800 MHz as opposed to 900 MHz.
Most of Cellnet's and Vodafone's subscribers are on the increasingly crowded analogue networks while Orange, along with rival Cable and Wireless- and U S West -owned Mercury One 2 One, is wholly digital.  
As mobile phone companies vie to lift the market out of its yuppie ghetto and into the mass market, the challenge for newcomers like Orange -- with its monthly rental packages that include free minutes and per-second charges -- is to attract customers who still have no mobile phone.
It also has to catch those as they move from the older analogue networks to the new digital technology. Orange, which last month reported gaping first-half pretax losses of 125.2 million stg, has seen its shares fall well short of the 205 pence level of its March flotation that valued the company at about 2.5 billion stg.
But the company, partly owned by Hong Kong conglomerate Hutchison Wam Poa and British Aerospace, says its expects to turn in a profit or pay shareholders a dividend by 1998.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
Institutional investors in British utility Northern Electric said on Friday they were likely to sell up if told to do so by the company, despite their objections to the price offered in U.S. group CE Electric's winning bid.
Northern Electric, which operates in northeast England, was poised to announce whether it would officially concede defeat and recommend the 782 million pound ($1.3 billion), or 650p- per-share, hostile offer by the U.S.-controlled energy group.
"There will be a statement from us in the next 72 hours or so," a company spokesman told Reuters.
Institutions said they were awaiting Northern's response after CE Electric on Tuesday declared its bid unconditional having secured a slim 50.3 percent majority of acceptances.
"We thought that the price offered was too low and I think now it is a question of getting Northern's judgement on it and making up our minds," said a fund manager at one institution who declined to be named. "But we would have to give a lot of thought to being a minority shareholder," he added.
Another institutional investor also said it was unlikely to keep its stake. "I doubt if we would be standing aside. (Selling) would be our normal procedure," said a spokesman.
In normal circumstances, a firm recommends even a hostile offer after the bid has been declared unconditional.
But there has been little about CE Electric's fight for Northern that has been normal -- and at least one institution admitted to harbouring a slim hope Northern could still pull something out of the hat.
Northern Electric, which last year became the only one of the 12 regional electricity companies (RECs) to fight off a hostile bid, lost the battle after an unprecendented extension to the bid tipped the votes in CE Electric's favour.
The Prudential Corp, one of Northern's biggest shareholders, then attempted to defeat the takeover in the eleventh hour by trying to persuade investors who had accepted the offer to sell their Northern shares to the insurer instead for the same price.
CE Electric is keen to win at least 90 percent of the shares -- the amount needed under British takeover rules before it can carry out a compulsory purchase of the remaining ones -- and its message to any institutions thinking about hanging on to minority stakes was terse.
"If these reports about some shareholders deciding that they will not accept the offer are true, it raises a number of questions about their investment policy. But obviously it is up to them to decide what they want to do," a CalEnergy spokesman.
While Northern's core business is heavily regulated, most institutions invest in utilities for their robust dividends -- which is a matter for the board, not the industry regulator.
Some institutions said they remained baffled that Northern's bid for independence had failed because of a technicality.
The Takeover Panel last Friday extended the bid, after CE Electric narrowly failed to win control, because Northern's broker BZW had belatedly reported it had charged Northern an extra 250,000 pounds in a performance-related fee.
One institution said on Friday it remained convined that Northern was worth 700-720 pence a share, saying that if CE's bid had failed, the U.S. group may have come back to discuss a higher price -- or a fresh bidder could have been attracted.
Failing that, the value of the company would have been reflected in its share price in the long term, it said.
Only two of 12 regional electricity companies now remain independent -- Southern Electric and Yorkshire Electricity. Six have been bid for by American companies.
($1=.5943 Pound)
Intel Corp launched its new Pentium chip with multimedia extension (MMX) technology on Wednesday, promising TV-quality video, stereo surround sound and three-dimensional graphics for personal computers.
The world's largest computer chip maker, Intel has collaborated with more than 100 software developers, some of which have created programs such as UbiSoft's dizzying new car race game called Pod' especially for Intel's Pentium processors that have the new MMX technology.
"This means life-like colour, full screen video and graphics, CD (compact disk) quality stereo sound, real-time animation and a better Internet experience," Intel said.
Long-awaited in the computer market, the MMX has helped drive Intel shares to record levels over recent weeks and is expected by industry watchers to boost computer sales.
Intel shares rose a further four dollars on Tuesday to $143-3/8 but were down slightly in active early Wednesday trade.
Trumpeting MMX as a "giant leap forward" for PC users, European technology director Ian Wilson told Reuters that new multimedia software written to take advantage of MMX technology ran up to 60 percent faster than on Intel's previous Pentium processors. Existing software runs up to 10-20 percent faster.
Intel says the new technology will boost computer sales and soon become an industry standard.
"The new features we have introduced with MMX technology allow a much better, richer multi-media experience...and we'll see a home and consumer demand for PCs growing even more," Wilson said.
Intel said that for the first time in its history, a wide range of consumer software was available right at launch to exploit the powers of the new chip.
The MMX chip will initially be offered with the 166 and 200 MHz Pentium processors, improving the performance of personal computer-based multimedia and high-speed communications with faster "modems" for speeding access to the Internet.
A host of computer manufacturers are offering the Pentium MMX processor, including America's International Business Machines Corp, Compaq, Hewlett-Packard, Italy's Olivetti and Japan's Toshiba.
British electrical retail chain Dixons said new Pentium processors with MMX technology would be available in some of its stores from Wednesday.
Wilson said he expected systems incorporating the new MMX technology to retail at between $1,500 and $2,000.
Analysts have estimated that Intel could sell 30 million to 45 million MMX chips this year -- about half of the microprocessor units it will sell this year.
But Wilson declined to comment on shipments, saying only: "By end of year, a significant percentage of our microprocessors being shipped will be incorporating MMX technology."
The MMX chip, which is available on desktop PCs as well as on low-power portable computers, contains 4.5 million transistors and adds 57 processor instructions to speed up software instructions.
The added performance of the technology frees up more of the Pentium processor to work on several tasks at once, including low-cost PC videoconferencing over standard telephone lines.
Intel said it planned to build technology to upgrade some of its older Pentium processors later this year.
The company does not expect a re-run of its experiences in 1992, when it was forced to recall hardware because of problems with its processor chips.
"I think we have learnt a lot from that experience," Wilson said. "We're very confident of the quality and reliability of the product we are shipping."
British Telecommunications Plc is likely to brush off Japanese telecom giant Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp's statement that it hopes to move into the global market independently, analysts said on Thursday.
BT, along with most of its global telecoms rivals, has long sought to link up with NTT and gain a foothold in the lucrative Asian markets. The company's top bosses, who regularly travel to Japan, are meeting NTT executives this month, BT confirmed.
NTT, which only last month won regulatory approval to offer international services as part of a move to restructure the company, said earlier this week that it hoped to pursue an independent approach to gain customers in the global market -- rather than seek tie-ups with interational rivals.
However, analysts said NTT's views, published in a newspaper interview, were more likely to be a negotiating ploy.
"I suspect the interpretation is that this is an entirely rational approach by NTT to indicate that it can, if necessary, go alone," said Laurence Heyworth, telecoms analyst at Robert Fleming Securities.
"Obviously that does improve its negotiating position with regard to potential partners as well," he added.
BT confirmed that chairman Sir Iain Vallance, who is in India with British Prime Minister John Major as part of a tour to boost British trade, will travel on to Japan on Friday to meet NTT executives.
Sir Peter Bonfield, BT's chief executive, will also meet NTT and other organisations in Japan at the end of this month. But the company said these visits had long been scheduled and were not a knee-jerk reaction to NTT's independence stance.
"This is something that has been planned for a long time and yes, they will be meeting people from NTT and indeed other organisations in Japan...as you would expect. It is an important area," a BT spokesman said.
BT has an office in Japan and this year appointed its first regional director in Japan in a move to highlight the importance of the area. It already has a minor link with one of NTT's units, NTT Data, which distributes its Concert Internet Plus services.
But BT also reiterated that while NTT, the world's biggest telecoms company, would be a good partner, there were others it could talk to.
BT has small stakes in mobile telephone operations in Japan.
Most global telecoms groups, for whom the key to success in the increasingly competitive market is global reach, are keen to move into Asia -- an area where few are well represented.
"I think that every major telecommunications grouping is harbouring hopes of linking up with Japan. Clearly NTT is the largest telecom company in the world and provides local access to one of the most impenetrable markets in the world as well," Heyworth said.
BT last November announced a $20 billion merger with America's MCI Communications in a move partly to increase its clout and make it more attractive to potential Asian partners.
Cable &amp; Wireless (C&amp;W) on Friday brushed aside speculation that its landmark merger with three companies had run into hurdles and said it had got the man it wanted to run what will be Britain's biggest cable firm.
In a long-awaited statememt, C&amp;W said it would appoint Graham Wallace as chief executive of Cable and Wireless Communications, formed by merging C&amp;W's Mercury unit, Nynex Corp's NYNEX CableComms Group, Bell Cablemedia Plc, and Videotron Holdings Plc.
"Graham Wallace is the one we wanted," C&amp;W chief executive Richard Brown told Reuters in an interview.
"He is the first choice and we're delighted to get him."
Wallace, who will join C&amp;W on February 1, is currently a director at leisure and media company Granada Group. But he brings with him useful experience in television from a stint on the board of satellite broadcaster BSkyB.
C&amp;W, is mainly a telecommunications business and has little previous experience in television.
But one analyst gave the appointment a lukewarm reception.
"It's not an obvious choice," said the analyst. "He strikes me as very competent, but does he know anything about the cable business? I'm not quite sure why they didn't go for one of the insiders. There were some strong people, I thought."
Although C&amp;W's shares were languishing 2.5 pence lower at 485.5 pence in late afternoon trade, NYNEX CableComms saw its shares rise 5.5 pence to 108.5 pence.
With C&amp;W, Britain's second biggest telecoms company, planning to finalise the cable merger in spring, the lack of a chief executive at the new company had fuelled some speculation that a clash of cultures was hindering talks.
Although Brown conceded that the merger was complicated, he insisted: "That is not true...There's a great deal of activity and we really are right on track.
"There is an exciting spirit of cooperation to bring this to reality," he said.
Brown, who will take the chair of the company, tipped to be worth 5.0 billion pounds ($8.36 billion), said a finance director would be the next announcement.
The proposed cable merger was announced last October -- and most such deals spell job cuts.
Although Brown said he was not legally allowed to comment ahead of Cable and Wireless Communications's planned listing in London and New York, he warned that the new group would "clearly" reap efficiencies.
"I cannot quantify what that is going to be, but we are working on that and we will achieve that," he said.
Cable and Wireless Communications, which will be well-placed to compete against dominant telecoms company British Telecommunications, will provide local, national and international data and mobile telecommunications with multi-channel television and Internet services.
($1=.5979 Pound)
British Telecommunications (BT) on Friday played down top level talks with Japanese telecoms giant Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp but analysts refused to rule out that the companies were hatching a deal.
Since the talks were announced on Thursday, speculation has swept the market that BT, which along with its American partner MCI Communications has been openly courting NTT, might be on the brink of a link-up.
But a BT spokesman told Reuters: "That meeting was of no particular significance. We have regular contacts at that level and will continue to do so with NTT and others."
While BT is playing its cards close to its chest, some analysts speculated that the company, keen to get a foothold in the lucrative Asian telecoms markets via the world's biggest telecoms player, might hammer out a deal with NTT quite soon.
"I think that they are quite close to it," said John Tysoe, telecoms analyst at brokers SocGen Strauss Turnbull. But he added: "That is just instinct."
One analyst even said he had made a bet with a colleague that a deal would be signed or announced before the end of February. But others were split.
"You would expect in the next 12-18 months something to happen," said Chris McFadden, analyst at Merrill Lynch, adding: "If it happened tomorrow, we'd be all pleasantly surprised."
Another said he thought an imminent "memorandum of understanding" between the two companies was quite possible. But he added: "But in terms of any tangible, real tie-up, I would put it later in the year."
But analysts agree on two things. They dismiss as a "courtship ritual" NTT's statement that it might prefer to branch out into the global international market on its own.
They also believe that NTT will want to be calling the shots on any deal.
NTT may even stop short of a straight deal with BT and MCI's Concert alliance, preferring to link up with more than one global alliance. "On a selected basis, they may link up with as many as possible," said one analyst.
At present, there are three main alliances.
Apart from Concert, Deutsche Telekom, France Telecom and America's Sprint have formed Global One. The third consortium is WorldPartners, a loosely-knit organisation created by U.S. telecoms gaint AT&amp;T.
Members include Unisource, a venture of PTT Telecom of the Netherlands, a Swedish firm, the Swiss service provider, Spain's Telefonica and a stack of Asia-Pacific members such as Hongkong Telecom, Australia's Telstra and Korea Telecom.
BT's chief executive Sir Peter Bonfield is also travelling to Japan at the end of this month, part of a regular trip where he is likely to meet NTT executives, BT says.
BT has had an office in Japan for 10 years and already has a minor link with one of NTT's units, NTT Data, which distributes its Concert Internet Plus services.
It sent its first regional director to Tokyo this year in a move to highlight the growing importance of the area.
British telecommunications company Energis said on Friday that its parent, the National Grid electricity transmission network, might sell a majority stake in the company to one or more strategic investors this summer.
The group, which supplies telecoms services to about 14,000 business customers via the Grid's high voltage electricity pylons, also said it was poised to announce a continental deal in a move that will slash the cost of European telephone calls.
Chief executive Mike Grabiner, who moved from the country's dominant phone company British Telecommunications a year ago, said Energis had talked to all global carriers, with the exception of BT, in its search for international partners.
And since the birth of a new cable giant -- Cable and Wireless Communications -- the company is also looking to gain access to key metropolitan areas.
"I think both Energis and the Grid initially see the Grid selling a minority stake in the business," Grabiner told Reuters in an interview. But he added: "For the right mix of partners, I think they could go below 50 percent -- but still maintain a very large strategic and influential interest in the company."
Energis has been burning a 100 million pound ($168 million) per-year hole in the pocket of the Grid, which was demerged from the 12 regional electricity companies and floated in 1995.
Some analysts say that a significant equity partner in loss-making Energis, that has been valued at more than 600 million pounds, could help inspire the Grid's lacklustre shares.
However, Grabiner said talks with U.S. telecoms giant AT&amp;T were "not very active". Some analysts tip the Global One alliance between America's Sprint, France Telecom and Deutsche Telekom as a potential partner.
Global One has little British access and Energis has already signed a "correspondent agreement" with Sprint, America's third international carrier, to end each other's transatlantic calls.
But Energis is keeping its options open. It has also talked to "selected international strategic investors". "(A partner) hasn't got to be a global carrier. It has to be a partner who can support us and add value to the business," Grabiner stated.
Energis was set up in 1993 and operates one of the country's most advanced networks by wrapping 4,500 kms of fibre optic cables -- capable of transmitting images and data as well as voice -- around the earthwires between overhead power pylons.
But Energis still has to rely on local operators to originate and end calls.
A five billion pound merger between Cable and Wireless's Mercury unit, NYNEX CableComms, Bell Cablemedia and Videotron to create the country's biggest cable group has increased the pressure on Energis to get local access.
To be competitive with BT and Cable and Wireless Communications, Energis is considering linking up with other cable players, local operators or building its own network.
In the meantime, with an international licence safely under its belt, Energis is looking to spark an aggressive price war on European busines telephone routes with an "imminent" new correspondent agreement with a major telecom player.
The government broke the BT/Mercury duopoly on owning international calls networks last month, awarding 44 new international licences. Rivals, which used to be forced to lease line capacity from BT and Mercury at high prices, can now buy permament line capacity from others -- and save a lot of money.
"We have a very small market share, a dramatically reduced cost base and every incentive to be aggressive on price to grow our market share. And we will do that," Grabiner said.
Last October, Energis offered to undercut BT by about 50 percent with a 10 pence-per-minute charge for selected business customers on direct dialled calls to America. "European prices have further to go than North American prices," Grabiner noted.
($1=.5958 Pound)
British telecommunications company Energis said on Friday that its parent, the National Grid electricity transmission network, might sell a majority stake in the company to one or more strategic investors.
Energis, which supplies telecoms services to 13,000-14,000 business customers via the Grid's high voltage electricity pylons, is seeking both an international partner and one that will give it local access to key metropolitan areas.
"We have an excellent core national network and a growing customer base," chief executive Mike Grabiner told Reuters.
"International connectivity and local access are the two things to do next," he added in an interview.
Grabiner, who came from the country's dominant 'phone company British Telecommunications one year ago, said Energis had talked with all global carriers, with the exception of BT, in its search for an international partner.
"I think both Energis and the Grid initially see the Grid selling a minority stake in the business," Grabiner said.
But he added: "For the right mix of partners, I think they could go below 50 percent -- but still maintain a very large strategic and influential interest in the company."
Energis is on track for signing up an international partner this summer, Grabiner said, noting: "We're very much still in active discussions."
However, Grabiner said talks with U.S. telecoms giant AT&amp;T were "not very active". Some analysts tip the Global One alliance between America's Sprint, France Telecom and Deutsche Telekom as a potential partner.
Global One has little British access and Energis has already signed a "correspondent agreement" with Sprint, America's third inernational carrier, to end each other's transatlantic calls.
But Energis is keeping its options open. It has also talked to some international "strategic investors". "(A partner) hasn't got to be a global carrier. It has to be a partner who can support us and add value to the business," Grabiner stated.
He conceded that a five billion pound cable link-up between Cable and Wireless, NYNEX Cablecomms, Bell Cablemedia and Videotron, has highlighted Energis' lack of local loop access.
"In a sense our discussions have broadened," he said.
Energis, which needs to be able to match the cost structure of BT and the new cable company Cable and Wireless Communications, is considering whether to link up with a cable company, other local operators or build its own network.
Some analysts say that a significant equity partner in loss-making Energis, that has been valued at more than 600 million pounds, could help inspire the Grid's lacklustre shares.
The Grid is committed to investing 100 million pounds per year into the loss-making telecoms subsidiary for the immediate forseeable future.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7987
Angry British businesses expressed dismay on Tuesday after news of another overhaul of telephone prefixes in what is promised to be the final phase of a search for "future proof" phone numbers.
Telecommunications watchdog Oftel announced plans to create billions of new numbers, although Britain has barely recovered from "PhONEday" in April 1995, when the last batch of new numbers was created and millions of old ones were made obsolete.
"These changes mean more disruption and cost to businesses," said Simon Sperryn, chief executive of the London Chamber of Commerce &amp; Industry. "...business is bound to be lost because of customers ringing the outdated number."
PhONEday cost telecoms giant British Telecommunications alone 100 million pounds ($166 million).
Each time numbers change, companies have to pay thousands of pounds in notifying business contacts and to change stationery and logos on delivery vans and shopfronts.
London dialling codes will now be lengthened by a uniform 020 prefix in the year 2000. The current London codes of 0171 and 0181 will be shortened to 7 and 8, respectively, to be dialled after 020.
Northern Ireland, Cardiff (Wales) and the southern English coastal cities of Southampton and Portsmouth will also each get a new prefix starting with 02. Prefixes of 03 to 06 are being kept for future generations.
In an attempt to quell mounting anger and confusion, Oftel director general Don Cruickshank, who was once memorably quoted as saying he was "not very good" at forecasting demand for numbers, pledged the new plan would be robust and flexible.
"By early in the next century we will have completed transition to one of the most clear, flexible and customer-friendly numbering schemes in the world," he said.
But the opposition Labour Party called for his suspension pending an inquiry into what it called a renumbering "shambles".
Labour consumer affairs spokesman Nigel Griffiths said Oftel had ignored advice that PhONEday would not create enough new numbers and another costly upheaval would be needed.
"Sadly this was ignored. How can the public have any confidence that Mr Cruickshank has got it right?" he asked.
Perhaps surprisingly, BT has backed Cruickshank's new attempt to solve the problem of surging demand for telephone numbers. Cruickshank also drew praise from the Telecommunications Managers Association, a professional consumer group, which said the old system had lacked logic and structure.
A range of numbers with the prefix 05 will be reserved for corporate use, so companies can move around the country without changing numbers -- or just keep one number for all sites.
Mobile, paging and personal numbers are set to take the prefix 07 by 2001, special freephone and local rate services will have the prefix 08 and premium rate numbers will adopt 090 by 1999.
Nevertheless, Cruickshank voiced uncertainty about long-term future use, musing: "If you star-gaze way into the next century I have a sneaking suspicion e-mail and voice recognition may well replace numbers."
Angry British businesses expressed dismay on Tuesday after news of another overhaul of telephone prefixes in what is promised to be the final phase of a search for "future proof" phone numbers.
Telecommunications watchdog Oftel announced plans to create billions of new numbers, although Britain has barely recovered from "PhONEday" in April 1995, when the last batch of new numbers was created and millions of old ones were made obsolete.
"These changes mean more disruption and cost to businesses," said Simon Sperryn, chief executive of the London Chamber of Commerce &amp; Industry. "...business is bound to be lost because of customers ringing the outdated number."
PhONEday cost telecoms giant British Telecommunications alone 100 million pounds.
Each time numbers change, companies have to pay thousands of pounds in notifying business contacts and to change stationery and logos on delivery vans and shopfronts.
London dialling codes will now be lengthened by a uniform 020 prefix in the year 2000. The current London codes of 0171 and 0181 will be shortened to 7 and 8, respectively, to be dialled after 020.
Northern Ireland, Cardiff (Wales) and the southern English coastal cities of Southampton and Portsmouth will also each get a new prefix starting with 02. Prefixes of 03 to 06 are being kept for future generations.
In an attempt to quell mounting anger and confusion, Oftel director general Don Cruickshank, who was once memorably quoted as saying he was "not very good" at forecasting demand for numbers, pledged the new plan would be robust and flexible.
"By early in the next century we will have completed transition to one of the most clear, flexible and customer-friendly numbering schemes in the world," he said.
But the opposition Labour Party called for his suspension pending an inquiry into what it called a renumbering "shambles".
Labour consumer affairs spokesman Nigel Griffiths said Oftel had ignored advice that PhONEday would not create enough new numbers and another costly upheaval would be needed.
"Sadly this was ignored. How can the public have any confidence that Mr Cruickshank has got it right?" he asked.
Perhaps surprisingly, BT has backed Cruickshank's new attempt to solve the problem of surging demand for telephone numbers.
Cruickshank also drew praise from the Telecommunications Managers Association, a professional consumer group, which said the old numbering system had lacked logic and structure.
"Oftel is to be congratulated -- it has developed a framework that will give UK telecoms and the country as a whole the necessary stability to enable people to plan for the future in a dynamic and competitive environment," it said.
A range of numbers with the prefix 05 will be reserved for corporate use, so companies can move around the country without changing numbers -- or just keep one number for all sites.
Mobile, paging and personal numbers are set to take the prefix 07 by 2001, special freephone and local rate services will have the prefix 08 and premium rate numbers will adopt 090 by 1999.
Nevertheless, Cruickshank voiced uncertainty about long-term future use, musing: "If you star-gaze way into the next century I have a sneaking suspicion e-mail and voice recognition may well replace numbers."
As Japanese telecoms titan NTT mulls an investment with British Telecommunications (BT) in France, analysts said on Thursday any such deal would be a major coup for Britain's dominant telecoms operator.
One investment banker told Reuters that Nippon Telegraph and Telephone, the world's biggest telecoms company, had approached probably more than two investment banks to evaluate an investment alongside BT in the French telecoms market.
"I am aware approaches have been made and I am also aware that strategically and commercially this is an opportunity which has been given a lot of attention within the senior management of NTT," he said.
With further details largely confidential, the investment banker said only that BT was also exploring whether to strengthen its 1.1 billion pound ($1.8 billion) investment in a 25 percent stake in France's new telecoms operator Cegetel.
Cegetel, which was set up by Cie Generale des Eaux, is seen as the main rival to France Telecom.
"What is being looked at these initial stages is much more to do with access to international traffic and strategically, from NTT's perspective, how it can enter the market," he said.
BT declined to be drawn on reports that NTT was evaluating a 300 million pound ($490.3 million) investment -- or whether it would welcome such a link. But along with its American partner MCI, BT has been openly courting NTT along with MCI for many years.
And major deal in Japan has become increasingly urgent since the NTT was last month freed by the government to pursue international business.
But a BT spokesman would only say: "If NTT have appointed investment bankers that is their decision."
All three global telecoms alliances are vying to get a foothold in the lucrative Asian markets so that they can sell their services to multinational firms.
"If BT were able to get NTT to take this step in France that would be a significant coup for BT because it would be the first step towards tying them in to (BT's) global Concert alliance," said Andrew Harrington, telecoms analyst at Salomon Brothers.
"Japan is the last major frontier for the world telecoms companies...And if you're going to service multinationals, you've really got to be in Japan," he added.
NTT is the obvious partner choice as it controls virtually all of the local network in Japan as well as having a large presence in Asia.
And there are three main global alliances eager to link up with the group; BT and MCI's Concert, Global One, which incorporates France Telecom, Deutsche Telekom and America's Sprint and U.S. telecoms gaint AT&amp;T's loosely-knit global alliance.
But while speculation is swirling that NTT may first move in France, the investment banker said he would be surprised if the group wasn't looking for alliances right across Europe.
France is one of the most important European markets, but companies such as Italy's STET are also looking to see whether they can forge international partnerships with other operators.
"I would think NTT would be looking at a toe-hold in the top four or five markets in Europe," he said. "(It seems) discussions within NTT have moved onto a more advanced stage and I would be surprised if their efforts were being focused exclusively on France. But that is pure speculation." ($1=.6119 Pound)
British companies tipped as possible targets for a windfall tax under a Labour Government are unconvinced by the opposition party's promise not to discriminate unfairly between "utilities".
Labour, which is far ahead of Prime Minister John Major's Conservative Party in opinion polls, has said only that it plans to tax what it calls "the excess profits of privatised utilities" if it wins the next election, due by May 22.
With speculation mounting that the party plans to raise up to 10 billion pounds ($16.6 billion) from such a tax, companies as diverse as electricity, water, gas, telecoms, airline and airport firms are being tipped as possible targets.
"If Labour are not going to increase taxes anywhere else -- and utility taxes are not exactly unpopular -- they could decide to go and dig more deeply into the stores of privatisation wealth," said Nigel Hawkins, utilities analyst at Yamaichi.
Hawkins speculates that on a rough calculation based on market value, the 15 electricity groups might be hit by a two billion pound bill, the 10 big water companies with one billion pounds, British Telecommunications with 1.5 billion and British Gas with 500 million.
To raise 10 billion pounds, Labour might stretch the phrase "utilities" to include firms such as former airports authority BAA, Associated British Ports, British Steel, British Aerospace and possibly some bus firms.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, while Labour said it did not want to "discriminate unfairly between companies", none of the firms contacted by Reuters believed they should be affected by Labour's tax proposals.
Labour has argued that Britain's utilities were sold too cheaply on privatisation and have benefited from relatively benign regulation allowing them to stack up windfall profits.
Electricity and water giant United Utilities denied it had benefited from a windfall, BT, the country's dominant telephone company, insisted it was neither a monopoly nor a utility and BAA would not even contemplate such a tax.
"We just think it would be a crazy thing to do...the likelihood is just so small,"a BAA spokesman said.
A spokeswoman for British Gas said the firm had made no provisions for a profit tax. "We prefer to see any details of any proposals before commenting on them. It's all hypothetical at the moment," she said.
But analysts are starting to pencil in calculations.
"I work on a basis, as a very rough guideline, of a tax of between five and 10 percent of total market capitalisation," Hawkins said. "In some cases it means in a single year a utility has no retained earnings."
But ahead of its first budget, the Labour Party declines either to define what it means by privatised utilities, or to disclose how much it plans to raise.
Labour has consistently condemned the so-called "fat cat" executives of the privatised electricity and water companies for what it calls short-changing consumers while lining their own pockets and those of their shareholders with hefty dividends.
But short of conceding that it does not consider British Airways a utility, the party will not be drawn on which other companies will fall into its tax net.
"We will consult with the regulators before we make any announcement about the definition of the tax, who it will apply to, its scale. And that won't happen until we're in government," an aide to Labour's finance spokesman Gordon Brown said.
The party, which has taken extensive legal advice, added: "No amount of lobbying by companies or the Conservatives will make any difference. In the way we intend to introduce it, we're 100 percent convinced there will be no legal, financial or technical obstables to the introduction of a windfall tax." ($1=.6035 Pound)
British Telecommunications Plc (BT) might give some ground to U.S. rival AT &amp; T Corp in a quest to win regulatory approval for its $20 billion merger with U.S. carrier MCI Communications Corp, a source familiar with negotiations said on Wednesday.
The proposed merger, the biggest transatlantic deal in history, is being examined by British, American and European regulators. Regulatory clearance from America hinges on whether the British telecom market is deemed to be as open as America's.
AT&amp;T, the world's second biggest telecoms group after Japan's Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp, has charged that it does not have the same competitive advantages in Britain as BT will have in the U.S. after its MCI take-over.
The source said BT might look at some of the prices it charges AT&amp;T, which has been active in Britain for some years. The American giant wants BT to lower its transit' costs -- charged for transporting calls from the coast to AT&amp;T's network in cities.
The company also wants what is dubbed "equal access" to the British market. This would mean that customers would not have to call special numbers or press other buttons on their telephones before being connected with their chosen telecoms operator.
AT&amp;T complains that customers often forget to dial an access code to get onto its service before making calls, which means that BT gets paid for the call.
While the source said BT was unlikely to give ground on equal access, because it was not cost-effective, he said BT might consider its transit charges. "It is something that BT may look at," the source said, adding: "I think interconnect costs are always looked at in the UK."
MCI is America's second biggest international carrier and BT, keen to gain a greater access to the world's biggest telecoms market, wants to buy the 80 percent of MCI it does not already own.
EU sources say that the European Commission is expected to launch a full investigation into the alliance later this week.
The proposed merger, announced last November, was submitted to the Commission for clearance last December, and it has until Thursday to decide whether to clear it following a preliminary investigation -- or launch a deeper probe.
An in-depth probe into whether the deal could violate European fair competition rules could last up to four months.
But BT's EU affairs official Mike Corkerry told Reuters in Brussels: "We're not picking up any negative vibes about the merger...but there may be some nervousness because it is just so big."
BT, which along with MCI is holding briefing on Thursday to discuss British and American regulation, expects the deal to be cleared around autumn.
Misys, Britain's fast-growing, 950 million pound ($1.5 billion) software supplier, posted record half-year results on Wednesday and said it was eyeing up to five international acquisition targets worth up to $30 million each.
Chairman Kevin Lomax told Reuters that Misys, which has snapped up software trading firms in South East Asia, Ireland, the U.S. and Europe, was keen on businesses that operated within a strong international financial services market.
"They (possible acquisition targets) are worth mainly between $2.0 million and $30 million...," Lomax said.
Misys, whose banking division alone now supplies software to 12,000 banks with 4,000 separate installations, has become one of the world's largest application software companies as consolidation in the industry gathers pace.
And with 18.7 million pounds of cash and undisclosed, but low debt levels, Lomax said the company had plently of headroom in its cash flow and borrowing facilities to enable it to embark again on the acquisition trail.
Only last month, Misys announced the planned $60 million acquistion of Summit Systems, a New York computer company specialising in financial derivatives trading software.
Supplying software to banks and insurers has brought rich rewards to Misys. The group raised pretax profits in the half year by 23 percent to 23.7 million pounds on revenues of 129.5 million pounds -- 10 percent higher than in the last half year.
Lomax said he saw the possibility of "creating quite a bit of shareholder value" by buying regional software companies, particularly in the banking industry.
The group has bought software businesses in risk management, private banking, corporate electronic banking, derivatives trading, capital markets trading --- areas where banks and securities firms want to expand and control their activities.
In the last 12 months, Misys's shares have more than doubled to 1140 pence from 567 pence as the group systematically targets international financial institutions that need new software at lower costs but with a greater security of transactions.
Lomax insists that he is unworried by the share price, which at about 20 times prospective earnings, no longer looks cheap. Competitors' price/earnings ratios are comparable, he says.
But the stock has slipped recently, and was trading 2.5 pence weaker at 1115p by 1115 GMT -- despite the strong results.
In terms of international banking, Misys is three to five times bigger than its competitors. Large rivals such as Reuters Holdings Plc and America's SunGard Data Systems impinge only on parts of its market, Lomax noted.
"Nobody of any serious calibre or size competes across the board with us."
The group lifted its half year dividend 15 percent to 4.57p.
($1=.6199 Pound)
Misys, Britain's fast-growing, 950 million pound software supply giant, said on Wednesday it was looking at four or five international acquisition targets worth up to $30 million each.
Chairman Kevin Lomax told Reuters that Misys, which has snapped up software trading firms in South East Asia, Ireland, the U.S. and Europe, was keen on businesses that operated within a strong international financial services market.  
"They (possible acquisition targets) are worth mainly between $2.0 million to $30 million -- and we might do one, we might do four," Lomax said.
With 18.7 million pounds of cash and an undisclosed, but low gearing level, Lomax said the company had plently of headroom in its cash flow and borrowing facilities to enable it to embark again on the acquisition trail.
Supplying software to banks and insurers has brought rich rewards to Misys. The group earlier raised pretax profits in the half year by 23 percent to 23.7 million pounds on revenues of 129.5 million pounds -- a 10 percent rise.  
Lomax said he saw the possibility of "creating quite a bit of shareholder value" by buying regional software companies, particularly in the banking industry.
Misys, whose banking division alone now supplies software to 12,000 banks and 4,000 installations, has become one of the world's largest application software companies as consolidation in the industry gathers pace.
In the last 12 months, its shares have almost doubled to 1115 pence from 567 pence as it systematically targets international financial institutions that need new software at lower costs but with a greater security of transactions.  
Lomax insists that he is unworried by the share price, which at about 20 times prospective earnings, no longer looks cheap. Competitors' PE ratios are comparable, he says.
But the stock slipped 2.5p to 1115p despite record results.
The company has bought software businesses in risk management, private banking, corporate electronic banking, derivatives trading, capital markets trading --- areas where banks and securities firms want to expand and control their activities.
"Internal production is not meeting the time to market requirements that these companies have -- so they tend to look outside to other (software) products," Lomax says.
Only last month, Misys announced the planned $60 million acquistion of Summit Systems, a New York computer company specialising in financial derivatives trading software.
In terms of international banking, Misys is three to five times bigger than its next competitor. Rivals such as Reuters Holdings and America's SunGard Data Systems impinge only on parts of its market, Lomax noted.
"Nobody of any serious calibre or size competes across the board with us."
The group lifted its half year dividend 15 percent to 4.57p.
London Newsroom +44 171 542 7987
A battle to revolutionise British television with more channels, high-quality pictures and CD-quality sound began Friday when two new TV groups applied to run Britain's key digital terrestrial television services.
Leading heavyweights BSkyB, Carlton Communications and Granada Group are teaming up to create a formidable new company -- British Digital Broadcasting.
It plans to offer an initial 15 channels including subscription channels from the British Broadcasting Corporation .
The group faces competition from Britain's third largest cable operator CableTel, which is wholly-owned by U.S. cable company International CableTel, and which also owns NTL, one of two major British transmission companies.
This group, which plans to offer about 20 channels, interactive services such as home shopping and home banking and information services, is called Digital Terrestrial Network (DTN).
"This is the most exciting development in broadcasting since the introduction of colour," said DTN Chief Executive Jeremy Thorp. "We are on the brink of a revolution in entertainment, information and telecommunications."
Thorp gave away few clues about where the group is planning to get its programmes from, saying only that it had "the best sources in the UK and U.S." Its investment plans are also still subject to confidentiality agreements, although the group says they will be "obviously substantial."
If the BSkyB camp is successful in winning the licenses, the shareholders have agreed to meet between them a peak funding requirement of up to 300 million pounds ($481 million). The company is expected to be profitable within five years.
The BSkyB/Carlton/Granada/BBC venture plans three premium subscription channels showing top Hollywood movies and sports. Another 12 channels will be offered as part of a basic subscription package.
British Telecommunications admitted on Thursday to not sharing the same culture as its merger partner MCI Communications, America's second largest international carrier.
But after reporting robust third quarter profits, helped by "healthy" demand for its products and services, BT's chief executive Sir Peter Bonfield told reporters, "We are open minded that these things (mergers) have their pitfalls on culture."
Commentators have dubbed BT "staid" and MCI "spunky". But Bonfield said MCI staff he had met so far had been "amazingly enthusiastic" about the two companies' planned $20 billion merger, which BT expects European and American regulators to clear by this autumn.
After a 39 million pound ($64 million) charge for redundancies, BT's third quarter pretax profits rose to 909 million pounds ($1.45 billion) from 829 million pounds last time -- towards the upper end of analysts expectations.
BT announced last October that it planned to buy the 80 percent of MCI that it did not already own. The new group, called Concert Plc, aims to service multinational companies end-to-end and be represented in all the world's key nations.
BT also hopes to become the second telecoms operator in continental Europe as key markets are eased open to competition in 1998 and is itching to get into lucrative Asian markets.
BT has one of the most comprehensive network partnerships across Europe, having set up joint ventures in about eight continental European markets worth more than $140 billion.
In a move to boost its German venture, BT announced that Norwegian telecoms operator Telenor had agreed in principle to take a 10 percent stake in VIAG InterKom, the alliance BT has set up with German engineering conglomerate VIAG AG.
Telenor brings with it vital expertise from operating in one of the world's most saturated markets for mobile telephones. Having won a mobile and fixed-line licence in Germany, BT said VIAG InterKom would be the first major telecoms copany to exploit the convergence between the two services.
In December, BT beat arch-rivals Deutsche Telekom and France Telecom by clinching a deal with TeleDanmark in Switzerland's second telecom network Newtelco.
While global telecoms groups jockey for position in a race to secure lucrative services to multinational companies, Japan is seen as the last major frontier.
BT has been wooing Japan's Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp, the world's biggest telecoms titan, for years.
While NTT takes its time to decide how best to enter the international market, BT's finance director Robert Brace told Reuters that the group did not expect an MCI-type deal in the Asian telecoms markets "in the next few years".
"I think we will continue to develop on a global basis as and when the opportunities arrive," he said.
Bonfield, who was in Japan last week, said NTT was too big a company to risk linking up with a single company.
"But it may come up with a preferred partner -- and we would like to be that partner," he said. BT, which already has a technology agreement with NTT, is keen to use the $150 billion group's lines to sell its Concert services to business clients.
BT's share price, which has surged to new year highs of 450p in the run-up to results, seesawed despite what SocGen's analyst John Tysoe called "a good, cheerful presentation".
Tysoe has edged up his full year forecast to a pretax profit of 3.2 billion pounds, largely because of a 50 million pound reduction in the level of expected redundancy charges.
BT saw net cash inflow swell to 4.4 billion pounds in the first nine months and has now got a hefty 211 million pounds of funds on its balance sheet.
Schroders Plc, one of the great British merchant banks, on Friday delivered record half-year profits along with a warning that conditions for its businesses may become more uncertain.
"Although the second half has started reasonably well, it will not be easy to match two successive record half years," the the bank said while posting a first-half pretax profit of 115.9 million pounds ($181.5 million) compared to 85.6 million in 1995.
"With elections imminent in the U.S. and UK and with equity markets in those countries testing all-time highs, conditions for our businesses may become more uncertain," Schroders added, sending its shares spinning lower.
Schroders, which lifted its half year dividend 33 percent to 6.0 pence -- the top-end of forecasts -- said the environment for the financial sector had been benign, with financial markets, banking and leasing the major contributors to profits.
Analysts expected the merchant bank, whose shares have seen some hot money thrown at them as bid speculation refuses to die down, to report pretax profits of 106-125 million pounds.
But although first-half results were in line with forecasts, Schroders' shares dived 57.5 pence lower to 13.90 pounds as the market took stock of the company's cautious outlook.
"Talk about uncertain business conditions is not what investors wants to hear," noted one London market-maker.
Some analysts warned that they may scale back profit forecasts despite a healthy growth in profits at Schroders' investment banking arm.
The division saw profits rise to 50.7 million pounds from 41.7 million and Schroders said it had gained a number of prominent new clients. Earnings from its securities businesses in North America and Europe grew "satisfactorily", but activity in Asia/Pacific operations was more subdued, it stated.
The merchant bank's asset management division was boosted by a strong inflow of new businesses and total funds under management rose 13 percent to 83.4 billion pounds.
Schroders said it had built up an "outstanding performance record" in emerging markets, adding that a significant proportion of new business inflow related to new appointments to manage funds in emerging markets.
Pretax profit at the division jumped to 65.2 million pounds from 43.9 million in the same period last year, partly reflecting a delay as profits from new funds feed through.
Some analysts say Schroders' controlling family holding may hinder a takeover. But others believe that the bank may not be able to hang onto its independence for more than two years as the desire for fresh capital for its investment banking arm becomes overwhelming.
This could either lead to a full-scale merger or as a tie-up such as the one brokered between merchant bank Rothschild and ABN Amro, analysts say. ($1=.6385 Pound)
British households are likely to pay less for water and get a better service from cash-rich privatised utility companies in the next decade, the industry regulator promised consumers on Wednesday.
Water watchdog Ian Byatt told privatised water companies -- whose bills and fat executive wages have fuelled vitriolic criticism from consumer groups -- that he expected them to pass on significant efficiency savings to customers in 2000.
"Lower costs mean falling bills," Byatt warned them in a letter setting out his proposed objectives and timetable for the price review, which will be completed in December 1999.
"At the next review, I will expect companies to demonstrate improving standards for their customers and efficiency gains will allow prices to come down in real terms, despite continuing capital investments," he said.
Byatt, who plans to call this summer for comments on his plans, will impose new price curbs on 29 water and sewerage companies in England and Wales from April 1, 2000.
A spokesman for the Water Services Association trade group said that lower bills depended on what new quality and environmental obligations were be set by Europe and Britain -- and how much needed to be spent on new water resources.
But the Ofwat National Customer Council consumer group said that in the absence of competition, it was looking to Byatt to take "the toughest action possible" to get water bills down.
"In my view, water companies have rewarded their shareholders handsomely but have treated their customers much more mean-spiritedly," said deputy chairman Clive Wilkinson. "Customers have had enough of big profits and rising dividends and, at best, being handed back the small change."
Water groups are the only utilities to have raised prices since privatisation in 1989, blaming costly infrastructure investments and new swimming and drinking water quality control directives from the European Union.
The opposition Labour Party, which is expected to levy a one-off tax on the profits of privatised utilities if it comes to power in the next election, is widely considered to have discovered one of the few "popular" taxes.
Headlines such as: "Like water off a duck's back" greeted Byatt's last review, which came into effect in 1995, as shares surged. Consumer groups charged that Byatt had been too lenient.
But Byatt said one of the new review's main aims would be to ensure that water companies' savings over the last five years should be quickly given to customers.
He also does not want spending on water quality, maintaining supplies and reducing leakage -- which sparked criticism during a drought in 1995 -- to be passed onto household bills.
Amid charges that regulators are out of touch with the industry and underestimate its cash-spinning powers, Byatt is mulling appointing senior industrialists to help find a balance between consumer bills and maintaining companies' efficiency incentives.
London's Thames Water charges the least for water -- not being responisble for any coastline. Average bills, at 180 pounds ($294) per year, are some 80 percent higher than in 1989.
Exeter-based South West Water, with its long coastline, has the highest bills at about 330 pounds per year -- a 121 percent rise -- according to 1995-96 figures. ($1=.6120 Pound)
Human rights activists and the computer industry joined in a rare show of cooperation on Thursday, urging more effective policing of pornography and violence in the anarchic "virtual wild west" of the Internet.
    Stories proliferate about pornography, sexual   violence
against women and children, bomb-making recipes, incitement to racial hatred and do-it-yourself fraud schemes that are available at various computer Web sites.
"We acknowledge the problems, we're not abdicating responsibility," said Janet Henderson, lawyer and rights strategy manager for Internet services at British Telecommunications.
"We do have the well-being of customers and ultimately their fundamental freedoms at heart," she told the first European conference on combating violence and pornography in cyberspace.
Lawyers have been studying how to police what appears to be a regulatory vacuum without national boundaries -- while trying to distinguish between what is illegal and what is, more subjectively, harmful.
BT, which launched its Internet access service last March, has adopted what it calls a "taste and decency" policy. Any illegal material found through its access to the computer network is reported to the Internet Watch Foundation, which was created last October.
The foundation, which will pass on information about potentially illegal material to the police, also wants to encourage legal material to be classified, allowing users to block access to certain subjects with filtering software.
Henderson said the Internet allowed anonymous worldwide distribution of vast amounts of extremely violent material and child pornography. But access providers could not be the "moral guardians of the nation".
"Slow but sure is the approach we are taking," she said.
Speakers agreed that without knowing the names of "obscene" websites, even spending hours wandering through cyberspace was unlikely to reveal anything more perturbing than walking into a newsagents. Only with "a great level of intent and technical expertise" was it possible to find obscene material, they said.
But German human rights campaigner Monika Gerstendorfer noted that the Internet made it easier for groups, such as extreme political organisations, to communicate and gather forces worldwide.
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl's cabinet last year approved a bill that will ban websites spreading Nazi propaganda, distributing hardcore pornography to minors and conducting fraudulent business.
The German division of the world's second largest online service, CompuServe GmbH, has said it would consider moving its operations to a neighbouring country if German laws forced Internet companies to control porn on their networks.
Shareholders in Anglo-American conglomerate Hanson Plc Friday overwhelmingly approved the final part of the group's ambitious four-way split-up.
The approval clears the way for its Energy Group division to be spun off on Monday. About 98 percent of shareholders voted for the plan.
The vote ended an era that saw Hanson, under takeover king Lord Hanson and his late partner Lord White, become a star performer in the 1980s as it grew into one of Britain's largest conglomerates.
But with a stock market that showed its mistrust of conglomerates by sharply marking down their shares, Hanson last January announced that it would tear itself up into separate tobacco, chemicals, energy and building companies.
Energy has two main parts, U.S.-Australian Peabody Coal, the world's largest private coal producer, and Eastern, Britain's fourth-largest electricity generator and distribution business.
Analysts said the company has good growth prospects but is difficult to value because of its diversity.
"I genuinely think if there is a chance of growth this is it, but valuing Energy is difficult because it is a very different animal from other utility stocks," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
David Campbell, an analyst at Craig Middleton, said he forecasts earnings growth of around 12 percent annually over the next two years.
Analysts said the potential for using electricity expertise to help Peabody Coal expand in this area in the United States could help Energy's growth.
"Peabody could be the most interesting. It's a clear chance to expand into electricity in the U.S.," one said.
Energy has already said it is mulling a string of acquisitions in Britain and North America and has started talks with a U.S. power marketing company.
The company will join a British electricity sector that has been whittled down by take-overs over the last two years as regional electric companies were bought, leaving just two out of an original twelve created at privatissation in 1990.
There has been some speculation Peabody Coal could be spun off from the British electricity interests, but on Friday, Hanson chairman Lord Hanson ruled this out.
"No, I have had enough of demergers (split-ups) and I think (the two) fit very well together," he replied to a shareholder question.
The group, which is expected to start with market value of around 2.8 billion pounds ($4.5 billion) and is being sold with 1.4 billion pounds of debt ($2.3 billion), will be large enough to rank among Britain's biggest blue-chip companies and America's Fortune 500. Shares of the company will be listed in London and New York.
The split-up will give shareholders one Energy share for every 10 existing Hanson shares held. Every eight shares in the remaining Hanson group will be consolidated into one new share at the same time.
Hanson's first two split-ups, of Britain's Imperial Tobacco Group Plc and U.S.-listed Millennium Chemicals Inc., took place last October.
Shareholders in Anglo-American conglomerate Hanson overwhelmingly approved the group's final plank of its ambitious four-way demerger on Friday, clearing the way for its Energy Group division to be spun off on Monday.
About 98 percent of shareholders voted for the motion, ending an era of wheeler-dealing that created Britain's once mighty conglomerate which, under takeover king Lord Hanson and his late partner Lord White, became a star performer in the 1980s.
But with a stock market that showed its mistrust of conglomerates by sharply marking down their shares, Hanson last January announced that it would tear itself up into separate tobacco, chemicals, energy and building companies.
"I am very pleased with the outcome of the meeting," Energy Group's chairman Derek Bonham told Reuters after the shareholder vote on the final demerger of the Energy Group and a share consolidation.
"And I am personally very excited about the prospects for the Energy Group in the future."
Energy, which will be listed in London and New York, has said it is already mulling a string of acquisitions in Britain and North America, which some analysts say could be worth up to 1.4 billion pounds ($2.3 billion).
Bonham also confirmed that the group was still in acquisition talks with a U.S. power marketing company.
The group, which is expected to start with a market value of around 2.8 billion pounds and is being sold with 1.4 billion pounds of debt, will be large enough to rank among Britain's biggest FTSE 100 blue-chip companies and America's Fortune 500.
Bonham dismissed speculation that Energy would embark on a further sub-demerger of its two main components -- U.S.-Australian Peabody Coal and Britain's largest regional electricity company Eastern Group -- referred to by one shareholder as an "unhappy marriage".
"No, I have had enough of demergers and I think (the two) fit very well together," he told the shareholder meeting.
Energy executives want the company, which says its year dividend will be an indicative 22 pence, to be viewed as a growth stock rather than a utility.
Peabody is the world's largest private coal producer -- still a cheaper fuel than gas in the U.S. -- and Eastern Group is the only fully integrated electricity and gas company in England and Wales.
"Energy will be substantially cash generative until it starts making acquisitions," noted David Campbell, electricity analyst at brokers Greig Middleton.
The demerger will give shareholders one Energy share for every 10 existing Hanson shares held. Every eight shares in the remaining Hanson group will be consolidated into one new share at the same time.
Hanson's first two demergers, of Britain's Imperial Tobacco and U.S.-quoted Millennium Chemicals, took place last October.
Unofficial grey market trading has already begun in both Energy and the new Hanson shares ahead of the split.
Energy saw its shares trade at 520 pence, a loss of 6.5 pence on Friday, while new Hanson shares, the rump building group that retains the old household name, were quoted at 287.5 pence, a loss of six pence.
Bonham, who newspapers say takes home a basic pay package of 450,000 pounds annually, also fielded questions from at least four shareholders who said they were "nauseated" and "aghast" at the executive pay and bonus packages that company directors awarded themselves.
He said that long-term incentive plans, geared to total shareholder return, ensured that executives only got paid what they deserved.
($ = 0.619 British Pounds)
Sema Group, the fast-growing Anglo-French information technology group, said on Friday it was banking on growth from its telecoms and business systems operations in 1997.
But director of communications Marie-Claude Bessis told Reuters that although the group was seeking to expand into Germany and the U.S., Sema plans to focus on maintaining robust organic growth this financial year.
"1997 will be a year of integration...It will not be a year of acquisitions like 1996 and even 1995," Bessis told Reuters by telephone from Paris.
"From 1997 we will see the opportunities...But the objective will be to integrate the acquisitions, to maintain a strong organic growth and to accelerate the telecom and business system market," she said.
Spending on technology is surging in the fast-growing telecoms market and Sema has signed agreements with Global One -- the alliance of Sprint, Deutsche Telekom and France Telecom, which is an indirect shareholder in Sema -- and AT&amp;T.
The group is developing value-added services and two-way messaging for AT&amp;T's wireless arm and is integrating the computer systems of Global One.
Sema's first rights issue to raise 99 million stg for acquisitions and growth last year has left the group with 18 million stg of cash and no gearing.
And acquisitions such as the purchase of France Telecom's stake in IT systems integration business Telis last year have given Sema substantial new resources and know-how in the fixed telephone market.
A recent acquisition spree has brought not only Telis, but British Rail's business services arm and a majority stake in Olivetti's Sytax processing unit into Sema's fold. The first two are expected to add 170 million stg to group turnover in 1997.
Sema, which is quoted on the London and Paris stock exchanges, earlier reported a 35 percent rise in annual year pre-tax profits to 50 million stg on sales of 927 million stg -- a rise of 37 percent.
Organic growth rose a sharp 20 percent and its order book jumped 66 percent to 1.25 billion pounds. But Bessis said she expected average annual growth of around 13 percent from all businesses, including the slower technology arm which includes control and command systems for the Royal Navy.
Sema's telecoms systems business saw 44 percent growth and its business systems, which includes the high-margin outsourcing and systems integrations operations, saw 46 percent growth over the year, Bessis said.
The company, whose shares have surged from 532p to 1275 pence over the year, was one of the best performers on the stock exchange last year.
And Sema says it is unconcerned at its soaring price earnings ratio of around 40 times which could make the shares look expensive.
It's a good sector and it's a company which is growing spectacularly," Bessis said. "We've had five years of tremendous results -- not just one year."
But the shares slipped 23.5p to 1226.5p by 1115 GMT.
Double-digit compound growth is expected to be fuelled by the vast workload as companies prepare computer systems for European Monetary Union and what has been dubbed the "millenium problem" -- adjusting computers to handle dates from 2000.
The bill for these preparations has been tipped by consultants and analysts to be anything from 32-360 billion pounds.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7987
