Toronto stocks ended firmer in brisk dealings on Friday, adding another 10 points to the week's gains of 90 points and bringing the key 300 index closer to breaking its all-time high.
"We just refuse to move lower," said MMS International analyst Katherine Beattie. "We're just ignoring all the bad news." The Toronto Stock Exchange key 300 Composite Index rose 10.9 points to end at 5193.0 points on Friday.
The TSE 300 has recovered from its lows in July and is climbing towards its all-time high of 5248.37 points reached in late May.
The index may test the high next week, Beattie said.
On Thursday Canada's central bank cut short-term interest rates by 25 basis points, easing the key bank rate to 4.25 percent. This will help keep up interest in Toronto's important bank issues, analysts have said.
During the week, investors picked up the heavily weighted gold stocks as gold prices edged closer to the psychological high of US$400 on New York's COMEX, analysts have said.
Canadian forestry products were hot today with U.S. market players as well, said ScotiaMcLeod's director of investment research Jim Doak.
Nine of Toronto's 14 sub-indices rose, led by golds, forestry products, base metals and transports. Falling sectors included media issues, oils and utilities.
Advancing stocks outnumbered declining ones 481 to 371, while 310 traded flat.
Golds were among the most actively traded issues. Meridian Gold Inc. led the pack, rising C0.30 to C$6.20 on more than two million shares. It topped Toronto's most actives list.
Forestry products firm MacMillan Bloedel Ltd. gained C0.30 to C$20.00 in heavy trading.
Fertilizer firm Potash Corp. of Saskatchewan Inc. rose C$2.00 to C$106.00 on strong turnover.
Lower profits from base metals producers are clouding the otherwise improving corporate earnings picture for Canadian companies in the third quarter, analysts said.
Richardson Greenshields of Canada analyst Dunnery Best forecast "very substantial declines in earnings" for major base metal firms.
"I think almost everywhere else you're going to see improvements year-over-year," Best said.  
Canada's third-quarter earnings season kicks off when Alcan Aluminium Ltd reports on Thursday.
Best said he expected Alcan third-quarter earnings to fall to US$0.35 a share from year earlier US$0.61 a share, which came before an extraordinary loss of US$1.24 a share for an asset writedown.
"There's some concerns that the metal group may not exactly report the (expected) numbers," Griffiths McBurney analyst Greg Misztela said.  
Companies such as Inco Ltd, Noranda Inc and Falconbridge Ltd would likely see earnings declines, Best said. A likely exception was Teck Corp, which Best said "has a lot of coal in its production lineup and coal's been strong, so that will be the one offset."
Investors had anticipated disappointments, causing metal stock prices to slide after second-quarter earnings were hit by a drop in copper, nickel and other prices.  
Markets were rocked in mid-June by the news that Sumitomo Corp fired its head copper trader after he allegedly ran up a US$1.8 billion loss.
Analysts forecast that Canada's major banks would lead the pack in earnings gains. The banks are expected to report their results for the fourth quarter ended October 31 in early December.
"They'll have a very good year-over-year comparison. I think quarter-over-quarter won't be quite as good," said Royal Bank of Canada vice-president of equities John Kellett.  
The six big banks, including Royal Bank of Canada and Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, have posted a string of record profits in recent years.
Best said Richardson Greenshields had increased earnings estimates for Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce six times so far this year.
Consumer products earnings will also rise, analysts said.
Another strong area will be Canada's important gold sector, which was buoyed by firmer bullion prices.
Earnings at energy firms will be fueled by higher crude oil prices, analysts said.  
Retail firms will benefit from recent cuts in short-term interest rates by Canada's central bank, spurring consumers to borrow and shop. "Bit by bit the underpinnings are being put in place for a more confident consumer that would eventually lead to better times," Kellett said.
Some high-technology firms have said they would report losses in the upcoming quarter, including Gandalf Technologies Inc and Corel Corp, due to problems getting their products to market.  
Technology heavyweights such as Northern Telecom Ltd and Newbridge Networks Corp will see higher earnings, Best said.
-- Reuters Toronto Bureau 416-941-8100
Canada's largest stock exchange's key index broke through the psychological barrier of 5500 points on Monday to a new closing high of 5518 points.
The Toronto Stock Exchange's 300 Composite Index rose 25.5 points to hit 5518 points by day's end, propelled by soaring gold issues and surging oil stocks.
The 300 Index reached 5000 points on Feb. 1.
Today, "we have gone through the 5500 barrier," noted ScotiaMcLeod's senior vice-president Fred Ketchen.
Another trader said: "There seems... to be foreign interest in Canada."
Overseas investors are eyeing Canada's falling interest rates and declining deficit financing needs, analysts said.
Trading volume totalled 858 million shares valued at C$1.25 billion (US$929 million).
Advancing issues beat out declining ones 561 to 420, while 276 traded unchanged.
Nine of Toronto's 14 sub-indices gained ground, led by the heavily weighted gold sector, which rose 1.2 percent, and the oil group which jumped 1.7 percent, along with stronger base metals and media issues.
Falling groups included consumer products, conglomerates and forestry products.
Among Toronto's hot stocks were fertilizer firms. Viridian Inc. said it agreed to a friendly C$1.33 billion (US$988 million) merger with Agrium Inc.
Viridian shares jumped C$1.25 to C$17.75 on more than 4.1 million shares, while Agrium lost C$0.35 to hit C$18.55 in heavy dealings. The merger would create one of North America's largest integrated fertilizer firms.
Nickel giant Inco Ltd. jumped C$1.05 to C$41.80 in heavy trading, after it announced higher-than-expected third quarter earnings at US$0.19 a share compared to year-earlier US$0.33 a share.
Stampeder Exploration Ltd topped Toronto's most active stocks, rising C$0.10 to reach C$6.55.
- The chief financial officer of debt-ridden Rogers Communications Inc., resigned suddenly Monday.
Graham Savage, well-respected by analysts and considered a restraining force on flamboyant president Ted Rogers, had been with the firm for 21 years. He resigned to "pursue other interests," the company said.
"Of all the senior individuals who have left Rogers in recent times, the departure of Savage is the most detrimental to the company, given Savage is the man who has held it all together for the past few years," said Lawrence and Co. analyst Andrew McCreath.
Analyst John Drolet at Toronto's Yorkton Securities said, "This is not good for Rogers at all. I wouldn't be surprised if other people left."
Rogers, which also owns Rogers Cantel, a wireless communications firm, has shed U.S. and Canadian assets in the past year in an attempt to cut its debts. Rogers piled up most of its debt load when it acquired Maclean Hunter Ltd., along with the Toronto Sun group, for C$3.1 billion ($2.26 billion).
Total long-term debt grew to C$4.88 billion ($3.56 billion) as of June 30 from a year-earlier C$4.07 billion ($2.97 billion).
In 1995, Rogers had revenue of C$2.69 billion ($1.96 billion).
"Graham Savage was a pretty good guy. He was able to keep the wolves away as ... Ted Rogers kept adding on assets. But I guess he finally realized that there's an end to the line," Drolet said.
Alan Horn, vice-president of administration, will serve as acting chief financial officer until another is found, the company said.
In a statement, Ted Rogers said: "We remain committed to the near-term financial priorities of improving our balance sheet and increasing revenues as we invest in new businesses."
Rogers' stock, after being halted earlier in the day on the Toronto Stock Exchange, fell 80 cents to close at C$9.25.
In New York, Rogers fell 50 cents to $6.875 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Canadian consumers are set to play Scrooge again this holiday season to the despair of long-suffering Canadian retailers, according to a survey of consumers by accounting firm Arthur Andersen.
"Overall, the holiday season will not be too much different from last year," said Anderson partner Frank Anderson, who heads the firm's consumer products division.
In 1995, Canadian retailers posted one of their worst holiday seasons in recent years, followed by an unseasonably cool spring that hurt sales and forced chains to discount their stock.
Many chains have said they are counting on the holidays to boost results in 1996.
In the survey released this week, 58 percent of respondents said they would spend the same amount as last year, while 28 percent forecast lower spending and 14 percent said they would spend more.
The survey by Arthur Andersen and Quebec firm Le Groupe Mallette Maheu polled 1,220 Canadians in the second week of October.
The results were little changed from last year's poll when 58 percent said their spending would equal 1994 levels, while 29 percent said they would spend less and 13 percent more.
The findings came despite Canada's lowest interest rates in almost 40 years after a series of rate cuts by the central bank and commercial lenders.
Anderson said this year's survey "just shows you there's some underlying problems people have with respect to the level of debt and job security."
Canadians have opted for paying down heavy debt loads rather than being spendthrift, he said. Many people still also fear for their jobs after years of layoffs, Anderson added.
"It's almost like (you are) looking for an excuse to curtail your spending," he said.
"But then again," he added, "historically people have tended to say these things in October and then sort of spend normally when they get involved in the Christmas atmosphere."
Toronto stocks ended mixed on Tuesday, with a focus on falling pipeline and gold issues after the market gained nearly 300 points thus far in August.
"This is a momentum that cannot be maintained, so this market is giving back some of its gains," said P and C Holdings President Ron Meisels. "I think it'll take a few more days before it sells off enough" for investors to return and hunt for bargains.
The Toronto Stock Exchange's key 300 Composite Index lost 12.8 points to close at 5173.9 points for its second straight losing session. However, advancing issues edged out declining ones 444 to 438.
Another 310 stocks ended unchanged.
More than 88 million shares were traded worth C$1.42 billion (US$1.04 billion.)
Since July 30 the key 300 index has climbed from 4891 points to today's close of 5173, a gain of 282 points.
Market players have been hurt by vacations ahead of a long holiday weekend, Meisels said. Canadian markets will be closed on Monday, September 2, for Labor Day.
All of Toronto's 14 sub-indices fell except for conglomerates and retail issues. Pipelines, golds, transports and forestry products dropped the most.
Among the hot stocks, banks were briskly traded. National Bank of Canada rose C0.10 to C$11.90 in turnover of 2.5 million shares.
Today Canada's third and fourth largest banks, the Bank of Montreal and the Bank of Nova Scotia, kicked off the reporting period for financial institutions by posting better-than-anticipated third quarter profits, said Richardson Greenshields of Canada analyst Dunnery Best.
Rogers Communications Inc. was also active. The nation's largest cable-television firm saw shares slip C0.05 to C$9.20 on 2.4 million shares, continuing Monday's fall. Chief financial officer Graham Savage resigned yesterday, the second senior executive to jump ship this year.
Barrick Gold Corp. closed its deal with small gold prospector Arequipa Resources Ltd. today, paying C$30 a share in cash and Barrick shares after sweetening its original offer of C$27. Barrick stock slipped C$0.15 to C$37.55 on nearly 1.6 million shares.
Investors, who last week helped drive the Toronto Stock Exchange to its 50th record close this year, are unlikely to cool on Canadian stocks any time soon, attracted by Canada's improving economic fundamentals.
"Canada really has begun to address its deficit problems with rather Calvinistic virtue and I think this is going to help that market and also tend to focus other investors on the opportunities in Canada," said Michael Metz, chief investment strategist at Oppenheimer &amp; Co. Inc. in New York.
Toronto's key 300 Composite Index set its 50th record high close last Thursday, the most in a single year since Canada's largest stock exchange began tracking such figures. The previous record was 45 record closes in 1987.
The 300 index has risen almost 19 percent this year.
After the stock market crash of Oct. 19, 1987, Toronto posted no record closes from 1988 through 1992.
But analysts said Toronto's latest bull run will likely extend to mid-1997.
"I don't think the run in the Canadian market is over by any means," said Metz.
"There's such a rosy view out there on Canada," said HSBC James Capel Canada strategist Bob Boaz.
"Inflation is low. The federal deficits are coming down, especially in relation to GDP (gross domestic product). Current account surpluses are happening. The political situation (Quebec separatism) has faded away and that has buoyed the Canadian dollar," Boaz said.
Canada's inflation rate is about 1.4 percent, while the federal government has forecast its yearly borrowing requirements will drop to zero in 1998/99 from C$28.6 billion ($21.4 billion) in 1995/96.
Booming exports have pushed Canada's current account to a surplus due for the first time since 1984.
Political uncertainty has also waned after last year's narrow loss by separatists in a referendum on independence for the French-speaking province of Quebec.
On Friday, Canada's dollar reached the 75 U.S. cent mark for the first time in a year.
"I think Canada's in a different situation" than in 1987, Metz said. "We're on the early stages of what I would call a boomlet worldwide, which is going to result in I think strengthening industrial and commodity prices, which I think are going to be very bullish for Canada."
"I'm still tremendously bullish on stocks," said Boaz, who does not rule out the index hitting 6500 points by mid-1997.
The 300 index closed at 5,591.31 on Friday, down 7.51 points.
Toronto stocks posted their 51st record close of 1996 on Monday, powered by a rally in interest-sensitive issues ahead of an expected cut in Canadian interest rates, analysts said.
"(The) market is looking for yet another Bank of Canada cut," said MMS International analyst Katherine Beattie.
Canada's central bank has dropped short-term interest rates 19 times since May 1995, slashing the key bank rate by 4.75 percent to stimulate a lackluster economy.
"If there's another Bank of Canada cut, the bank stocks will continue rallying," Beattie said.
The Toronto Stock Exchange's key 300 Composite Index gained 17.95 points to close at 5609.26 points, reaching its 51st record close of 1996.
However, the overall market was mixed despite the rally in bank stocks. Declining issues outnumbered advances 478 to 447 with 300 issues unchanged.
A total of 88.7 million shares were traded worth C$1.28 billion (US$958 million) at Canada's largest stock exchange.
"Everybody is still looking at low interest rates and wondering where to put their money. They jump on the bandwagon of recent movements," said Ron Meisels, president of P &amp; C Holdings Ltd.
The financial services sector extended its long rally, adding more than two percent on Monday. The group led half of Toronto's 14 sub-indices higher.
Other strong sectors included real estate and utilities. Base metals, conglomerates and communications led the weak side.
Among hot stocks, Edper Group Ltd. receipts soared C$7.50 to close at C$78.50 on 4.2 million shares amid market speculation that talks over the World Financial Center in New York would soon conclude, leaving majority shareholders' Bronfman group in clear control.
* Bank of Montreal jumped C$1.10 to C$42.70, while National Bank of Canada rose C$0.40 to C$13.65.
* Air Canada shares gained C$0.45 to close at C$5.80 as investors appeared to shun troubled Canadian Airlines Corp. in favor of Canada's largest air carrier.
* Canadian Airlines fell C$0.36 to C$1.25 today after announcing a four-year C$800 million (US$599 million) restructuring plan on Friday.
Investors, who last week helped drive the Toronto Stock Exchange to its 50th record close this year, are unlikely to cool on Canadian stocks any time soon, attracted by Canada's improving economic fundamentals.
"Canada really has begun to address its deficit problems with rather Calvinistic virtue and I think this is going to help that market and also tend to focus other investors on the opportunities in Canada," said Michael Metz, chief investment strategist at Oppenheimer &amp; Co Inc in New York.  
Toronto's key 300 Composite Index set its 50th record high close last Thursday, the most in a single year since Canada's largest stock exchange began tracking such figures. The previous record was 45 record closes for all of 1987.
The 300 index has risen almost 19 percent this year.
After the stock market crash of October 19, 1987, Toronto posted no record closes from 1988 through 1992.
But analysts said Toronto's latest bull run will likely extend to mid-1997.
"I don't think the run in the Canadian market is over by any means," said Metz.  
"There's such a rosy view out there on Canada," said HSBC James Capel Canada strategist Bob Boaz.
"Inflation is low. The federal deficits are coming down, especially in relation to GDP (gross domestic product). Current account surpluses are happening. The political situation (Quebec separatism) has faded away and that has buoyed the Canadian dollar," Boaz said.
Canada's inflation rate is now about 1.4 percent, while the federal government has forecast its yearly borrowing requirements will drop to zero in 1998/99 from C$28.6 billion in 1995/96.  
Booming exports have pushed Canada's current account to a surplus for the first time since 1984.
Political uncertainty has also waned after last year's narrow loss by separatists in a referendum on independence for the French-speaking province of Quebec.
On Friday, Canada's dollar strengthened to the US$0.75 mark for the first time in a year.  
"I think Canada's in a different situation" than in 1987, Metz said. "We're on the early stages of what I would call a boomlet worldwide, which is going to result in I think strengthening industrial and commodity prices, which I think are going to be very bullish for Canada."
"I'm still tremendously bullish on stocks," said Boaz, who does not rule out the index hitting 6500 points by mid-1997.
The 300 index closed at 5591.31 on Friday, down 7.51 points.
Toronto stocks added almost one percent in value on Tuesday, posting their 52nd record close of 1996 on rallying bank stocks and stronger bond and currency markets, analysts said.
"We got a new high on the Canadian dollar. Second, we have a big increase in the Canadian bonds. Thirdly, we had a very strong Dow Jones (Industrial Average)," said Rolie Bradley, an institutional salesman with Maison Placements Canada Inc.
"As a result of all that, you have almost panic buying in Canadian interest-sensitive stocks," Bradley said.
The dollar rallied to close at C$1.3301 (US$0.7518), its strongest level since October 30, 1995. Currency traders said the unit was helped by bullish technical momentum and strong U.S. interest in Canadian bonds.
The Canadian 30-year benchmark bond jumped C$2.00 to close around C$114.55 to yield 6.807 percent.
The TSE, Canada's largest equity market, gained 55.21 points to close at 5664.47. In New York, the Dow Jones Industrial Average added 39.50 points to end at 6081.18.
Toronto traded a total of 105 million shares worth C$1.83 billion (US$1.37 billion).
Advancing issues outnumbered declines 505 to 445 with 300 stocks unchanged.
"The banks are driving Toronto to yet another new high," said RBC Dominion Securities analyst Dunnery Best. The financial services sector rose by 2.8 percent, leading 12 of Toronto's 14 sub-indices higher.
Other strong groups included pipelines, conglomerates, consumer products and transports. The only weak sectors were golds and oils.
Among hot bank stocks, Bank of Montreal added C$1.75 to C$44.45 on 1.8 million shares.
Toronto-Dominion Bank gained C$1.15 to C$34.25 in heavy trading after it was upgraded to an outperform rating by U.S. brokerage Morgan Stanley.
Canada's largest publicly traded firm, BCE Inc., rose C$1.10 to close at C$62.20 on over 1.5 million shares.
Growing interest in the Internet, the world-wide computer link-up, is attracting investors to telecommunications firms like BCE, Bradley said.
Toronto stocks ended softer on Thursday, snapping a recent winning streak despite strength in the gold and real estate sectors.
The Toronto Stock Exchange's key 300 Composite Index slipped by 10.69 points to reach 5739.23 points, after adding more than 1.5 percent yesterday.
"After yesterday's remarkable action, it's time for a pause," said RBC Dominion Securities analyst Dunnery Best in a report.
"The golds have ignited on the quick rise in bullion prices that came late morning," Best said.
COMEX December gold ended up US$0.90 at US$379.60 an ounce, after hitting a six-day intraday high at US$382.00. The yellow metal soared briefly after comments by a Japanese official which indicated Japan will no longer tolerate a weak yen.
This pushed the U.S. dollar lower while investors rushed to sell the currency and buy gold, but the dollar recovered after the U.S. government had a strong 30-year Treasury bond auction, said Maison Placements Canada trader Rolie Bradley.
Toronto trading was brisk at 99.8 million shares worth C$1.7 billion (US$1.28 billion). Advancing issues outnumbered declining ones 522 to 488 and 289 traded flat.
Half of Toronto's 14 sub-indices eased, led by pipeline stocks, banks and consumer products. Golds, conglomerates and real estate issues rolled higher.
"The lower interest rates are really stimulating the whole real estate situation," Bradley said.
Among hot stocks were the banks, which sank after a month's worth of gains. Royal Bank of Canada topped Toronto's most active stocks, falling C$0.90 to C$47.90 on nearly 2.7 million shares.
"Our favourite group, the banks, which got a pasting today, likely will go up tomorrow," Bradley said.
Telecommunications firm Northern Telecom Ltd. lost C$2.55 to reach C$86.95 in heavy trading. It said on Thursday that it agreed to buy the assets of a California-based software firm, AGL Systmes Inc., for an undisclosed sum.
Funeral homes operator Loewen Group Inc. slipped C$0.75 to C$51.75 in light dealings. The closely watched firm, which has made headlines for its battle against hostile bidder Service Corp. International, said it expects to make acquisitions worth US$600-US$700 million next year.
The Toronto Stock Exchange soared and posted its 53rd record close of 1996 on Wednesday, driven by excitement in interest-sensitive issues and conglomerates.
The key TSE 300 Composite Index rocketed 85.45 points to close at 5749.92 points on 118.1 million shares.
The value of shares traded on Canada's largest equity exchange was the third-ever highest at C$2.18 billion (US$1.64 billion).
Toronto reached its highest value traded in one day in 1986, the exchange said.
Toronto is "a market that's generally under-owned in North America," said chief investment strategist Michael Metz of Oppenheimer &amp; Co, Inc.
Canadian bank stocks have benefitted from foreign interest, especially after U.S. brokerage Morgan Stanley upgraded Toronto-Dominion Bank and Royal Bank of Canada this week.
"The multiple revision that has taken place is not pushing the (banking) group into untenable territory, rather it is a valuation range that the Canadian banks deserve, relative to their peers in the U.S.," Best said.
In today's action, all of Toronto's 14 sub-indices surged higher except for gold issues, which fell on slipping bullion prices.
The conglomerate group gained the most, adding more than five percent. It was followed by consumer products, banks and transports.
Banks and interest-sensitive issues were among today's most heavily traded stocks.
Bank of Montreal, Canada's third largest bank, jumped C$0.95 to C$45.00 on more than three million shares while smaller National Bank of Canada rose C$0.35 to C$14.25.
Another hot stock was Canada's largest publicly traded firm BCE Inc., which gained C$2.00 to C$64.20.
Toronto stocks ended softer due to a sell-off in financial services on Wednesday, while the value of trading was the third-highest ever.
The Toronto Stock Exchange key 300 Composite Index fell 7.96 points to close at 5799.01 points, before setting a new intra-day high of 5816.40 points.
Trading volume was 133.2 million shares worth C$2.29 billion (US$1.7 billion). The TSE's highest trading value was C$2.53 billion (US$1.9 billion), set in April 1986.
RBC Dominion Securities analyst Dunnery Best noted that bank stocks were retreating from their recent rally.
"Weaker bond markets are fueling the shift away from the interest sensitives into the more glorious investing terrain of golds and the cyclicals," Best said in a market report.
Ron Meisels, president of P and C Holdings Ltd., added that a pause was warranted since the TSE 300 Index has added about 200 points since November 5.
"It would be quite normal and understandable for it to have a correction after such a robust move," Meisels said.
Toronto's 14 sub-indices were evenly split between rising and falling groups. Pipelines lost the most ground, followed by banks, utilities, and conglomerates.
Golds, base metals and communications led the strong side.
Advancing issues edged out declining ones 492 to 473 while 315 traded flat.
Among hot stocks, nickel giant Inco Ltd. rose C$1.80 to finish at C$45.95 in heavy trading.
Gold firm Euro-Nevada Mining Corp Ltd. topped net gainers, adding C$2.55 to close at C$42.80 in moderate trading.
Royal Bank of Canada lost C$0.95 to finish at C$45.05 in brisk trading, while Toronto-Dominion Bank fell C$0.75 to end at C$32.65.
Canada's largest publicly traded firm, telecommunications conglomerate BCE Inc., lost C$1.15 to close at C$62.60 on volume of about one million shares.
Several large-capitalization Canadian stocks could benefit, while others may be hurt when the Toronto Stock Exchange changes rules governing control blocks in its key 300 Composite Index on Friday.
Stocks such as Barrick Gold Corp, funeral home operator Loewen Group Inc and energy firm Petro-Canada should get snapped up by fund managers when the rules change, analysts said.
"Index funds, which try to match the weighting of the index, are going to have to scramble to buy X percent more Barrick shares...by Friday," said an analyst who declined to be identified.
The Toronto Stock Exchange, which handles more than 80 percent of Canada's equity trading, will increase the relative weighting of 30 stocks on Friday by raising the level of control blocks to 20 percent from 15 percent.
The change will take effect at the start of trading on Friday.
Relative weighting describes the impact a stock or sub-group has on the overall TSE 300 Composite Index.
A control block is a group of shares owned by a single entity. Control blocks are not considered part of a stock's weighting because these shares cannot freely trade in the market.
Under the new rules, the federal government's 18.26 percent holding in Petro-Canada Inc will be included in the company's overall float. Petro-Canada's will therefore see its weighting rise to 1.22 percent from about 1.03 percent.
The TSE is changing the definition of a control block to comply with Ontario Securities Commission reporting rules, said Tara O'Donnell, director of derivative markets management.
The Ontario Teachers' Pension Plan Board, one of Canada's biggest pension fund managers, will need to make some changes, said Zev Frishman, manager of quantitative products.
Teachers' has almost C$45 billion in assets with a third of its money in Canadian equities.
"I cannot go into specific numbers or anything like that, but in essence we will have to, to some extent, adjust positions," Frishman said.
Barrick will likely be one of the stocks snapped up, analysts said.
Barrick, which is 15.7 percent owned by Trizec Hahn Corp, will now be weighted based on 100 percent of its shares from 84.3 percent. As a result, the world's third largest gold producer will see its relative weighting in the TSE 300 increase to 3.28 percent from 2.84 percent.
Loewen's weighting will jump to about 1.74 percent from about 0.64 percent, after a control block held by chief executive Raymond Loewen and his wife is included.
Ontario Municipal Employees Retirement Services (OMERS) said it expected the control block changes to have little impact on its funds.
"You have to remember that the actual changes relative to the market overall are quite small," said Tom Gunn, senior vice-president of OMERS' investment division.
The list of 30 affected stocks also includes gold producer Franco-Nevada Mining Corp Ltd, Quebecor Printing Inc, publisher Hollinger Inc, energy firm Gulf Canada Resources Ltd and Shaw Industries Ltd.
Others are Astral Communications Inc, BC Sugar Refinery Ltd, CCL Industries Inc and Co-Steel Inc, Corel Corp, Cognos Inc, Cinram Ltd., Edper Group Ltd and First Marathon Inc and Tee-Comm Electronics Inc.
At Wednesday's closing siren the Toronto Stock Exchange rang up a 60 point gain for its key 300 Composite Index, driven by an investor buying frenzy.
The TSE 300 Composite Index added 60.55 points to end at 5966.10 points, which was its 61st record close of 1996. Canada's largest exchange also hit an new intra-day high of 5986.80 points on Wednesday, closing in on the important 6000-point level.
Toronto, which handles more than 80 percent of Canada's equities transactions, has gained 85 points in the past two sessions.
"The big stocks are doing extremely well, and at this stage it's a momentum driven market," said Wood Gundy Inc's chief strategist Subodh Kumar. "It's being driven by two things: ... lower interest rates and cash inflows for investors from the mutual fund areas."
Bond yields have dropped in Canada and the U.S. this year as central banks in both countries slashed short-term interest rates to stimulate their sluggish economies, analysts said.
Investors and mutual fund companies are searching for high yield vehicles to improve their returns. "Right now the pressures (by mutual funds) are to allocate funds," Kumar said.
ScotiaMcLeod's senior vice-president Fred Ketchen said Toronto's gains has lagged behind New York's rallies for the last year and a half. Toronto lost ground during Canada's political uncertainty in late 1995 when residents of the French-speaking province of Quebec deliberated whether to separate from Canada.
New York powered ahead during that time but Toronto is slowly closing in. "I think we're sort-of playing catchup and will continue to play catchup because we're further behind than what we should be," Ketchen said.
Today the Dow Industrial Average gained 32.42 points to close at 6430.02 points.
Toronto also has enjoyed a near-continuous rally since mid-September when the 300 index broke through the 5300-point level.
Today 132.8 million shares were traded worth C$2.1 billion (US$1.57 billion), Toronto's fifth highest trading value on record.
All of Toronto's 14 sub-indices powered ahead, except for the financial services sector. The key gold group added more than two percent of its value today, leading media, transportation, consumer product and other issues higher.
On the broader market 616 stocks advanced, beating out 370 declining issues. Another 280 issues traded unchanged.
Among the hot stocks, Edper Group Ltd. shares bucked the slipping trend in the financial services area. The conglomerate saw C$0.25 added to close at C$7.95 on 6.1 million shares.
Fertilizer firm Potash Corp. of Saskatchewan gained C$2.90 to C$96.40 in active dealings.
Toronto stocks ended sharply lower on Thursday, pulled down by investor profit-taking and a sell-off in the heavily weighted gold issues.
The Toronto Stock Exchange key 300 Composite Index lost 43.9 points to end at 5922.2 points, after nearly touching the 6000-point level yesterday.
Ron Meisels, president of P &amp; C Holdings Ltd, said some profit-taking was justified after the 300 Index's bold move upward this month.
Investors sold off some holdings to reap profits since the closely-watched 300 Index gained more than five percent since the beginning of November, Meisels said.
Trading was heavy, with 124 million shares turned over worth C$1.85 billion (US$1.38 billion).
An equities trader agreed. "We could be in for a corrective phase here."
Other analysts have said a pull-back was possible.
Weak gold bullion prices exacerbated the situation, dragging Toronto's gold stocks down. London gold prices dropped to their lowest level in nearly two years after heavy selling forced it through a technical support level of US$377 an ounce to as low as C$375.70.
Banks stocks, which also enjoyed recent gains, suffered from profit-taking, the trader said.
Only three of Toronto's 14 sub-indices rose: conglomerates, oils and pipelines.
The gold sector lost nearly 2.9 percent today, followed lower by banks, transports and consumer products.
Declining stocks raced ahead of declining ones 593 to 395. Another 272 traded flat.
Among the hot stocks, gold prospector Bre-X Minerals Ltd. was in the spotlight again after days of turbulent activity. Shares rose C$1.10 to C$23.70 on more than 2.7 million shares as investors eyed a November 22 deadline for the settlement of an ownership dispute over a huge Indonesian gold discovery.
Toronto-Dominion Bank lost C$1.15 to C$36.75 in heavy turnover.
Barrick Gold Corp., the world's third largest gold producer, lost C$1.15 to hit C$36.75 on Thursday.
A small but growing number of Canadians intend to raid the electronic halls of the Internet for holiday gift-buying instead of strolling through local malls, according to a new survey.
Three percent of Canadians with access to the worldwide computer network said they planned to buy a gift using the Internet, a Deloitte &amp; Touche Consulting Group survey said this week.
"It's 3 percent. It's much more than zero, one or two," said Augustin Manchon, a retail and consumer business consultant.
About 3 million Canadians will have access to the Internet by year-end, according to Michael O'Neil, senior vice-president of marketing research firm International Data Corp.
Once they are on the net, Canadians will have access to some 700 electronic malls, Manchon said.
Jason Zandberg, Pacific International Securities Inc. analyst, said that online shopping is starting to evolve. However, "it's not going to replace walking to a store and buying something."
Many people still like to feel the items they buy.
Recently International Business Machines Corp. unveiled partnerships to develop an Internet retailing outlet that would include a Web site for Canada's largest department store chain, Hudson's Bay Co..
Americans are more progressive than Canadians when it comes to online shopping but not by much, Manchon found. "(Interest is) still slightly under the U.S. but it's not bad for the first or second year," Manchon said.
Manchon also said that up to half of the people who have access to the Internet, estimated at 40 million worldwide, have already bought something using their computers.
And more retailers intend to take advantage of this increasing Internet use, the survey found.
Thirty percent of retailers said they're going to invest in the next few months in Internet-related technologies whereas only 16 percent said that last fall.
"So that's a dramatic increase," Manchon said.
Popular shopping items online tend to be electronic goods, which consumers like to comparison-shop, price-sensitive products and everyday purchases such as toothpaste and cleaning powders, Manchon said.
Companies such as Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the United States' largest retailer, have used the Internet to collect research about customers and test new products before installing them on their shelves.
Manchon also said Canada's retailers were expecting a better holiday season compared to last year's dismal showing. "The optimism is growing from month to month," Manchon said.
"It shows in the numbers of several retailers that we know," Manchon said. "We can confirm that numbers of many of them are going up, slowly."
Heavily weighted bank stocks pushed the Toronto Stock Exchange to stronger territory at Monday's close, despite the fact that more issues fell than climbed.
The TSE's key 300 composite index gained 34.61 points to end at 5952.41, a little shy of its recent record close of 5966. Turnover was 94.1 million shares worth C$1.4 billion (US$1.04 billion).
"At the end of the day, it was only the banks and the utilities," said John Kellett, Royal Bank's vice-president of equities. "When the banks do well, it certainly gives a good tone to the market."
Declining issues edged out advancing ones 486 to 473. Another 288 traded flat.
Bank stocks soared ahead of year-end results, which will kick off with Bank of Montreal earnings on Tuesday. Canada's big six banks are forecast to unveil record profits for the third year in a row.
And analysts consider Canadian bank stocks still undervalued compared to U.S. issues.
"Today I think really what happened was U.S. banks were really on wheels," Kellett said. "Suddenly Canadian banks, which already had gone a long way, looked good."
The important bank sector led eight of Toronto's 14 sub-indices higher, gaining nearly 3.3 percent. Transports, consumer products and utilities followed.
The key gold group and base metals lost the most ground.
Among the hot stocks, the nation's second largest bank Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce rose C$2.25 to C$59.60 on 640,000 shares. The Royal Bank of Canada, the largest, gained C$2.10 to C$48.75 on more than one million shares.
Weakness in gold bullion prices in both London and New York hit gold stocks. However, Bre-X Minerals Ltd., which still embroiled in an ownership dispute over its huge Busang gold discovery in Indonesia, lost more ground due to the uncertainty. Shares fell C$1.35 to reach C$22.55.
Biotechnology firm Biovail Corp. International rose C$2.25 to C$40 in light trading after news that it settled patent litigation with Elan Corp. Plc after Elan had alleged infringement of drug patents by Biovail. Biovail, which also announced that it would list on the New York exchange on December 12, said it and Elan agreed to various cross-royalty payments on some current and future products.
Convenience store company Silcorp Ltd. rose C$0.15 to C$18.40 after news that it signed a definitive deal to buy the assets of Becker Milk Co Ltd. Alimentation Couche-Tard Inc. said it extended its takeover offer for Silcorp to December 23.
The Toronto market was boosted to another record close on Tuesday by strong buying interest in Barrick Gold Corp. after news broke that it is negotiating to gain control of a huge gold deposit in Indonesia.
The Toronto Stock Exchange's key 300 Composite Index gained 23.15 points to end at 5975.56. Turnover was heavy, with 123 million changing hands worth C$2.12 billion (US$1.58 billion). Trading value was the fifth highest ever.
Barrick Gold, the world's third largest gold producer, announced that it was in talks with Bre-X Minerals Ltd. over its massive Busang discovery in Indonesia.
The market opened stronger, turned mixed at midday but surged again after Barrick and Bre-X announced their negotiations. The Indonesian government had asked Bre-X to form a joint venture with Barrick.
"That pulled the gold and precious metals sub-sector higher," said MMS International analyst Katherine Beattie.
Barrick, the world's third largest gold producer, has a relative weighting of 3.28 percent on the TSE's list of its top 300 stocks. Relative weighting describes the impact a particular share issue has on the 300 list.
Bre-X, which saw its shares tumble, is not included in the TSE 300 index.
Ten of Toronto's 14 sub-indices rolled higher, led by golds, transports, consumer products and real estate issues.
Sectors which lost a bit of ground were media, base metals, oils and forestry products.
On the broader market, declining issues still outpaced advancing ones 553 to 412. Another 305 traded flat.
Barrick rose C$2.45 to close at C$39.00 while Bre-X fell C$2.20 to end at C$20.35. Bre-X topped the most actives list, with 8.2 million shares traded, followed by Barrick at 5.9 million shares.
Other active stocks included Newbridge Networks Corp., which fell after brokerage Merrill Lynch cut the stock's rating to near-term neutral from near-term accumulate. Shares in the high technology products maker fell by C$2.25 to reach C$37.60.
The Bank of Montreal, which is Canada's third largest bank, slipped after it announced record yearly profits as expected. Annual profit soared past C$1 billion (US$745 million) but the stock, which had surged in recent weeks, dipped C$0.45 to C$44.20.
The Toronto Stock Exchange posted another record close on Wednesday on the back of stronger financial service and conglomerate stocks.
The TSE's key 300 Composite Index rose 10.85 points to 5986.41 in heavy trading. Trading volume was 108.2 million shares worth C$1.9 billion (US$1.4 billion).
Of Toronto's 14 sub-indices, eight rose led by conglomerates, banks, pipelines and media.
"This is an interest-sensitive area and where buyers tend to conglomerate," said ScotiaMcLeod senior vice-president Fred Ketchen.
Falling sectors included oils, transports and real estate.
Barrick Gold Corp. led Toronto's active issues after news on Tuesday of a deal which will give it a majority share in a rich Indonesian gold deposit.
One dealer said he had only traded Barrick -- the world's third largest gold producer -- and Bre-X Minerals Ltd. which discovered the Busang gold deposit.
"I think both are buys at this point in time," he said.
Bank stocks were snapped up by investors as Canada's Big Six banks began reporting year-end earnings this week.
Bank of Nova Scotia posted its first C$1 billion ($750 million) annual profit on Wednesday.
On the broader market, declining stocks edged out advances 556 to 437, despite gains in the key index. Another 294 shares were unchanged.
U.S. markets will be closed on Thursday due to the U.S. Thanksgiving holiday.
--- HOT STOCKS ---
* Barrick Gold rose 0.75 to 39.65 on more than 7.1 million shares, while Bre-X Minerals gained 0.65 to 21 on 6.5 million shares.
* Bank of Nova Scotia climbed 0.20 to 46.05 on 745,000 shares. Toronto-Dominion Bank jumped 0.80 to 36.85 in heavy turnover of 1.3 million shares.
T-D Bank is scheduled to report its fourth quarter results on Thursday.
* Newbridge Networks Corp. jumped 1 to 38.60 on 1.5 million shares. The stock regained some lost ground since analysts' downgraded Newbridge last week.
The Toronto Stock Exchange closed mixed in heavy trading on Friday, but its key index managed to stay above to the 6000 point mark.
The TSE 300 Composite Index closed 1.98 points lower at 6016.67, after falling 6000 points earlier.
On the broader market, advancing stocks outnumbered declining ones 558 to 398. Another 318 traded unchanged.
"These markets are holding up really well," said RBC Dominion Securities private client strategist Dunnery Best. "The fact that Canada held on to big gains is very powerful."
The TSE 300 Index gained about 90 points this week.
Trading volume was 96.7 million shares worth C$1.58 billion (US$1.17 billion).
The activity was surprisingly heavy since analysts had expected trading to fall off after the New York Stock Exchange closed early for the U.S. Thanksgiving long weekend.
Best expected further gains for the TSE as the year end approaches and Canadians think about buying mutual funds for their registered retirement savings plans.
Ten of Toronto's 14 sub-indices ended higher, led by conglomerates, media, transport and real estate. But the key index was depressed by soft bank stocks and a weak gold sector which lost nearly one percent.
Among the hot stocks, the bank stocks suffered profit taking after strong gains earlier this week on record year-end earnings. Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce fell C$1.10 to close at C$60.70. Toronto-Dominion Bank dropped C$1.00 to C$36.00 on 1.3 million shares.
Barrick Gold Corp lost C$0.70 to end at C$40.50 on 3.7 million shares as it continued talks with Bre-X Minerals Ltd. Barrick said on Friday it expects to strike a deal with Bre-X over the Busang gold deposit early next week. Bre-X shares fell C$0.35 to C$20.65 on 2.4 million shares.
Copper and base metals miner Aur Resources Inc gained C$0.10 to reach C$8.35. Cominco Ltd. sold its minority stake in one block of 4.2 million shares.
Geac Computer Corp Ltd. rose C$3.25 to C$26.00 in active dealings.
Toronto stocks ended softer on Monday after the important gold sector crumbled under the weight of falling bullion prices.
The Toronto Stock Exchange's key 300 Composite Index fell 31.70 points to 5984.97, below the 6000 level. Trading was brisk at 92.6 million shares, worth C$1.6 billion (US$1.2 billion).
The heavily weighted golds group lost more than 2.5 percent after bullion prices dropped in New York. February COMEX gold finished the day US$4.10 cheaper at US$370.90 an ounce.
"The gold index is finally bowing to reality" after recent gains, said RBC Dominion Securities strategist Dunnery Best in a market report.
This year the TSE's 300 index has jumped about 27 percent since the start of trading, aided by a surge in gold stocks.
Ten of Toronto's 14 sub-indices finished weaker, led by golds and financial services. The gaining groups were conglomerates, transports, retail and pipelines.
"The banks were significantly weaker," one trader said. "That's going to take the market lower."
Falling issues powered ahead of advancing ones 596 to 380. Another 277 traded flat.
However, traders said today's weakness was a temporary blip ahead of more year-end gains. In the past mutual fund managers tended to shuffle portfolios before Christmas to provide a strong finish to their year, which has boosted equities markets, they said.
Among the hot stocks, shares in gold prospector Bre-X Minerals Ltd. were still volatile ahead of a potential partnership deal with Barrick Gold Corp. over Bre-X's huge gold discovery in Busang, Indonesia.
Bre-X dropped C$2.90 to C$17.75 on trading of nearly six million shares while Barrick, the world's third gold producer, lost C$0.95 to C$39.55, also in brisk dealings.
The nation's largest bank, Royal Bank of Canada, fell after influential U.S. investment firm Morgan Stanley &amp; Co Inc. downgraded the stock to neutral from outperform, saying it was fairly valued. Shares in Royal closed C$0.85 weaker at C$49.00 after sky-rocketing this month.
Integrated oil company Suncor Inc. climbed to new year highs in Toronto as rumors circulated that it could be the target of a takeover bid. Suncor shares rose C$1.40 to C$60.30 in light trading.
The Toronto Stock Exchange closed weaker in heavy trading on Tuesday, hit by plunging gold stocks and a sell-off on Wall Street.
The TSE's key 300 Composite Index lost 44.24 points to finish the day at 5940.73. The Dow Jones Industrial Average in New York fell nearly 80 points to 6442, its largest loss in a single day since a 161-point drop in mid-July.
Toronto was also dragged down by its heavily weighted gold index, which fell 2.7 percent in the second day of a retreat.
"A dominant theme in Canadian markets today is gold," noted RBC Dominion Securities analyst Dunnery Best.
Turnover was brisk at 119.7 million shares worth C$2.1 billion (US$1.6 billion), Toronto's fourth highest trading value ever.
Analysts said Wall Street was submerged under a wave of profit-taking as investors decided to lock in profits and sell some stocks following recent gains.
All of Toronto's 14 sub-indices lost ground except for media and transportation. Golds led the weaker side, followed by conglomerates, base metals and utilities.
Gold stocks fell after bullion prices slipped in both London and New York.
Declining issues beat out advancing ones 575 to 424. Another 292 traded flat.
More losses may be seen ahead because investors will sell poorly-performing stocks to realize tax losses after a spectacular year, said Josef Schachter, fund manager and Schachter Asset Management Inc president.
"They usually plan on liquidating during this period of time, so they offset the gains they booked earlier in the year," Schachter said.
Shares in Bre-X Minerals Ltd., halted at the end of the day, were active today. Earlier the stock rose C$0.95 to C$18.70 on more than five million shares before the gold prospector announced it increased the resource calculation of its Busang gold discovery in Indonesia by 10.4 million ounces of gold to 57.3 million ounces.
Barrick Gold Corp. is still in the midst of negotations with Bre-X over ownership of the deposit. The Indonesian government set a December 4 deadline for a deal between the two.
Placer Dome Inc. and other miners said said they would challenge Barrick for control of Bre-X's discovery by pressuring the Indonesian government to allow competing offers.
However the Indonesian government said on Tuesday it was expected confirmation tomorrow of a deal between Bre-X and Barrick. It did not mention other potential partners. Barrick fell C$1.70 to C$37.85 and Placer dipped C$0.45 to C$30.60.
Potash Corp. of Saskatchewan surged C$5.05 to end at C$108.50. The fertilizer firm told clients it planed to riase domestic potash prices in mid-February.
The Toronto stock market ended weaker in brisk trading on Wednesday, pulled down by investor profit-taking in every sector except for surging golds.
The TSE's key 300 Composite Index dropped 30.08 points to 5910.65, losing ground for the third day in a row.
Since Monday the 300 index has fallen 106 points or more than 1.7 percent.
"The market is a little shaky right now, and I imagine there's some people taking profits," said MMS International analyst Katherine Beattie. Market players sold stocks to reap profits after big gains earlier this year.
Trading was brisk with 111.3 million shares changing hands worth C$1.8 billion.
"Another one of those middle-cycle corrections," said ScotiaMcLeod senior vice-president Fred Ketchen. "I expect this to be short-lived."
Ketchen said he expected Toronto to continue to rise since investors have nowhere to turn. Fixed income markets generally provide lower returns than equities, especially since Canadian interest rates have fallen dramatically this year.
The important gold sector rose nearly three percent today, which prevented a further decline in the index. The other 13 sub-indices were led lower by conglomerates, media, transports and banks.
Declining issues beat out advancing ones 581 to 428 while 272 were left unchanged.
Among the active stocks were Bre-X Minerals Ltd. and Barrick Gold Corp. Bre-X jumped C$1.30 to C$20.20 on more than five million shares.
Bre-X said today that it and Barrick have made some progress on an ownership deal over Bre-X's huge Busang gold discovery in Indonesia. The Indonesian government, which advised a joint venture between the two, has not yet extended today's deadline.
Barrick stock rose C$1.45 to C$39.30.
Northern Telecom Ltd. fell C$2.50 to C$84.30 in brisk dealings after news that delays in testing software would stall the roll-out of a personal communications network for Sprint. Officials said Nortel would not sustain a material financial impact from the delay.
Biovail Corp. fell C$2.35 to C$35.85. Partner Forest Laboratories Inc. said it would reduce inventory levels but Biovail said it would not affect inventories of its flagship hypertension drug Tiazac.
The Toronto stock market ended weaker in brisk trading on Thursday, hit by a sell off in Canadian bonds and heavily weighted bank stocks.
The Toronto Stock Exchange's key 300 Composite Index fell 68.54 points to close at 5842.11, down almost 1.2 percent. Trading totalled 108.3 million shares worth C$1.9 billion (US$1.4 billion.)
"It was a bond-led downdraft," one trader said of today's market action.
Canadian bonds recorded their biggest one-day drop in more than two years. Investors sold off bonds with Canada/U.S. spreads at near record lows, while a flood of new corporate supply also depressed bonds today, traders said.
Weakness in Canada's currency also helped spark the bond sell-off. The 30-year benchmark bond fell C$3.17 to C$110.85 to yield 7.086 percent.
"This is a made-in-Canada meltdown," RBC Dominion Securities analyst Dunnery Best said in a stock report.
Investors are now likely to buy more natural resource stocks after selling holdings in the financial services, one trader said. "This signals a rotation out of the interest sensitives to some more cyclical names," he said.
The shift already started, with stronger golds helping restrain Toronto's fall.
Of Toronto's 14 sub-indices, banks fell the most at 3.65 percent, followed by media, utilities and pipelines. Financial services and banks are the most important group on the index.
Golds, real estate, and retail rose.
Falling issues powered ahead of advancing ones 600 to 407, while 284 traded flat.
Among hot stocks, the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce fell C$2.50 to C$57.00 on 1.7 million shares. Canada's second largest bank reported net profits rose to almost C$1.4 billion for 1996 from C$1.0 billion last year.
The Bank of Montreal, Canada's third largest bank, fell C$2.00 to C$40.40 on 1.8 million shares.
Bre-X Minerals Ltd. and Barrick Gold Corp. were heavily traded.
Bre-X, which has been advised to do a deal with Barrick over the ownership of its huge Busang gold discovery by the Indonesian government, said it is seeking clarification on what kind of arrangement it should negotiate.
Bre-X shares ended flat at C$20.00 while Barrick rose C$0.95 to C$40.25.
Toronto stocks rallied to close higher on Tuesday, surging ahead on strength in the important resource sectors.
"Canadian gold stocks led Canadian stock prices higher," said Richardson Greenshields analyst Linda Lehman in a market report. The Toronto Stock Exchange's key 300 Composite Index jumped 33.32 points to reach 5150.89 points.
So far in August the key index has climbed out of its July lows to reach heights it has not hit since early June.
"We're not far from our highs," said P and C Holdings president Ron Meisels. Toronto's key index hit its all-time high of 5248 points on May 28, 1986.
At this point in the bullish economic cycle, market players are investing in resource stocks, Meisels said.
Trading reached 87.98 million shares valued at C$1.25 billion (US$910.4 million.)
Markets are also now debating whether the Bank of Canada will ease short-term interest rates since the U.S. Federal Open Market Committee did not raise rates at its meeting today, analysts have said.
Canada's central bank can risk the rate cut without excessively widening bond spreads between the two nations. This may help boost interest in equities.
Golds led all of Toronto's 14 sub-indices higher, gaining 1.38 percent. They were followed by transportation issues, base metals and media issues.
Advancing stocks beat out declining ones 507 to 361, while 275 traded unchanged.
Among active stocks, heavyweight Barrick Gold Corp. jumped C$0.35 to C$37.90.
Black Swan Gold Mines Ltd. was Toronto's most active stock in turnover of 2.7 million shares. The small prospector slipped 0.06 to 1.44 after recent strength as investors await drill results.
-- Reuters Toronto Bureau (416) 941-8100
The Toronto stock market ended weaker on Friday, but recovered most of its losses after sinking nearly three percent on comments by U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan.
The Toronto Stock Exchange's key 300 Composite Index fell 31.69 points to close 5810.06 after experiencing its worst intra-day decline in nine years.
The key index sank 171 points, the most severe fall since a 176.5-point decline on October 22, 1987.
Trading was moderate with 80.8 million shares changing hands worth C$1.4 billion (US$1.03 billion).
"For a volatile market that has been looking for a reason, any reason, to correct, last night's comments by Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan were just the ticket," RBC Dominion Securities analyst Dunnery Best said in a report.
In a speech Thursday night, Greenspan warned that "irrational exuberance" was infecting financial markets, sparking heavy selling in equities markets worldwide.
By the end of Friday's session, Toronto recovered most of its losses, while the Dow Jones average lost 55.16 points.
Analysts said mutual fund institutions were bargain hunting on the TSE today.
"Canadian institutions came in late in the day and established themselves for the RRSP (Registered Retirement Savings Plan) season," said Jim Doak, investment research director of ScotiaMcleod Inc.
Despite Toronto's steep decline, analysts expect the Canadian market to resume its upward march and outperform Wall Street in 1997.
All of Toronto's 14 sub-indices lost ground except pipelines and industrial products. Declining stocks outnumbered advances 705 to 320, while 259 traded flat.
Among hot stocks, Bre-X Minerals Ltd. rose C$0.15 to C$20.15 in heavy trading.
Barrick Gold Corp. is in the midst of finalizing a deal with Bre-X over ownership of Bre-X's massive gold deposit in Busang, Indonesia.
Barrick closed down C$0.05 at C$40.20.
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Canada's second largest bank, fell C$0.85 to C$56.15 on 1.8 million shares.
Fuelled by record earnings and low interest rates, bank stocks have soared to new heights since September.
Despite the Toronto Stock Exchange's steep decline this week, analysts expect Canada's biggest equity market to resume its upward march and continue outperforming Wall Street in the New Year.
Early on Friday, Toronto's key 300 Composite Index posted its largest intraday drop in nine years, losing 171 points or almost three percent to 5670.
It was Toronto's biggest intraday fall since a 176.5 point slide on October 22, 1987, a few days after the Black Monday market crash of October 19, 1987.
The index has slid from a record of 6018 on November 28.
Toronto stocks recovered partly by Friday afternoon, when they were down 40.55 points to 5801.20.
Toronto's losses on Friday were sparked by comments late Thursday by U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan that were interpreted as suggesting that U.S. equity markets may be overvalued.
Profit-taking also hit Toronto stocks this week as investors cashed in on recent spectacular gains.
Montreal-based investment adviser Ron Meisels forecast more weakness in the next few weeks, before a return to strength.
"I think Toronto will probably outperform New York in the first quarter of 1997," Meisels said.
Meisels said Toronto stocks traditionally outpace Wall Street in the late stages of a bull market as investors flock to Toronto's natural resource sector.
This year's boom has been fueled by U.S. economic growth and declining interest rates that prompted low returns on bonds and other fixed-income instruments, analysts said.
Toronto's key index has jumped almost 28 percent this year, versus a 23 percent gain by New York's Dow Jones Industrial Average.
Meisels said Toronto should also benefit later this year as Canadians make their annual contributions to tax-sheltered pension funds, many of which include mutual funds.
"There's an enormous amount of mutual fund money being committed to the market," ScotiaMcLeod's director of investment research Jim Doak said.
In the near term, Toronto could extend this week's 4.3 percent decline, some analysts said.
"I think we're looking at at least a (total) 10 percent correction," said MMS International analyst Katherine Beattie.
This year's rally at the Toronto Stock Exchange, Canada's biggest equity market, will stretch through 1997 and may last until the turn of the century, analysts forecast.
"I think the Toronto Stock Exchange is in the middle of a bull market," said Michael Metz, chief investment strategist with Oppenheimer &amp; Co Inc in New York.
Canadian equities investors have enjoyed spectacular gains this year. Toronto's key 300 Composite Index jumped as much as 28 percent in 1996 and was now up 21 percent after a correction this month.
By contrast, the Dow Jones Industrial Average, which Toronto generally tracks, was up 23 percent this year, down from a peak of 26 percent.
Analysts said Toronto's market -- the 10th most active worldwide -- would continue to benefit from poor bond yields, which make stocks more attractive.
Bond yields have dropped across the board this year, with 50 basis points shaved off the return of Canada's 30-year benchmark bonds.
Most of the seven analysts polled by Reuters said Toronto's 300 index next year would break its all-time high of 6018 points, set on November 28. The index was at about 5700 on Friday.
Analysts' median estimate for the 300 index was 6600 points by the end of 1997, rising to 7600 by 1998's close.
"We're in a general long-term uptrend," said Katherine Beattie, technical analyst for MMS International in Toronto. "The stock market is still going to be the best place to invest given the relatively low interest rates."
"We will start inching up, but even if we do get two or three interest rate hikes in the first couple of quarters next year - which I think is going to cause a correction in the markets - it's not going to put bonds or bills at a competitive enough level," Beattie said.
Fred Ketchen, senior vice-president at brokerage ScotiaMcLeod Inc, said Canadian equities were being snapped up by the large baby boom population, which was now focusing on generating wealth for retirement amid the uncertain future of government pensions.
"I think that basically we're into fairly firm markets right through until the end of the century," Ketchen said. "Demographics are certainly helping here."
Josef Schachter, president of Schachter Asset Management Inc, predicted Toronto's heavily weighted resource sectors could push the 300 index to 7000 by the end of 1997 and to at least 8500 a year later.
"I see (it) potentially higher than that if we can get precious metals...and base metals joining the party," Schachter said.
Montreal-based portfolio consultant Ron Meisels forecast th index would climb to 8000 by the end of 1998 and 10000 by the year 2000.
But some analysts were more bearish, with John Ing, president of Toronto-based Maison Placements Canada Inc, predicting the index would sink to 5750 by the end of 1997 and 5400 by the end of 1998.
Ing said interest rate hikes would cut short the party.
"The inevitable increase in rates has got to happen sometime within the next 12 months and that will test the markets," Ing said.
This year's rally on the Toronto Stock Exchange, Canada's biggest equity market, will stretch through 1997 and may last until the turn of the century, analysts forecast.
"I think the Toronto Stock Exchange is in the middle of a bull market," said Michael Metz, chief investment strategist with Oppenheimer &amp; Co. Inc. in New York.
Canadian equities investors have enjoyed spectacular gains this year. Toronto's key 300 Composite Index jumped as much as 28 percent in 1996 and was up 21 percent after a correction in December.
By contrast, the Dow Jones industrial average, which Toronto generally tracks, was up 23 percent this year, down from a peak of 26 percent.
Analysts said Toronto's market -- the 10th most active worldwide -- would continue to benefit from poor bond yields, which make stocks more attractive.
Bond yields have dropped across the board this year, with 50 basis points shaved off the return of Canada's 30-year benchmark bonds.
Most of the seven analysts polled by Reuters said Toronto's 300 index next year would break its all-time high of 6,018 points, set on Nov. 28. The index was at about 5,700 on Friday.
Analysts' median estimate for the 300 index was 6,600 points by the end of 1997, rising to 7,600 by 1998's close.
"We're in a general long-term uptrend," said Katherine Beattie, technical analyst for MMS International in Toronto. "The stock market is still going to be the best place to invest given the relatively low interest rates.
"We will start inching up, but even if we do get two or three interest rate hikes in the first couple of quarters next year -- which I think is going to cause a correction in the markets -- it's not going to put bonds or bills at a competitive enough level," Beattie said.
Fred Ketchen, senior vice-president at brokerage ScotiaMcLeod Inc, said Canadian equities were being snapped up by the large baby boom population focusing on generating wealth for retirement amid the uncertain future of government pensions.
"I think that basically we're into fairly firm markets right through until the end of the century," Ketchen said. "Demographics are certainly helping here."
Josef Schachter, president of Schachter Asset Management Inc., predicted Toronto's heavily weighted resource sectors could push the 300 index to 7,000 by the end of 1997 and to at least 8,500 a year later.
"I see (it) potentially higher than that if we can get precious metals ... and base metals joining the party," Schachter said.
Montreal-based portfolio consultant Ron Meisels forecast the index would climb to 8,000 by the end of 1998 and 10,000 by the year 2000.
But some analysts were more bearish, with John Ing, president of Toronto-based Maison Placements Canada Inc., predicting the index would sink to 5,750 by the end of 1997 and 5,400 by the end of 1998.
Ing said interest rate hikes would cut the party short.
"The inevitable increase in rates has got to happen sometime within the next 12 months and that will test the markets," Ing said.
Toronto's stock market extended Friday's rally and closed firmer on Monday, boosted by stronger oil and gold issues to end under its all-time high of 6018 points.
Canada's largest equity market closed barely above the watershed 6000 point mark, up 16.55 points at 6001.48. Turnover was brisk at 111.7 million shares worth C$1.58 billion ($1.17 billion).
ScotiaMcLeod's senior vice-president Fred Ketchen noted "the stock market didn't do too badly today."
Despite a rally in oils, Toronto could not breach its all-time high of 6018 points, set on November 28, 1996.
Oils were in focus after Canadian 88 Energy Corp. said it would launch a C$652 million ($476 million) takeover offer for much larger Morrison Petroleums Ltd.
"That added a little juice to the oils sector," Ketchen said.
On the broader market, only four of Toronto's 14 sub-indices lost ground: consumer products, conglomerates, pipelines and base metals. The gaining sectors were led by oils, golds, transports and industrial products.
Advancing stocks outnumbered decliners 544 to 435 and 294 traded flat.
Among active stocks, Morrison Petroleums topped Toronto's most actives, gaining C$1.45 to hit C$9.95 on more than 14.7 million shares. Canadian 88 Energy slipped C$0.30 to C$6.45 in light dealings.
Canada's largest department store retailer, Hudson's Bay Co., saw shares rise C$0.75 to reach C$24.10 in two large block trades.
The Toronto Stock Exchange's key 300 Composite Index rallied to close at a new all-time high of 6055 points on Tuesday, posting its first such record in 1997.
The influential index jumped 53.38 points to end at 6054.86 in brisk turnover of 129.3 million shares worth C$2.1 billion ($1.55 billion).
It busted through a previous record of 6018.65 points set on November 28, 1996, partly powered by a Wall Street rally.
Wall Street rose 53.11 points to close at 6762.29 on stronger-than-expected fourth quarter earnings from computer chip maker Intel Corp. Earnings per share jumped to $2.13 from a year-earlier $0.98.
Today's rally in Toronto was also aided by the start of the 1996 pension season, when Canadians rush into last-minute investing in tax sheltered funds before the traditional end-February deadline.
"The RRSP (Registered Retirement Savings Plan) season is beginning," said Midland Walwyn's director of private client investing Dunnery Best.
Fund manager Josef Schachter of Schachter Asset Management said that managers have been cautiously eyeing the market and waiting on the sidelines but have been forced to invest since more fund money will soon arrive. "They're sitting on too much cash," Schachter said.
All of Toronto's 14 sub-indices spiralled upward, except for golds which tumbled on lower bullion prices.
The consumer products sector soared 3.0 percent, followed by conglomerates, transports and base metals.
Advancing issues outnumbered decliners 514 to 443 and another 299 traded flat.
Takeover targets hogged the spotlight. Gold prospector Bre-X Minerals Ltd. soared 1.90 to $23.35 on today's news that Placer Dome Inc. proposed a rival merger bid to Barrick Gold Corp.'s joint-venture offer. Placer shares slipped 0.90 to $28.10 while Barrick fell 0.95 to 35.45.
The Indonesian government originally suggested Barrick and Bre-X team up to develop the deposit but Placer was encouraged to bid for Bre-X by some Indonesian sources.
Morrison Petroleums Ltd. rose 0.20 to 10.15 and was Toronto's most active stock. It is expected to fight a hostile bid from smaller oil firm Canadian 88 Energy Corp., announced on Monday.
The Toronto Stock Exchange's key index set records for a second straight session on Wednesday, achieving new closing and intra-day highs.
The TSE 300 Composite Index rose 10.48 points to end at 6065.34, after earlier setting an intra-day high of 6080.15.
Trading was brisk with 114.6 million shares changing hands worth C$1.7 billion ($1.27 billion).
A rally in Canada's currency boosted investor interest in equities. "It is encouraging that we're up despite the 35-point drop in the Dow," said MMS International analyst Katherine Beattie.
The dollar strengthened by more than a full Canadian cent, ending at C$1.3413 (US$0.7456) from Tuesday's close of C$1.3519 (US$0.7397) and propelled the TSE to its second record close of 1997.
A bullish article on Canada in Britain's Financial Times newspaper sparked the rally, a dollar trader said.
Toronto posted gains in all but three of its 14 sub-indices -- forestry products, real estate and industrial products. The strong side was led by base metals, pipelines, banks and transports.
Advancing stocks outpaced declines 508 to 466, with 294 flat.
Small gold prospector Bre-X Minerals Ltd. was among the hotly traded stocks. Bre-X rose 1.10 to 24.45 on 2.2 million shares after Tuesday's announcement that Placer Dome Inc. offered a deal to share in the huge Busang gold deposit.
Placer finished flat at 28.10 while shares in Barrick Gold Corp., which is also negotiating a deal with Bre-X, dipped 0.40 to 35.05.
Investors shrugged off news that Indonesian businessman Jusuf Merukh had filed a C$2 billion ($1.49 billion) lawsuit in Canada against Bre-X, claiming part ownership of Busang.
Repap Enterprises Inc. fell 0.47 to 2.90 on doubts that its Avenor Inc. takeover would proceed.
Telecommunications firm Mitel Corp. jumped 0.90 to a new closing high of 10.10 after an analyst upgraded Mitel to buy from market perform and raised his 12-month target to 14 from 11.
Copper giant Rio Algom Ltd. fell 2.00 to 31.90 on 1.5 million shares after some investors decided to buy into a newly announced convertible debenture issue.
The Toronto Stock Exchange's key index closed at new highs for the third consecutive session on Thursday, soaring into record territory and ending above the 6,100 point level.
The TSE 300 Composite Index climbed 38.32 points to end at 6103.66, after earlier reaching a new intra-day high of 6112.32.
Toronto, which set records for the third time this year, was boosted by stronger gold stocks. Portfolio consultant Ron Meisels said investors were looking to snap up cheap gold issues which had recently weakened on plunging bullion prices.
Bullion prices have weakened since Monday on news that the Dutch central bank had sold 300 tonnes of gold reserves.
"Despite the decline in the price of gold, gold stocks have done reasonably well," Meisels said. "People could have gone bargain-hunting today."
Trading was heavy at 121.9 million shares worth C$2.09 billion ($1.56 billion).
Almost all of Toronto's 14 sub-indices rose except for four -- conglomerates, pipelines, forestry products and real estate. Golds led the strong side, followed by oils, banks and consumer products.
Advancing stocks outpaced declines 591 to 400 with 278 issues unchanged.
Among the active issues, Bre-X Minerals Ltd. jumped 0.25 to 24.70 on 2.3 million shares, as some investors laid bets on whether the junior miner would merge with Placer Dome Inc. Placer recently offered to partner with Bre-X to develop the huge Busang gold deposit in Indonesia. Barrick Gold Corp. is also bidding to develop the site with Bre-X.
However Bre-X's fate is in the hands of the Indonesian government, which has the final say on any deal. Placer shares soared 0.85 to 28.95 while Barrick jumped 0.75 to 35.80.
Wascana Energy Inc. topped Toronto's most actives, gaining 0.40 to 16.10 on 3.4 million shares.
Potash Corp of Saskatchewan Inc. fell 2.35 to 113.55 after J.P. Morgan Securities cut its rating on Potash to market perform from buy.
The Toronto Stock Exchange's key index turned in another solid performance on Friday, posting a fourth record close for 1997 and hitting a new intra-day high as well.
The TSE 300 Composite Index added 35.14 points to close at 6138.80 in a seven session winning streak. Trading again was brisk: 120.3 million shares moved worth C$1.85 billion ($1.38 billion).
The new lifetime high is now 6144.29 points.
"Stocks are terrific. Another up day, in Toronto, across the board," said Maison Placements Canada president John Ing. "Gold stocks were very strong."
Bullion prices managed to push heavily weighted golds higher. Comex February gold rose $1.40 to finish at $356.40 on Friday.
Toronto's market has also benefitted from a recent influx of cash. Canadians are turning some bank savings into tax sheltered pension funds ahead of an end-February deadline for 1996 retirement plans, analysts said.
Of Toronto's 14 sub-indices, all but three -- real estate, forestry products and utilities -- climbed. Consumer products, golds, conglomerates and media stocks surged the most.
Advancers outpaced decliners 603 to 430 while 263 traded unchanged.
Tiny Mineral Resources Corp. topped Toronto's most actives. Shares rose a cent to seven and a half cents after news it plans a takeover bid for ailing Anvil Range Mining Corp.
Canadian Occidental Petroleum Ltd. jumped 1.25 to 25.30 on nearly 3.5 million shares, helped by firmer energy prices.
Bre-X Minerals Ltd. slipped 0.30 to 24.40. It said it was reviewing Placer Dome Inc.'s C$5 billion ($3.7 billion) offer and comparing it to Barrick Gold Corp.'s unpriced bid.
Despite Bre-X's response, a source in the Indonesian mines ministry said the Indonesian government, which suggested a Bre-X-Barrick partnership, was not likely to approve Placer's plan. The government has the final say over which companies will develop the huge Busang gold deposit in Indonesia.
Placer shares gained 0.20 to 29.15 while Barrick rose 1.05 to 36.85.
The chief executive of Zellers, a major Canadian retailer, aims to boost sales per square foot by more than a third over three years as the discount chain seeks to regain market leadership from U.S. invader Wal-Mart.
Millard Barron, a former executive at Wal-Mart Inc. - which ousted Zellers as Canada's top discount store chain -- told Reuters in a recent interview he planned to increase sales from C$157 ($117) a square foot for fiscal 1997 ending Jan. 31.
"We are at least a third below where we should be. We should be (C$)225 ($168) to (C$)250 ($187) a square foot and my goal is (that) over the next three years," said Barron, who took the top job at Zellers last September.
Zellers is a unit of Toronto-based Hudson's Bay Co., the owner of Canada's biggest department store chain.
Wood Gundy retail analyst David Brodie called Barron's goal ambitious.
"Wal-Mart has the momentum. These guys (Zellers) don't," said Brodie, who estimated that Wal-Mart had sales of C$220 ($164) a square foot in Canada, a number Barron called "overstated."
Brodie estimated Zellers' market share had fallen to 42 percent since Wal-Mart's arrival in 1994 from about 50 percent. Wal-Mart's Canadian market share was estimated at about 43 percent.
Barron landed the chief executive's job at Zellers at a crucial time. The company's operating profit was halved by the arrival in Canada of Bentonville, Ark.-based Wal-Mart, America's biggest retailer.
Zellers' fiscal 1996 operating profit plunged to C$106.7 million($79.8 million) from C$215.6 million ($161.2 million) in 1995.
Barron said his mission was to improve technology and communications, move more staff to the sales floor, pay more attention to rural stores and renovate the chain's 299 outlets.
He did not forecast fiscal 1998 sales, but said Zellers would post fiscal 1997 revenues of about C$3.4 billion ($2.5 billion), versus C$3.5 billion ($2.6 billion) in fiscal 1996.
He said that crucial holiday sales in December jumped by double digits for the first time in three years.
Barron said that Zellers' capital spending would increase to between two and three percent of fiscal 1998 sales. Retailers usually spend one to two percent.
About 20 percent of planned capital spending would be for technological upgrading, with Barron saying Zellers was four years behind other retailers in technology.
"By the end of 1997, we will be as technologically proficient and productive as any retailer in North America," Barron said.
Zellers said Canada would open up to 12 stores this year, expand 10 and update up to 70.
The Toronto Stock Exchange snapped a seven-session winning streak to close softer on Monday, depressed by weak gold stocks.
The TSE's key 300 Composite Index lost 24.90 points to end at 6113.90 points, in turnover of 104 million shares worth C$1.58 billion.
"We had a really nice seven-day rally," said MMS International analyst Katherine Beattie. "You're bound to have some kind of correction."
Gold bullion prices tumbled today in both London and New York, pushing Toronto's heavily weighted gold stocks into weaker territory. Some U.S. traders were off for the U.S. Martin Luther King holiday.
Despite weaker golds, Toronto stocks did not fall that far. "Actually we didn't have such a bad day today," said Maison Placements Canada president John Ing.
Investors are nervously awaiting comments by U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan on Tuesday, Beattie said. "The market's on edge.
Greenspan is scheduled to testify on the state of the economy to a Senate Budget committee hearing starting at 1000 EST/1500 GMT.
All of Toronto's 14 sub-indices lost ground except for oil and gas. The weak side was led by a 1.7 percent drop in golds, followed by media, transportation and forestry products.
Declining issues outnumbered advances 528 to 474, with 291 stocks unchanged.
Gold stocks were active today. Bre-X Mineral Ltd. fell 1.40 to 23.00 on over 1.8 million shares. Indonesia's Mines and Energy Minister Ida Bagus Sudjana earlier today gave Bre-X and potential partner Barrick Gold Corp. one month to settle with their local partners in the huge Busang gold find.
Barrick's shares dipped 0.75 to 36.10.
Golden Rule Resources Ltd. closed up 0.95 to 9.35 after earlier hitting a 52-week high of 9.65.
Oil firm Canadian Occidental Petroleum Ltd. rose 0.30 to 25.60, topping Toronto's most active list on volume of nearly four million shares.
The chief executive of Zellers, a major Canadian retailer, aims to boost sales per square  foot by more than a third over three years as the discount chain seeks to regain market  leadership from U.S. invader Wal-Mart.
Millard Barron, a former executive at Wal-Mart Inc. - which ousted Zellers as Canada's top discount store chain --  told Reuters in a recent interview he planned to increasesales from  C$157 ($117) a square foot for fiscal 1997 ending Jan. 31.
"We are at least a third below where we should be. We should be (C$)225 ($168) to (C$)250 ($187) a square foot and my goal is (that) over the next three years," said Barron, who took the top job at Zellers last September.
Zellers is a unit of Toronto-based Hudson's Bay Co.,  the owner of Canada's biggest department store chain.
Wood Gundy retail analyst David Brodie called Barron's goal ambitious.
"Wal-Mart has the momentum. These guys (Zellers) don't," said Brodie, who estimated that Wal-Mart had sales of C$220 ($164) a square foot in Canada, a number Barron called "overstated."
Brodie estimated Zellers' market share had fallen to 42 percent since Wal-Mart's arrival in 1994 from about 50 percent. Wal-Mart's Canadian market share was estimated at about 43 percent.
Barron landed the chief executive's job at Zellers at a crucial time. The commpany's operating profit was halved by the arrival in Canada of Bentonville, Ark.-bbased Wal-Mart, America's bigg 536870913 1702065184
Zellers' fiscal 1996 operating profit plunged to C$106.7 million($79.8 million) ffrom C$215.6 million ($161.2 million) in 1995.
Barron said his mission was to improve technology and communications, move more staff to the sales floor, pay more attention to rural stores and renovate the chain's 299 outlets.
He did not forecast fiscal 1998 sales, but said Zellers would post fiscal 1997 revenues of about C$3.4 billion ($2.5 billion), versus C$3.5 billion ($2.6 billion) in fiscal 1996.
He said that crucial holiday sales in December jumped by double digits for the first time in three years.
Barron said that Zellers' capital spending would increase to between two and three percent of fiscal 1998 sales. Retailers usually spend one to two percent.
About 20 percent of planned capital spending would be for technological upgrading, with Barron saying Zellers was four years behind other retailers in technology.
"By the end of 1997, we will be as technologically proficient and productive as any retailer in North America," Barron said.
Zellers said Canada would open up to 12 stores this year, expand 10 and update up to 70.
Toronto stocks closed weaker on Tuesday, dragged into negative territory by tarnished gold stocks and profit-taking.
The Toronto Stock Exchange's key 300 Composite Index fell 37.92 points to finish at 6075.98, the TSE's second straight day of losses. Trading was brisk at 120.9 million shares worth C$2.1 billion ($1.57 billion).
Heavily-weighted gold stocks began the day stronger, but turned softer amid volatile bullion prices.
"We had a negative reversal in gold," said MMS International analyst Katherine Beattie.
Midland Walwyn analyst Dunnery Best said investors reaped the benefits of Toronto's recent rally by selling some holdings.
"Little bit of profit-taking here and there," Best said, adding "it's been a heck of a run."
Toronto posted four record closing highs during a seven-day winning streak which was broken by Monday's decline.
Beattie said short-term losses could be expected after a gain of about 215 points. "A one-to-three day pull-back is not surprising," she said.
Traders began the day nervously awaiting comments by U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan on the U.S. economy, but his generally upbeat assessment was a boost for Wall Street equities.
In Toronto, all 14 sub-indices slipped except transportation, pipelines and real estate. Falling sectors included consumer products, conglomerates, oils and media.
Declining stocks outnumbered advances 559 to 454 with 274 issues unchanged.
Active stocks included oil and gas shares. Petro-Canada fell 0.20 to 21.50 on almost 6.1 million shares, topping the most-active list.
Gold prospector Bre-X Minerals Ltd. fell 0.40 to 22.60 while Barrick Gold Corp. inched up 0.05 to close at 36.15.
Barrick said on Tuesday the only obstacle to a joint venture over the Busang gold deposit is agreements with two of Bre-X's Indonesian partners.
Northrock Resources Ltd. rose 0.35 to a close at a 52-week high of 15.35 after announcing it would be flush with cash following a sale of non-strategic oil and gas properties.
The Toronto stock market closed softer for a third straight day on Wednesday, depressed by losses on Wall Street.
"Canada very often is just following New York," said Montreal-based portfolio consultant Ron Meisels.
The Toronto Stock Exchange's key 300 Composite Index fell 17.31 points to close at 6058.67. Trading was brisk on turnover of 123.1 million shares worth C$1.97 billion ($1.47 billion).
Wall Street was volatile after analysts were disappointed with fourth quarter earnings from computer giant International Business Machines Corp., they said.
Toronto's three-day decline is considered a healthy breather after strong gains earlier this year, Meisels said. "A pause is perfectly natural."
Toronto's 14 sub-indices were equally split between gaining and losing ones. The weaker side was led by battered golds, oils, base metals and consumer products. Stronger sectors included media, transports and pipelines.
Declining stocks outnumbered advances 559 to 450 while 271 traded unchanged.
Shares in the nation's largest airline Air Canada rose 0.75 to 8.00 on ten million shares. Investors were comparing Air Canada's favourable outlook with financially troubled competitor Canadian Airlines Corp. as both waded back into a profit-cutting seat sale, one analyst said.
Small prospector Golden Rule Resources Ltd. rose 1.10 to close at 12.00 on speculation about a property in Ghana.
Barrick Gold Corp. slipped 0.60 to 35.55 after news that potential partner Bre-X Minerals Ltd. said it acknowledged the 30-day deadline provided by the Indonesian government and will strive to resolve issues with its Indonesian partners. Bre-X shares rose 0.05 to 22.65.
Toronto stocks ended softer on Thursday but avoided the massive sell-off on Wall Street as heavyweight bank and transport issues restrained losses in the Canadian market, analysts said.
The Toronto Stock Exchange's key 300 Composite Index slipped 18.16 points to end at 6040.51, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped 94.28 points to 6755.75.
Trading was brisk with 117 million shares changing hands worth C$2.19 billion ($1.63 billion), the fourth highest on record.
"This is mostly a Dow-blue chip sell-off," one trader said.
Strength in the TSE's financial services and transport sectors restrained Toronto's decline.
Computer trading programs drove Wall Street lower after selling was triggered by fears that the Dow was reaching stratospheric levels, traders said.
"They were hysterically euphoric in the morning and hysterically nervous in the afternoon," said Oppenheimer &amp; Co. Inc. chief investment strategist Michael Metz.
Traders attributed some of the bearish sentiment to news that investment strategist Elaine Garzarelli had turned bullish on U.S. stocks, reversing her call for a 10 to 15 percent correction. Traders said this latest conversion to the bull camp raised concerns among some investors.
Of the TSE's 14 sub-indices, 10 lost ground led by media, golds, base metals and utilities. Gaining sectors included transports, real estate and financial services.
Declining stocks outpaced advances 525 to 456 with 288 issues unchanged.
--- HOT STOCKS ---
* Agrium Inc. topped the most-active list, rising 0.60 to 20.50 on 3.9 million shares. Agrium announced plans for a share buyback and US$300 million debt issue on Thursday.
* In financial services, Royal Bank of Canada slipped 0.10 to 49.80 on 3.0 million shares. The bank urged shareholders to reject an activist's proposals to limit senior executive pay at its annual meeting in March.
Among other banks, Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce rose 0.60 to 59.10, while Bank of Nova Scotia improved 0.10 to 46.75.
* Gold miner Placer Dome Inc. sank 0.70 to 26.90 after announcing a construction delay at its Las Cristinas gold mine in Venezuela.
Toronto stocks ended mixed in thin dealings on Monday, resisting New York's continued sell-off with the help of stronger key gold issues.
The Toronto Stock Exchange's key 300 Composite Index rose 7.18 points to reach 6040.76 in turnover of 87 million shares worth C$1.29 billion ($961 million).
But declining issues beat out advancing ones 510 to 460. Another 296 ended flat.
"Stocks didn't do too badly today, thanks to strength in the gold sector," said ScotiaMcLeod's senior vice-president Fred Ketchen.
Trading was thin ahead of Tuesday's U.S. fourth quarter Employment Cost Index. Last week, U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan expressed concern over rising wages.
Toronto's 14 sub-indices were evenly split. The strong side was led by a 1.6 percent gain in precious metals, followed by consumer products and conglomerates.
Weak groups included transportation, forestry products and financial services.
Golds were among actively traded issues. Golden Rule Resources Ltd. added 0.55 to 13.10 while Placer Dome Inc. rose 0.80 to 28.30.
Telecommunications conglomerate BCE Inc., Canada's largest publicly traded firm, slipped 0.10 to 65.65 after posting fourth quarter results that were in line with market expectations, traders said.
Beer and entertainment conglomerate Molson Companies Ltd. rose 1.10 to 22.95. Molson announced plans to sell a 50-percent stake in retailer Reno-Deport Inc. for C$62.25 million ($46.34 million).
Telecommunications firm Northern Telecom Ltd. saw shares dip 1.30 to 92.30 despite posting a strong fourth quarter profit of $1.23 a share versus year ago $0.98.
She once jokingly thought of calling her autobiography "Fascist Bitch," and now Canadian journalists are wondering what epithet to use as she plays an expanding role in the country's largest newspaper empire.
British-born Barbara Amiel, the wife of Hollinger Inc. chairman Conrad Black, is an accomplished journalist who counts many fans in Britain, where she writes a rightwing shoot-from-the-hip column for the Daily Telegraph, the centerpiece of the Hollinger empire.
Although she honed her craft in Canada, she makes many Canadians bristle by standing out from the mass of generally liberal journalists. She says she has never managed to reap the accolades she desires from Canadians, the ones she routinely receives from the British.
A sought-after London party guest, Amiel now is in the Canadian spotlight through her position as vice president of editorial in her husband's newspaper empire. Hollinger added a majority shareholding in Southam Inc., the country's largest daily newspaper chain, to its media stable, substantially boosting its control to more than 40 percent of the industry.
The move left some Canadians worried about Hollinger's influence on their media and many Southam journalists fearful for their jobs as Black's well-known road to profits often involves cutting newspaper staff.
HUSBAND CAN SPEAK FOR HIMSELF
At a recent conference of journalists in Ottawa, Amiel, a former Toronto Sun editor, was repeatedly asked about Black's intentions. She replied that he could speak for himself. But she added, "I think the Southam papers ... have not done their best but have terrific potential."
Amiel, who still writes for Maclean's magazine, hesitated when asked if she was treated differently in Canada than abroad. "I think Canada's been very good to me. I became editor of a newspaper, (former editor) Peter Newman gave me a column in Maclean's magazine, how many people have got that? You can't complain."
But then she added, "I've never, although one always wants it, had the recognition of my peers that I've had in England, but then maybe I didn't deserve it in Canada."
Television personality Alan Edmonds, an admirer of Amiel who disagrees with her views, said Canadians have refrained from praising Amiel's talents because of her rightwing bias. "In the years that she was in Canada ... the prevailing mindset in the media was in the opposite direction."
Edmonds said other journalists were jealous of the openings that came her way. "She's used her undoubted feminine attraction to ... create opportunities to use her undoubted superior intellect."
In person and in print, Amiel has a knack for sparking debates. For instance, she once wrote that Quebec's moves toward independence, culminating in a narrow 1995 defeat for the separatists, could be blamed on Canada's liberal elite, which promoted multi-culturalism, thereby strengthening French-Canadian nationalism.
CASTIGATING LEFTWINGERS
Her columns have castigated Ontario's former leftwing government, led by the New Democratic Party, for allegedly being swayed by special interest groups like the disabled. She also wrote that Ontario, which gave homosexual couples the same rights as heterosexual ones, had weakened the family.
Canada's most widely read satirical magazine, Frank, noted "a favorite theme in her columns is the insidiousness of self-pity, that the poor should get on with their lives and quit carping about it." And columnist Allan Fotheringham once observed, "Barbara Amiel, otherwise known as Mrs. Conrad Black, can take out any opponent in the world and eat them for breakfast. As she does regularly in print."
Amiel has even joked about her reputation, saying she thought about calling her surprisingly frank 1980 autobiography "Fascist Bitch," a name suggested by irate readers. Instead the book was titled "Confessions."
Now in her mid-50s, the much-married Amiel began her path at the tender age of eight at a "grotty little newspaper" in her hometown of Hendon, England. Her parents divorced, her mother remarried and her new Canadian stepfather dragged his new family back home. Amiel, used to fine surroundings, ended up in Hamilton, a gritty steel town in southern Ontario about 40 miles (70 km) from Toronto.
Before her 1991 marriage to Black, she was married to student Gary Smith, philosopher George Jonas and cable magnate David Graham, with whom she returned to England in 1985.
In 1993 well-known Canadian author Margaret Atwood published "The Robber Bride" about a scapel-assisted femme fatale named Zenia. The Canadian rumor mill identified Amiel as the model for Zenia, but she denied it.
The Toronto Stock Exchange's key index ended higher on Wednesday, but the overall market finished mixed in thin trading as many money managers decided to place their bets on fixed income investments.
The TSE 300 Composite Index rose 24.57 points to close at 6071.28 in turnover of 105.3 million shares worth C$1.4 billion ($1.04 billion).
Almost all of Toronto's 14 sub-indices ended higher except transportation. Despite these gains, declining stocks outpaced advances 492 to 483 with 281 issues unchanged.
"I think the market's kind of jittery," said Oppenheimer &amp; Co Inc chief strategist Michael Metz.
ScotiaMcLeod's director of investment research Jim Doak agreed. "People are being cagey, not going to equity funds," he said.
Many mutual fund managers are trading cautiously and awaiting direction in the market after this week's volatility, analysts said.
New York soared 84.7 points to close at 6740.7 following yesterday's roller-coaster ride in North American markets.
Media, consumer products, golds and real estate posted the strongest gains among Toronto's rising sectors.
Smaller issues, including some heavyweight gold stocks, we're sold off in thin trading, one trader said.
Golden Rule Resources Ltd. lost 2.70 to 10.05 on more than three million shares. Brokerage firm ScotiaMcLeod recommended selling the prospector after shares nearly tripled since January 6 on initial results from its Ghana property.
Bre-X Minerals Ltd. slipped 0.05 to 21.65 while potential partner Barrick Gold Corp. rose 0.20 to 37.05. Both denied an earlier report which said Bre-X may be able to hold an auction for control over its huge Busang gold deposit in Indonesia.
Shares in Placer Dome Inc., Barrick's possible rival, rose 0.70 to close at 28.60.
The Toronto stock market joined a rally in bonds and finished stronger on Friday, resisting a late session downturn in New York and weakness in heavyweight gold stocks.
Toronto's key 300 Composite Index rose 24.48 points to close at 6109.58. About 105 million shares changed hands worth C$1.48 billion ($1.1 billion).
"It's the strength in the bond market and the bill market," said MMS International analyst Katherine Beattie.
North American bonds rallied after U.S. gross domestic product data released early Friday suggested inflation is not accelerating. The data eased fears of higher U.S. interest rates following next week's rate-setting Federal Open Market Committee meeting.
Canada's benchmark 30-year bond jumped C$1.20 to close at C$109.15, yielding 7.215 percent.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed down 10.77 points at 6813.09, but partly recovered from earlier lows due to profit taking, analysts said.
In Toronto, the TSE suffered losses in only four of 14 sub-groups. The key gold sector lost 0.7 percent followed by conglomerates, transportation and base metals.
The strong side was led by retail, pipelines, forestry products and consumer products.
Advancing issues outpaced declines 539 to 436 with 290 stocks unchanged.
Among hot stocks, high technology firm Mitel Corp. fell 0.85 to 9.85 on turnover of 2.4 million shares after reporting relatively flat third quarter profits.
Northern Telecom Ltd. rose 2.25 to close at 99.50. Nortel said after the market closed on Thursday that it is bullish on Latin America and will seek further business in Mexico.
Takeover target Morrison Petroleum Ltd. fell 0.15 to close at 10.25 on 2.34 million shares as it battles a hostile bid from Canadian 88 Energy Corp.
Canadian 88's stock dipped 0.10 to finish at 6.30 on 142,000 shares.
The Toronto stock market posted its sixth record close of the year on Tuesday, led by a rally in Canada's so-called Big Six banks.
Toronto's key 300 Composite Index rose 4.48 points to close at 6145.41 in turnover of 115.4 million shares worth C$1.8 billion ($1.3 billion).
Investors snapped up banks and other financial service stocks in anticipation that the U.S. Federal Open Market Committee will announce it is keeping short-term interest rates unchanged following a two-day meeting which ends on Wednesday, analysts said.
"The most exciting group today was none other than the financial services," said RBC Dominion Securities investment advisor Ira Katzin.
"The feeling is that interest rates are not going to rise," he said.
Advancing stocks outpaced declines 506 to 464 while another 303 issues were unchanged.
The banks led Toronto's six strong groups with a 1.8 percent gain, followed by pipelines and utilities. The TSE's eight weak sectors included media, golds and oils.
--- HOT STOCKS ---
* The Bank of Montreal, Canada's third largest bank, jumped 1.15 to finish at 48.85 on more than two million shares. Bank of Nova Scotia gained 1.40 to close at 50 on 491,000 shares.
* Junior minerals explorer Pure Gold Resources Inc. continued to lead active stocks, rising 0.05 to 0.415 on 7.6 million shares.
* Potash Corp. of Saskatchewan Inc. fell 3.50 to 109.50 on turnover of 197,000 shares, depressed by weak potash prices.
ScotiaMcLeod analyst Sam Kanes said Russia has been exporting potash at cheaper rates recently.
"It's the number one competitor for Potash in Saskatchewan for the moment and they continue to sell their potash at aggressive pricing," Kanes said.
Toronto's stock market ended lower on Wednesday, dragged down by Wall Street after U.S. high technology stocks were hit by profit-taking.
The Toronto Stock Exchange's key 300 Composite Index lost 33 points to end at 6112.41. Turnover was heavy at 130.5 million shares worth C$2.04 billion ($1.52 billion).
The Dow Jones Industrial Average lost 86.51 to close at 6746.90 as major high tech issues sold off, traders said.
North American markets were looking for an excuse to reap profits after recent highs, said portfolio consultant Ron Meisels.
Investors decided to sell after the U.S. Federal Open Market Committee decided to keep short-term interest rates unchanged as expected by analysts.
"In spite of the good news, people decided to take profits," Meisels said.
All but three of Toronto's 14 sub-indices slipped into negative territory. Transportation posted the biggest decline, followed by oils, golds and conglomerates. The TSE posted gains in pipelines, consumer products and real estate.
Declining issues outpaced advances 441 to 539 with 300 stocks unchanged.
Among active stocks, Morrison Petroleum Ltd. lost 0.15 to close at 10.15 on over three million shares. Morrison is still seeking a white knight to oppose a hostile takeover bid from Canadian 88 Energy Corp.
Canadian 88 shares rose 0.25 to close at 6.00 in active trading.
Bank of Montreal lost 0.50 to finish at 47.95 after hitting a new high of 49.15 earlier in the session. Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce rose 0.70 to 63.40 on 1.7 million shares after reaching a 52-week peak of 63.95.
Potash Corp. of Saskatchewan Inc. continued to lose ground after Tuesday's drop, falling 4.50 to 105.00 on 86,000 shares.
Toronto stocks closed on a firmer note on Friday, boosted by a party in the bond market and strength in the heavily weighted banking and gold sectors.
The Toronto Stock Exchange's key 300 Composite Index rose 29.85 points to reach 6101.74, with 111 million shares traded worth C$1.74 billion ($1.29 billion).
North American markets surged after the release of the U.S. January jobless rate. It edged up to 5.4 percent from 5.3, providing indications that the job market has not tightened enough for employers to bid up wages and that the Federal Reserve may not raise interest rates.
Bonds rallied dropping yields, so Canadian investors fled to the high-yielding Toronto stock market.
"It's acting on any piece of news," said Montreal-based strategist Bill Ram.
Advances inched ahead of declines 507 to 490 while another 276 traded flat.
Of Toronto's 14 sub-indices, banks rose the most, adding two percent to hit a new high of 5972.59 points. Other strong groups were consumer products, golds and base metals.
The weaker side included conglomerates, oils and pipelines, which kept Toronto from jumping as high as Wall Street. The Dow Jones Industrial Average soared 82.74 points to 6855.80.
Over the course of the week Toronto's stock exchange retraced its steps from a new lifetime high of 6159.18 points on Wednesday to today's close.
Among active issues, food services firm Cara Operations Ltd. class A rose 0.05 to 4.15 on three million shares after announcing positive third quarter results yesterday.
Viceroy Homes Ltd. shares lost more than half their value, falling 5.40 to 5.00 after reporting lower than forecast fourth quarter earnings today. Net income for the quarter plunged 61 percent to C$409,000 ($300,740).
Royal Bank of Canada, the nation's largest, rose 1.40 to 52.40 on more than 1.7 million shares. Shares in the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, the second biggest, gained 1.35 to 64.60.
Toronto stocks ended weaker in light trading on Thursday, swept lower by a downdraft in the oil and gas sector.
Toronto's key 300 Composite Index fell 40.52 points to 6071.89. Trading was lackluster at 107.3 million shares worth C$1.4 billion ($1.04 billion).
"Toronto committed suicide," said portfolio manager Josef Schachter. "The oils and golds ... got clipped and took the market lower," he said.
Oils took a beating after March Nymex oil lost US$0.81 today to close at US$23.10 a barrel. The TSE's energy group surrendered 172 points, leading 11 of 14 sub-groups lower.
The heavyweight gold sector also fell along with softer bullion prices in New York. Comex April gold lost US$1.30 to close at US$345.10 an ounce.
The three strong sectors were real estate, transportation and retailing.
Declining stocks edged out advances 545 to 402 while 276 issues were unchanged.
Schachter said he expected the downdraft to continue for the next few sessions, pulling the Canadian market down by another 100 points. However, oil stocks may bounce back if the rest of the North American winter remains cold and demand for energy improves.
Among active stocks, oil producer Canadian Natural Resources Ltd. fell 1.95 to close at 34.25 on 2.6 million shares.
Food services firm Cara Operations Ltd. topped Toronto's most-active list. Its class A stock gained 0.35 to close at 4.10 on 6.6 million shares after reporting stronger third quarter earnings.
Among active golds, Barrick Gold Corp. fell 0.60 to close at 35.25 on 1.7 million shares.
Toronto's stock market drifted lower in moderate trading to close softer on Monday, weighed down by a battered oil and gas sector despite firmer bank issues.
The key 300 Composite Index fell 20.47 points to end at 6081.27 in trading of 93.9 million shares worth C$1.4 billion ($1.04 billion).
"The energy sector's the one that got clipped here," said fund manager Josef Schachter.
The oil and gas group lost almost 2.4 percent and led eight of Toronto's 14 sub-indices south.
Other falling sectors included conglomerates, transportation and golds. The stronger side was led by consumer products, heavily weighted banks and pipelines.
Wilf Gobert, Peters &amp; Co. analyst, said several factors hit energy issues including weaker oil prices for most of Monday, recent news that Canadian Natural Resources Ltd. will cut back on production soon and Canadian 88 Energy Corp.'s failure to take over Morrison Petroleum Ltd.
In a surprise move Canadian 88 said on Sunday that it withdrew its hostile bid for Morrison Petroleum.
Declines raced ahead of advances 456 to 362 while another 283 traded unchanged.
Schachter forecast that Toronto's weakness was only short term. "This is just a buying opportunity."
Energy stocks were heavily traded on Monday. Morrison shares lost 0.35 to end at 9.65 on half a million shares while Canadian 88 slipped 0.25 to 5.15 on 1.1 million shares.
Poco Petroleums Ltd. lost 0.30 to reach 13.75 on more than two million shares.
Pacalta Resources Ltd. managed to buck the falling trend, gaining 1.45 to hit a new high of 12.90.
Fairfax Financial Holdings Ltd. topped Toronto's gainers after rising 3.50 to 299.00.
