Russia is eyeing its second bad grain harvest in a row and will need imports despite a prediction by Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin that output will be enough to meet demand, industry sources said on Tuesday.
"The sheer volume Russia will produce is enough to meet demand, but the quality is not," said specialist Andrei Sizov of the independent consultancy SovEcon Ltd.
"So it is fully possible that Russia will be forced to go to Western markets."
Chernomyrdin, in a speech to the Federation Council, the upper parliament house, forecast 1996 grain output of 77-78 million tonnes, "significantly higher" than last year's harvest of 63.4 million tonnes.
"This will allow us to provide the population with bread and bread products until the new (1997) harvest, to prepare enough concentrated feed grains and to increase grain reserves," a copy of Chernomyrdin's speech read.
But grain sources have said private-sector buying would still take place. "We have a shortage of first-class wheat," Georgy Zelinsky, general director of the agricultural trade association Khleboproduktprogress, told an industry seminar.
Sizov said piecemeal Russian imports of grain and flour in grain equivalent from all sources would rise to 5.0-6.0 million tonnes over the 1996/1997 crop year, from 4.5 million in 1995/1996 crop year.
Anatoly Manellya, head of agricultural forecasting at the Centre for Economic Trends, a think-tank set up by the government, said he thought imports could be even higher.
Agriculture Minister Viktor Khlystun has said Russia may import up to 4.5 million tonnes of maize and soymeal plus 500,000 tonnes of food wheat from the United States, Canada and/or Australia.
Zelinsky said domestic feed maize was in short supply, but maize for human consumption was not.
But industry sources said Western markets should not expect sudden announcements of big purchases. Rather, Russia would buy piecemeal in small lots, they said.
Sizov said imports of Western grain could be possible because Ukrainian flour supplies would slip due to very poor harvest outlook there.
"Russia has become the world's largest flour importer," he said, referring to imports which increased to one million tonnes in the 1995/1996 crop year, a rise of 25-30 times year-on-year.
Industry sources said the most likely buyers would be the dozen or so Russian commercial banks authorised to use U.S. government commodities credits.
Sources said Inkombank had used GSM-102 credits to buy up to 60,000 tonnes of U.S. wheat through Tradigrain for Russia's Far East for delivery to Vladivostok last spring.
Russia has used nearly all its reserves from the 1995 harvest, the worst in three decades. It survived largely due to carryover stocks from the 1994 harvest. These stocks were 8.8 million tonnes in July 1995 but were nearly zero in July 1996.
Sizov said the Federal Food Corporation, which buys for strategic needs including the army, had bought only 330,000 tonnes of grain by the end of September out of a targeted 4.5 million. September is peak buying time.
Russia is eyeing its second consecutive bad grain harvest and will need imports despite a prediction by Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin that output will be enough to meet demand, industry sources said Tuesday.
"The sheer volume Russia will produce is enough to meet demand, but the quality is not," said specialist Andrei Sizov of the independent consultancy SovEcon Ltd. "So it is fully possible that Russia will be forced to go to Western markets."
Chernomyrdin, in a speech to the Federation Council, the upper parliament house, forecast 1996 grain output of 77-78 million metric tons, "significantly higher" than last year's harvest of 63.4 million tons.
"This will allow us to provide the population with bread and bread products until the new (1997) harvest, to prepare enough concentrated feed grains and to increase grain reserves," a copy of Chernomyrdin's speech read.
But grain sources have said private-sector buying would still take place. "We have a shortage of first-class wheat," Georgy Zelinsky, general director of the agricultural trade association Khleboproduktprogress, told an industry seminar.
Sizov said piecemeal Russian imports of grain and flour in grain equivalent from all sources would rise to 5.0-6.0 million tons over the 1996/1997 crop year, from 4.5 million in 1995/1996 crop year.
Anatoly Manellya, head of agricultural forecasting at the Centre for Economic Trends, a think-tank set up by the government, said he thought imports could be even higher.
Agriculture Minister Viktor Khlystun has said Russia may import up to 4.5 million tons of corn and soymeal, plus 500,000 tons of wheat from the United States, Canada and/or Australia.
Zelinsky said domestic feed corn was in short supply, but corn for human consumption was not.
But industry sources said Western markets should not expect sudden announcements of big purchases. Rather, Russia would buy piecemeal in small lots, they said.
Sizov said imports of Western grain could be possible because Ukrainian flour supplies would slip due to very poor harvest outlook there.
"Russia has become the world's largest flour importer," he said, referring to imports which increased to one million tons in the 1995/1996 crop year, a rise of 25-30 times from the previous year.
Industry sources said the most likely buyers would be the dozen or so Russian commercial banks authorised to use U.S. government commodities credits.
Russia has used nearly all its reserves from the 1995 harvest, the worst in three decades. It survived largely due to carryover stocks from the 1994 harvest.
Russia is flirting with danger in considering a freeze on domestic energy prices, a move which could prolong the oil sector's recovery and in turn slow economic reforms, energy analysts said on Wednesday.
Fuel and Energy Minister Pyotr Rodionov has called for lower oil, gas and electricity prices to help domestic industry.
Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin, taking up the baton, said on Tuesday that President Boris Yeltsin could soon sign a decree lowering energy prices and freezing others, but made clear he was talking about gas and electricity.
Energy analysts said talk of frozen prices was ominous for the Russian oil industry -- the country's biggest export earner and the motor of the domestic economy -- just as the now privatised sector shows signs of recovering from a long slump.
"We could see a return to the situation we saw over the past 10 years, when low reinvestment rates led to the decline of the oil industry to its present state," said Vadim Voronin, an energy specialist at the World Bank's Moscow mission.
Price freezes would also annoy the International Monetary Fund, which wants domestic oil prices to match world levels and made industrial restructuring a condition of its $10 billion, three-year loan to Moscow.
"(A price freeze) would slow down some of the reforms and progress we've made, especially in liberalising oil prices," said James Bunch, oil analyst at Renaissance Capital.
Rodionov's predecessor, Yuri Shafranik, had said domestic oil prices should be capped at 75 percent of world levels -- their current level.
Domestic natural gas prices are still a fraction of their real market cost, while electricity is also heavily subsidised.
Artificially low prices inhibit adequate cash-flows, which in turn lowers money available for oil companies to invest, maintain existing wells and drill new ones.
Subsidised prices and low reinvestment were the key factor behind the collapse of the Russian oil industry that began in 1984 and has lasted to this day.
Energy waste in the Soviet era was rife, and Russia's new profit-oriented oil companies have little desire to return to the days of heavily subsidised fuel. In Soviet times, a glass of carbonated water cost more than a litre of gasoline.
With oil production 47 percent below Russia's peak 1987 level of 569.5 million tonnes (11.48 million barrels per day) and two-thirds of output staying in Russia, a price freeze would leave oil companies short of cash just as they need it most.
Russia is the world's third biggest oil producer after Saudi Arabia and the United States, and Moscow wants cheap oil to fuel domestic factories.
Industrial output, already half 1992 levels, fell five percent in January-July after a three percent decline in the first seven months of 1995.
The fact that oil is cheap means the export market is more attractive than the domestic one, but producers are unable to sell more abroad because pipeline capacities are stretched.
The government has promised tax breaks for oil companies, but instead is moving to squeeze them for more cash and force them to deliver more supplies to domestic enterprises.
Peter Houlder, managing director of CentreInvest consultancy in Moscow, said artificially low domestic energy prices would be "extremely damaging". "Companies are making their profit on the small amount of oil they export -- domestic sales now at best break even," he said.
Russia's Gazprom natural gas monopoly plans to double exports to Europe by 2010, mostly via its ambitious $40 billion Yamal pipeline project, but energy analysts said the timing could be wrong.
"There's a market problem (with oversupply in Europe), and the cost of developing the Yamal field will be too high," said a senior European energy specialist familiar with the project.
"Europe is at saturation level for the next 10 years or so, so Gazprom is 5-10 years too early."
The Yamal-Europe project envisions building a gas pipeline network across 4,107 km (2,550 miles) from Russia's vast Arctic Yamal peninsula reserves to Germany via Belarus and Poland.
Gazprom wants to take advantage of rising European demand.
To help raise capital for Yamal, RAO Gazprom is offering American Depositary Shares as part of a plan to sell a total nine percent stake abroad.
"Europe can hardly wait for this project," said Alexander Litvinov, Gazprom's chief public relations specialist.
A company statement said: "The company faces significant requirements for capital expenditures."
The Yamal system, to be built in stages and linking with existing pipelines in some places, would have an initial capacity of 83 billion cubic metres (bcm) per year, including around 52 bcm to Western Europe.
Gazprom said the Yamal-Europe pipeline would boost Russia's export capacity to 124 billion bcm by 1997 and 154 bcm by 1999. Sales outside the former Soviet Union were 117.4 bcm in 1995.
The company wants annual exports to rise by 50 bcm by 2010.
Gazprom has won big Western credits to build European parts of the Yamal link into Poland's grid and Belarus, but it has not won financing for the main part of the system or to boost output at Yamal itself, which it hopes to begin doing by 2000.
Pierre Bauquis, special adviser to the president of French company Total SA, told an energy conference in the Kazakh capital Almaty last week that Russia had huge gas reserves but big financial constraints.
"Yamal is not needed before 2010," he said.
He said netbacks (a key indicator of profitability) on Yamal gas to Germany today were negative, "so Yamal is not obvious from an economic standpoint."
Gazprom sees Yamal as the goose that will lay the golden egg, since the area has recoverable reserves of 10,400 bcm, or 20 percent of Russia's total proven reserves.
But Yamal gas, some under permafrost, is in a remote area and is quite expensive to recover.
Some analysts say it may be cheaper to tap and transport Algerian and Norwegian gas to European markets than to extract Yamal gas in the volumes and time-frame Gazprom plans.
Russian gas already accounts for 60 percent of Europe's total gas imports. Russia has more than one-third of world gas reserves and 26 percent of output, and is the world's single largest producer, with output of 556 bcm last year.
Gazprom accounts for 94 percent of Russian gas output and transports nearly all of it. The firm wants output to rise to 820 bcm a year by 2010.
Russia exports only 20 percent of its output, and declining industrial consumption at home has left Russia with an oversupply. Europe is also flush with supplies, though demand is set to rise.
"The fact that Gazprom does not have its own financing for Yamal and that it has not been able to find domestic or foreign financing (for the main part of the project) speaks quite negatively about its economics," said the European source.
Aluminium industry sources expressed doubt on Monday over whether producers association Kontsern Alyuminiy would be able to contain output to support sagging world prices.
"I don't believe they'll do it," said a Western trade source in Moscow.
A Moscow representative of the Krasnoyarsk smelter and two sources at the giant Bratsk plant said they had no information on plans to contain output.
"This is a very strategic question on which I have no information," said Bratsk-based Andrei Toropovsky of the plant's foreign economic relations department.
Kontsern Alyuminiy chief executive Igor Prokopov said Russian smelters had agreed to keep aluminium output at current levels and not to exploit at least 80,000-100,000 tonnes of idle annual capacity.
He and Vladimir Kalchenko, the group's first deputy chief executive, referred to weak world prices and unprofitable domestic smelters.
But the sources said Kontsern Alyuminiy had little leverage and was unlikely to be able to influence producers.
London Metal Exchange (LME) benchmark aluminium prices failed to react seriously and held little changed at $1,330 per tonne in early trade -- a sign that the market may have questions over what the Kontsern Alyuminiy plan means.
"The smelters tend to do what they want individually," said a European metals source. "I don't care what Kontsern Aluminiy says -- it doesn't affect my business."
Russia, with high electricity and freight costs and low domestic demand, is keen to see higher world metals prices. Aluminium is near 2-1/2 year lows of $1,305 and far below the $1,742 a tonne seen around this time last year.
A Russian industry source said profit margins on metal exported at average LME prices in the third quarter of this year were a negative 20 percent at Russia's Novokuznetsk smelter, negative 15 percent at Kandalaksha and negative 15-18 percent at plants in the Urals region.
Krasnoyarsk was breaking even, he said. Sayansk and Bratsk had profit margins of plus 10 percent. Irkutsk had 11 percent.
It costs Bratsk $1,127 to produce a tonne of aluminium, the source said. Freight charges to European outlets added $160 per tonne, leaving gross profits of about $110 per tonne, assuming LME prices of around $1,400.
"The Siberian smelters have a decent economic situation," said Ruslan Fedorovsky of Barclays Physical Trading Limited in London. "It's profitable for them to let the European smelters (with negative profit margins) die out."
A Canadian diplomat said last week in Moscow that Russian and Canadian government officials had met to discuss curbing Russian output, rekindling memories of the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between major producers Russia, Australia, Canada, the European Union, Norway and the United States.
The MOU, designed to cut output by 10 percent and draw down bloated stocks, began in March 1994 and expired this spring.
Adding to uncertainty was a statement by Oleg Deripaska, chief executive officer of Sayansk Aluminium, who said on Friday that he expected a decision on decreasing output.
But sources said impending Russian purchases of alumina, the raw material for aluminium, would be a better indicator of how much metal Russian smelters plan to produce next year.
"That will be the telling time," said one source, referring to buying that should take place by the end of the year.
Trade sources in direct contact with Russian smelters said they would keep an eye on Kontsern Alyuminy, but doubted it could influence the industry.
"They (Kontsern Alyuminiy) don't really represent smelters and do not have a lot of credibility," one Western source said.
--Moscow Newsroom +7095 941 8520
Russia's Fuel and Energy Ministry, sitting on the remains of the once-great power it wielded over the oil sector, is struggling to redefine itself in the new market economy, energy analysts said on Tuesday.
The body, known as Mintopenergo, could once command that oil wells be drilled, helped to restrict exports with quotas and ensured that billions of dollars in oil export cash from the world's third largest oil producer went into Kremlin coffers.
Today the power to produce, export and plot corporate strategies largely lies in the hands of Russia's newly privatised, vertically integrated oil firms -- leaving the ministry to redefine itself in the new market economy.
"You kind of have to use the word castrated -- it's not what it once was," said a European energy consultant in Moscow.
Under new minister Pyotr Rodionov, a gas transport specialist, Mintopenergo may have even less of a say in the daily business of oil firms, which increasingly go about their own business and cut their own deals with foreign investors.
Oil companies say the ministry, as the guardian of big state stakes in them, could become a lobby for their interests in the Kremlin and less the long-arm of politicians seeking oil profits to top up the federal budget.
"Undoubtedly its regulatory influence has waned," said Alexei Gorshkov, spokesman for YUKOS, Russia's second largest oil company in terms of reserves. "We don't see it (their former influence) and, frankly, don't want to see it.
"But the ministry does explain our point of view on taxes to the government, and for that we are grateful."
Known as the Ministry of the Oil and Gas Industries in the Soviet era, Mintopenergo lost responsibility for what is today Gazprom, the natural gas monopoly, when it was renamed in 1991.
During Mintopenergo's existence, it has seen Russia's state-run oil production associations transformed into privatised companies, some of them with multi-billion dollar arrangements with Western oil majors.
Mintopenergo's brief includes coal and electricity. But many of its oil specialists have fled the ministry's Stalin-era building for lucrative jobs at investment banks and oil firms.
Even former minister Yuri Shafranik left in August to head the board of the Tyumen Oil Company, whose headquarters are in his Siberian power base in the oil-rich Tyumen region.
"The ministry is simply not going to be as important as it once was," said Matthew Sagers of PlanEcon in Washington in a recent interview. "It's going to be left with a policy-making, advisory, overseer role -- and that's a good thing."
Mintopenergo has a new challenger to the remnants of its power base in the form of the Federal Energy Commission, or FEK.
The brainchild of presidential chief-of-staff Anatoly Chubais, FEK wants to inject a free-market flavour into energy tariff and transport issues, although it is unclear how much leeway it will have. It is seeking to award access to crowded pipeline routes by tender, thus restricting the power of oil pipeline monopoly Transneft in non-operational issues.
Rodionov has said he plans policy changes -- but he has not revealed what he has in mind and has worried some industry players with talk about freezing domestic crude oil prices.
An aide to Rodionov said the ministry was foresaking its broad-brush "industry-wide approach" to energy in favour of concentrating on what he said were individual matters important to the Russian economy, like tax breaks for oil companies.
But one Western oil source said he was not so interested in what Rodionov planned, because the ministry had lost its power.
"Power has been devolved by default out to the oil companies and the ministry recognises this, which is why it puts its people on company boards," said Stephen O'Sullivan, associate oil and gas director at MC Securities in London.
Russia's former fuel and energy minister, Yuri Shafranik, tried but failed to create a mega oil corporation by merging four privatised companies, energy sources familiar with the ill-fated proposal said on Thursday.
They said Shafranik's proposal, first aired this summer, to merge the Tyumen Oil Company (Tyumenskaya Neftyanaya Kompaniya), ONAKO (the Orenburg Oil Company, or Orenburgskaya Neftyanaya Kompaniya)  ORNB.RTS, the Eastern Oil Company (Vostochnaya Nefytanaya Kompniya) and Slavneft, found no government support.
Sources said Shafranik, in search of a consolation prize, was now trying to create a financial-industrial group uniting some of the firms he wanted to merge and second-tier players.
Had Shafranik succeeded with his merger plans, he would have created Russia's largest oil producer, a super company whose units collectively produced over 89 million tonnes in 1995 -- far above current leader LUKoil, which produced over 57 million tonnes last year.
"Shafranik had this idea and was excited about it for a while, but then it ran into big problems with government acceptance," said one source who asked not be named.
The company, had it been created, would have accounted for nearly one third of Russia's total 1995 oil output of around 305 million tonnes. Russia is the world's third largest oil producer.
The sources said the proposed financial industrial group would consist of the Tyumen Oil Company, SIBUR (the Siberian- Urals Oil and Gas Chemicals Company, or Sibirsko-Uralskaya Neftegazokhimicheskaya Kompaniya), the Eastern Oil Company, Slavneft (a joint venture between Russia's Megionneftegaz MFGS.RTS and Belarus) and the Eastern-Siberian Oil and Gas Company (Vostochno-Sibirskaya Neftegazovaya Kompaniya).
SIBUR and Eastern-Siberian are two independents that do not have crude oil production units.
Sergei Verin, secretary to the board of directors of the Tyumen Oil Company, where Shafranik is chairman of the board, said only that the proposed financial-industrial group would undertake "joint projects".
Shafranik had hinted at a news conference in July, when he was still energy minister, that four companies would merge, but refused to say which ones.
"This is a big secret, and I'm not going to name the oil companies," he said. "Somebody will be against it, very against it, because this will be a powerful competitor."
Fuel and Energy Ministry spokesmen declined to comment on the failed proposal, and earlier prohibited a correspondent from raising the issue with the new minister, Pyotr Rodionov, as one condition of receiving an interview.
"Why don't you ask Shafranik?" Rodionov said on Thursday after a cabinet meeting, when asked about the failed merger.
Verin said only that a merger was not now being discussed and that the Tyumen Oil Company was the motor behind the financial-industrial group talks.
"Our goal is to undertake joint projects that a single company itself could not take on alone," Verin said, adding that all sides were in active negotiations on a development strategy.
Shafranik left the Fuel and Energy Ministry in August for the Tyumen Oil Company. It is based in Siberia's oil-rich Tyumen region, where Shafranik was administration head before taking his ministry post in 1993.
Shafranik saw Russia's state-run, monolithic oil industry transformed into 13 privatised companies, most of them vertically integrated, while he was minister and watched many ministry specialists quit for lucrative jobs at the new firms.
The sources did not say who in the government had rejected Shafranik's proposal. The shake-up of the oil industry was masterminded by Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin and President Boris Yeltsin.
Russia, hoping to boost industrial output, announced plans on Monday for lower electricity and rail transport prices, cheering energy-hungry aluminium plants but worrying Western economists.
President Boris Yeltsin's press service said Yeltsin had signed a decree at the weekend cutting wholesale electricity charges for industrial and residential customers from November 1 by an average 10 percent from their August 1 levels.
The decree also promised to rein in runaway rail transport charges, saying tariffs for transport by rail on electric locomotives would be set by the new electricity pricing rules.
Yeltsin's decree also promised to create a wholesale natural gas market by next year.
By bringing order to unruly pricing structures, the decree also aims to improve tax collection.
Privatised aluminium smelters in Russia, one of the world's largest producers, said the new rules would help them save them money as electricity and transport are two of the major costs in producing and exporting the non-ferrous metal.
But Yeltsin's decree aroused doubt from Western economists, who called it little more than a short-term way of plugging the budget deficit and unsustainable in the long run.
"Of course this makes us happy," said a representative in Moscow of the big Krasnoyarsk aluminium smelter.
But he declined to say how it would affect output.
"It's not sustainable in the long term," said a top Western economist. "Over the short term, it will reduce production costs, but it does nothing to solve nonpayments."
Boris Arlyuk, managing director of St Petersburg-based Alumconsult, said that Russia's average industrial electricity prices were already much higher than world charges.
But Russian smelters rarely pay full price, thus helping to fuel a massive non-payments cycle in which aluminium plants -- a major consumer of electricity -- owe regional utilities for supplies, who in turn owe the state unpaid taxes.
Yeltsin's decree is partly designed to break this cycle.
The decree also said gas and electricity producers would be liable for excise and profits tax on proceeds from collecting debts for their supplies, as long as these proceeds did not fall below the actual cost of producing and transmitting supplies.
That means it could become easier for utilities to collect money from aluminium producers and other industrial customers.
Arlyuk said domestic electricity tariffs vary greatly, with the Kandalaksha aluminium smelter in the European part of Russia charged the rouble equivalent of $25 per megawatt hour, and using 17 megawatt hours to produce each tonne.
But rates at the giant Bratsk smelter in Siberia were the equivalent of $6 per megawatt hour -- the same, Arlyuk said, as in big aluminium producing countries like Canada and Norway.
Bratsk, using 17.7 megawatt hours per tonne of produced aluminium, spent only $106 per tonne on electricity compared to about $425 per tonne for Kandalaksha.
Dmitry Kryukov, a utilities analyst at Renaissance Capital, said that partly privatised national power company Unified Energy System (RAO Yedinaya Energeticheskaya Sistema) would see lower revenues.
But he said its cash flow could improve since it would be taxed only when paid for deliveries, and not before.
Still, Anatoly Gamanov, head of tariffs at the aluminium producers' group Kontsern Alyuminiy, said he doubted regional utilities would be happy to receive less for their supplies.
"This is not the first time we've seen something like this, and some regional utilities may put up a fight."
UES owns 29 power plants and holds 49 percent stakes in most of the privatised "energo" regional utilities.
Electricity and rail tariffs have risen faster than the overall producers price index, prompting Kremlin officials to seek ways to give industrial producers a break.
Russia, dramatically changing its approach to foreign investment in its huge oil sector, said on Monday that new domestic companies, not Western majors, would be given the upper hand in future billion-dollar energy deals.
Vladimir Tumarkin, chief spokesman for Rosneft, the state oil holding company which is being privatised and the state's agent in production-sharing deals, said the days of foreign oil firms winning majority stakes to tap Russian reserves were over.
"We have a new approach," Tumarkin said. "We do not wish to repeat the so-called mistakes of earlier deals, when majority stakes went to foreign companies and Russia was left out."
He told Reuters he was referring to three, high-profile deals with Western and Japanese oil investors off Russia's Far Eastern island of Sakhalin -- deals in which Russian equity and ownership play a relatively minor role.
As a test of the new approach to Western oil investors, he said Amoco Corp, Exxon and Texaco of the United States, Total SA of France and Norsk Hydro ASA of Norway -- all bidders in a recent tender to develop reserves in Timan-Pechora -- would be asked to form a consortium and to give at least a 50 percent stake to Russian companies.
The companies had bid, some individually, some together, to develop up to 200 million tonnes of crude oil in the Khoreiverskaya Basin in oil-rich northern Timan-Pechora.
"The philosophy behind investing in Russian oil has changed," Tumarkin said, adding that Rosneft would hold talks with the companies next week.
Foreign oil investors are already wondering about the extent to which Moscow truly wants outside help in developing reserves in Russia, the world's third largest crude oil producer.
Lots of competitive investment dollars have gone to energy-rich Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan, where deals have got off the ground faster and more smoothly.
But while Russia has said it wants to turn around its flagging oil sector, where output has declined by 46 percent since the mid-1980s, its newly-privatised oil companies may not be able to carry the banner.
"The question is, do the Russian companies have the financing for all this," said oil analyst James Bunch at Renaissance Capital in Moscow.
Some of Russia's vertically-integrated oil companies have the makings of future stars, with savvy management and reserves that put them in the world's big league. But many of them are weighed down by non-payments and corporate taxes that leave them little free cash to invest.
"I don't think the size of stakes (in production-sharing contracts) makes that much difference to Western companies -- what is important is the economics of the deal," said oil and gas analyst Stuart Amor of CS First Boston in London.
He said it was doubtful whether Russian companies could find the money needed in the near-term to work with foreign investors and that crude oil output levels were, as a result, unlikely to rise significantly.
U.S. energy companies have invested less than $1 billion of the $60 billion they have said they plan to commit to Russian oil deals, complaining of political and legal risk.
Prominent projects -- including the $40 billion international Timan Pechora Company deal, and Amoco's $50 billion plan with Russian oil group YUKOS to tap Priobsk reserves -- are beset by quibbles with the Russians over equity stakes, contributions, and asset valuations.
"They're obviously not going to like it," said one Western analyst of Russia's new approach. "But I don't know if it will drive them out."
Russia's untapped gold reserves are unlikely to become the El Dorado of the East soon despite Moscow's promises to liberalise the tightly-controlled sector, precious metals sources said on Wednesday.
Russia's Central Bank said earlier this week it was gearing up to create a domestic gold market via measures that would make it worthwhile for Russian commercial banks to finance mining.
But industry sources said the rules would do little to reform the world's fifth-largest gold producer with the world's third-largest reserves.
"It will take quite a while for commercial banks to take much of that market," said analyst Tony Warwick-Ching of CRU International in London.
The Central Bank's new rules would allow banks to trade gold domestically in a limited way through special precious metal accounts and to make and secure limited, gold-backed loans.
"Well, if after two and a half years, the central bank has come up with accounting procedures for gold transactions, then that is very good," said Yuri Kotlyar, acting chairman of the State Committee for Precious Metals and Stones (Komdragmet), whose functions are being reorganised.
"But this has nothing to do with creating an actual market, and that is what we need."
Russia's gold mines, even those run by foreign joint ventures, are required to sell their output to the state at fixed prices and are usually paid many months later.
The government, in a budget crisis and facing a tax revenue shortfall, has even less money this year to finance output and 1996 production will not better 1995's poor 125-132 tonnes.
Commercial banks financed only about five tonnes of output last year. Moscow has promised but done little to let banks with special licences take gold abroad to secure financing.
Analysts said Moscow feared losing control of its gold industry, which would be harder to track than other key sectors.
"The history of the (Russian) industry is partly driven by politics, not economics," said analyst Andy Smith of Union Bank of Switzerland in London.
Others said a tug-of-war for control was scaring investors.
The Central Bank, which shares responsibility for gold reserves with the Finance Ministry, wants more control over more gold reserves to support the rouble in the future.
But Interfax news agency quoted Deputy Finance Minister German Kuznetsov as saying the ministry, not the Central Bank, should have first crack at buying output and the state, not the private sector, should finance most mining.
Total, unspecified volume of Russian gold mined over January-September was nine-percent below year-ago levels, the State Statistics Committee said. Mining season ends in October as freezing weather emerges in Siberia and Russia's Far East.
And Russia will literally have to dig deep to tap its reserves. More than three quarters of Russian gold is in below-ground ore deposits.
More than half of all foreign-backed gold projects in the former Soviet Union are in Russia.
But none of the big ones, including the giant Sukhoi Log, the world's largest unmined reserve with a possible 1,800 tonnes, are at the production stage because of tax and royalty quibbles with the government.
-- Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
Russian parliamentarians, in a stinging blow to foreign oil investors, on Thursday said they would ask lawmakers to reject a bill outlining oil reserves open to production-sharing agreements.
The bill, a list of about 250 oil fields holding 38 percent of proven Russian oil reserves, is a key step towards unlocking billions of dollars in planned and proposed investments in Russian oil, including a huge project by Amoco Corp.
But members of the audit chamber of parliament told a news conference they would ask Duma (lower chamber) deputies to reject the law early next month.
The call for rejection, likely to be accepted, is a slap in the face for Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin, whom foreign oil investors have considered their guardian angel in Russia and who has been instrumental in getting energy deals off the ground.
It is also the latest sign that Moscow, in a quiet change of policy, is getting tough with potential Western oil investors and seeking ways to give its own oil companies, which hold licences to most of the fields, a chance to get on their feet and compete with Western majors.
"It's quite a major setback," said a senior European energy consultant who asked not to be named. "There's a real feeling in Russia of "why should we give up any of this -- it's ours'."
Duma Deputy Yuri Boldyrev, who is deputy chairman of the audit chamber, said the chamber had rejected the reserves list because government officials had not presented financial analyses proving that the fields would earn Russia more money faster if developed on a production-sharing basis.
Production-sharing contracts bring Western oil firms into risky countries by allowing them to finance and develop oil production through the sale of some output on world markets to cover costs and generate returns. The rest of the oil goes to the host country, which also get royalties and profit taxes.
Under the scheme, ordinary tax regimes are not applicable, giving the investments an acceptable return.
Boldyrev said foreign investors would not be worried by the chamber's rejection and said Moscow should slash the number of reserves open to output-sharing to 10 or 15 a year.
But senior oil executives are likely to be annoyed.
"We are of course worried about anything that slows the process down," said Dan Westbrook, senior vice-president and resident manager of Amoco Eurasia Petroleum Company in Moscow.
While officials recommended that the field Amoco is eyeing, Priobsk, be included eventually in the production-sharing list, they said two prize, giant fields -- Samotlor and Krasnoleninskoye -- would not be tendered to foreign investors.
Amoco and Russian oil firm YUKOS have a preliminary $50 billion production-sharing deal to tap Priobsk, one of Russia's largest oil fields, in western Siberia's Tyumen region.
But negotiations have slowed, partly because parliament has not yet approved the reserves list.
More bureaucratic delays appear to be on the horizon, blocking some $50-$70 billion in planned foreign investments in Russian oil and retarding potential projects.
"We need a host of laws clarifying on what grounds a specific field should be included in the list," said parliamentary auditor Mikhail Beskhmelnitsyn.
Boldyrev, complaining that Russia's black gold goes into a black hole when oil firms underpay taxes to state coffers, said the chamber also rejected the reserves list because output-sharing contracts might award too many tax breaks to companies.
Russia, the world's third largest producer of crude oil, last year passed a production-sharing law but only after revising it to meet demands by domestic lobbyists worried about the country's resources being exploited too cheaply by foreigners.
Russia's new grain traders, looking for opportunities to make money and feed their vast country, said they were struggling to flourish in an arena now free of the state but lacking basic market structures too.
Preliminary data from the State Statistics Committee on Friday showed this year's gross grain harvest was 74.6 million tonnes, just eight percent up on 1995's disastrous 30-year low.
That could still leave supplies tight and, with no local equivalent of the Chicago Board of Trade or Canadian Wheat Board, traders will again be left to sift through bewildering market rumours and to pound the steppes in search of grain.
It is a Wild East bazaar, where producers prefer cash on delivery and where Soviet collective farming has left a deep suspicion of anything that looks like financial sophistication. But it is also, traders say, a place with golden opportunities.
"The arbitrage opportunities are excellent," said independent agriculture analyst Andrei Sizov of SovEcon Ltd consultancy, referring to trade in agricultural commodities from Russia and the former Soviet republics Ukraine and Kazakhstan.
He said Western commodities houses were actively arbitraging everything from sunflower oil in Russia's grain-belt North Caucasus to Ukrainian wheat and Uzbek cotton.
But other senior industry sources were at odds over how to trade in the post-Soviet market, where the state is no longer a major presence but where the new rules of the game are opaque.
Moscow shocked world markets in the 1970s by purchasing tens of millions of tonnes of foreign grain.
But the hard-up Russian government is keeping out of the market and last year relied on private traders to make up for Russia's worst grain harvest in three decades.
Arkady Zlochevsky, president of OGO, one of Russia's largest private commodities houses, said the domestic grain market was tough this year because few domestic traders had ready cash.
"The arbitrage situation is not as good this year because deliveries, especially from Ukraine, are unreliable, and because nobody has any money," he said.
Yet other sources said buyers were rushing to fill contracts left over from the last crop marketing year, when poor harvests across the ex-Soviet Union made supplies short.
"It used to be a seller's market only -- now buyers are on an equal footing," said a trader at a Western commodities house.
Russian farmers are already demanding prices above world levels and are selling standard, third-class bread-making wheat for 0.97 to 1.00 million roubles per tonne (about $177-$183 at current exchange rates). Delivery from central regions to Moscow or other big cities adds another 200,000 roubles per tonne.
Alexander Yukish, president of Russia's Grain Union industry group, said Ukrainian supplies were cheaper at 850,000 roubles a tonne, but said a 20 percent Russian value added tax and freight costs could quickly make up the difference.
Kazakh wheat before delivery to Russia across thousands of kilometres (miles) cost about one million roubles a tonne.
No one knows what percentage of Russian grain is traded domestically, in spite of the fact that the new private sector has in large part helped the government avoid major imports by selling domestic supplies to far-flung regions in Siberia.
The Russian Exchange, formerly known as the Russian Commodities and Raw Materials Exchange, has a puny turnover in grain contracts and registered no deals last month.
Farmers, burned by the late-paying state in the past, think only of roubles in hand, and not of hedging output with futures.
"For Western commodities houses, this is still a risky market," said Vasily Chinkaryov, deputy director at Eximkhleb, adding one could never be sure of receiving contracted supplies.
There are hundreds of so-called grain trading outfits across Russia, buying small lots here and there and wreaking havoc on the market by sometimes failing to pay producers.
Market sophistication is low, and even some top Russian traders do not see what "arbitrage" -- which in Russian denotes an arbitration court, not playing with price differences on commodities in different markets -- has to do with making money.
"What does our judicial process have to do with trading grain?" asked one senior Russian trader in all seriousness.
Still, Russian grain is finding channels through which to move, often abroad.
Russia registered a total of 1.2 million tonnes of wheat and wheat-rye exports since the beginning of the year, with September exports nearly doubling to 62,500 tonnes, according to State Customs Committee figures quoted by Interfax news agency.
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520 ($1 = 5,453 roubles)
Russia's grain crop is proving to be one of its lowest in three decades, prompting trade sources on Monday to speculate that the government could return to world markets for imports to feed the military and remote areas.
The nearly complete 1996 harvest, bucking a trend of increased grain output across the world, weighs in at a gross 74.6 million tonnes, with little high-quality bread wheat and virtually no stocks from last year's disastrous output, which was the worst for more than 30 years.
"The figure is, I think, slightly lower than we expected," said a Western agriculture source, commenting on preliminary data published by the State Statistics Committee on Friday.
"It means additional imports."
The cash-strapped Russian state insisted last year it had long ago left world markets for good.
But Anatoly Manellya, head of agriculture forecasting at the Centre for Economic Trends, a think-tank set up by the Russian government, said the Federal Food Corporation, the state agency responsible for reserves to feed the armed forces and remote towns, might soon be in the international market.
"The Federal Food Corporation is probably going to try to do some deals," he said, adding only that it was in preliminary negotiations.
The agency has bought a mere 450,000 tonnes of domestic grain out of the 4.5 million tonnes it plans to buy this year.
"As far as I know, the government is talking about possible imports for us, but I cannot tell you anything more since we merely fulfil government orders and they have not yet told us anything," said Corporation deputy director Yuri Lysenko.
Russia's harvest last year was officially 63.4 million tonnes and record-high world grain prices kept traders from importing any significant quantities from beyond the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.
This year prices are lower after bumper world harvests, with benchmark Chicago contracts at $3.75 per bushel after a long spell above $5 and a spike to $7.50 in March.
But Russian farmers, mindful of recent high prices, have declined to sell to state reserves -- making government officials jittery over how to feed the soldiers and isolated Arctic cities that cannot depend on the private sector.
"It seems like more and more contracts are being talked, especially in the (Russian) Far East," said the Western source, who forecast Russia's total grain imports over the 1996/97 crop marketing year from all sources at five million tonnes.
Andrei Sizov of the private agricultural consultancy SovEcon Ltd recently put the total at six to seven million tonnes.
Allowing for the eight or nine percent that is lost after cleaning, Russia's 1996 net harvest will probably weigh in at a lean 68 to 69 million tonnes -- not much above last year.
Manellya said he had told the cabinet last week that net output would be 69.8 million tonnes.
"This is better than last year, but is still one of the three worst harvests in the last three decades," he said.
-- Moscow Newsroom +7095 941 8520
Russia's second-generation, billion-dollar foreign oil projects are finding out that close ties to top government figures, delicate talks with new partners and careful handling of oil-rich, ambitious regions are vital.
Western oil companies eyeing Arctic reserves need close Kremlin relationships and savvy negotiating skills more than ever, now that Moscow has a cooler, tougher attitude toward Western participation in oil production-sharing deals.
Support from President Boris Yeltsin, who oversaw the transformation of the oil sector into privatised companies and who underwent heart surgery on Tuesday, is crucial.
So is a willingness to get out the pencils and redo budgets after talks with increasingly demanding Russian partners.
The factors -- some old, some new --  will decide whether deals stay on the drawing board or get off the ground.
In one of Russia's most prominent projects, Amoco Corp of the United States and Russian oil giant YUKOS are in tortuous talks that, analysts said, revolve around how to accomodate YUKOS shareholder Bank Menatep.
"Any time you add a new player to the game, you need to re-establish what the ground rules are," said Dan Westbrook, senior vice-president and resident manager of Amoco Eurasia Petroleum Company, in a recent telephone interview.
Leading commercial bank Menatep owns a 33 percent stake in YUKOS, Russia's second largest oil producer, and controls a further 45 percent stake formally owned by the government.
The two companies plan to spend $50 billion or so to tap the huge Priobsk oil field, which could hold 610 million recoverable tonnes, in Siberia's Tyumen region.
Russia's first-generation foreign oil deals, all off the Russian Far Eastern island of Sakhalin, took forever to hammer out but largely gave Western partners the leading equity stakes they demanded as insurance for the political risk of investing.
Now, years later, Moscow officials say quietly that Russia should have at least equal status, if not the upper hand.
That makes Kremlin and Fuel and Energy Ministry patronage as important as ever to getting deals to the production stage.
Succesful implementation of projects is still heavily dependent on people at the top, like Yeltsin -- thus showing the enduring power of personalities to moving oil deals forward in Russia, in spite of Moscow's moves to make laws, not people, the framework for investments.
The Timan-Pechora Company, or TPC, which groups Texaco, Amoco, Exxon, Norsk Hydro AS Russia's Rosneft and an exploration outfit in a $40 billion project in the Timan-Pechora basin, saw negotiations temporarily halt over the unexpected death of a key Russian negotiating partner.
TPC President Tom Hazen said he was confident talks to tap up to 360 million tonnes of oil would continue with a special Russian delegation after the Fuel and Energy Ministry selects a replacement for deceased delegation leader Vadim Dvurechensky, who was also a deputy Fuel and Energy minister.
"We are hopeful to continue our negotiations with the special delegation," Hazen said.
"There are very few remaining outstanding issues. I certainly wouldn't draw any conclusions that there have been a lack of negotiations or a termination of discussions."
Both Westbrook and Hazen declined to say when their projects could be finalised.
Western oil companies have a new worry -- the growing demands by oil-rich regions for a bigger cut in deals.
Interfax news agency earlier this week quoted the chairman of the State Duma lower parliament house's Committee on Natural Resources as saying that the Nenets regional Duma had recommended the government break off talks with TPC over regional tax issues.
-- Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
President Boris Yeltsin's surgery on Tuesday might be a heart stopper for some volatile commodities and currency markets, but recent history proves Russian oil and gas exports are unfazed by Kremlin dramas.
Traders have seen tanks fire at Russia's White House, cloak-and-dagger power struggles and war in oil-rich Chechnya -- and each time, they say, Russian supplies of oil and natural gas to Europe and the Mediterranean have held steady.
Russia is the world's third-largest crude oil producer and single biggest natural gas producer; its energy heats and powers much of Europe and is a multi-billion dollar cash cow for Russia no matter who sits in the Kremlin hot seat.
This time, with Yeltsin under the knife this morning for a gruelling, hours-long heart bypass, should be no different.
"Politics don't affect us," said trader Vladimir Solovyov of Nafta-Moskva, one of Russia's leading oil exporters.
"We are more interested in things like government decrees saying 'export tariff introduced' or 'export tariff scrapped'.
Yeltsin's surgery began against domestic and international worries that if the operation fails, Russia could plunge into political uncertainty that could hit oil and gas exports.
With about one third of Russia's 6.2 million barrels per day output exported outside the former Soviet Union, and with Russian natural gas keeping one third of Europe warm, it is easy to see why traders worry about supply.
But when Russian oil exports do fluctuate, it is on less dramatic events, like storms at the Black Sea export outlet of Novorossiisk, one-off government supply programmes to former Soviet allies and which oil company is flavour of the month with export officials.
Gas exports can fluctuate on occasional explosions in Russia's gas pipeline system, the largest in the world.
Analysts said that with domestic demand flat while the Russian economy recovers, exports will be stable near-term.
Industry sources said there is no danger of conservative officials playing with the taps while Yeltsin was incapacitated, but they said some risk-averse European buyers could insist on contract terms less beneficial to Russian exporters.
"Our partners could get worried and demand terms not as attractive to us," said a trade financer at International Economic Cooperation, or MES, another leading oil exporter.
Others said money, not politics, motivated exports -- and with domestic oil prices below world levels, it is not hard to make money exporting the stuff.
"We like good prices on world markets," Nafta-Moskva's Solovyov said.
Political tensions in other major oil exporting countries often cause benchmark London and New York oil prices to leap over worries about supply disruptions.
Nervous International Petroleum Exchange traders swung spot prices in London when Yeltsin sacked maverick security tsar General Alexander Lebed last month.
But Moscow oil traders and analysts said that everyone should just calm down.
"This stuff (oil) is scheduled for export months in advance and it's technically very difficult to fiddle with the taps," said energy analyst Peter Houlder of CentreInvest consultancy.
Even the conservatives who covet Yeltsin's Kremlin seat remember the good old Soviet oil-boom days, when exports -- not disruptions to them -- were the key to power and wealth and enticed the Soviet Union to crank up output and become the world's largest oil producer.
Russia's diamonds could face a rocky future with tax officials seeking a bigger cut from rough gem exports, but industry sources said on Wednesday they hoped a deal with South Africa's De Beers would proceed.
In the latest shock to hit the Russian diamond sector and relations with De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd, the prosecutor general's office on Tuesday accused Almazy Rossii-Sakha (ARS), Russia's largest diamond producer, of financial irregularities.
"Maybe it will affect the (De Beers) agreement and maybe it won't -- my personal opinion is that it won't and an agreement will soon be signed," said Pavel Kovylin, first deputy director of ARS's Central Selling Organisation, which handles exports.
The export body has the same name as De Beers's own London-based Central Selling Organisation.
Diamonds could provide a windfall for the Russian tax authorities. ARS is the world's second largest diamond producer and its sales of uncut gems rose six percent in 1995 to $1.38 billion.
ARS, which mines nearly all of Russia's diamonds and is its sole official exporter, reached a preliminary agreement with De Beers' to export rough gems under a memorandum in February.
But the text of the agreement, undergoing review in various ministries, is awaiting government approval.
"The final agreement must correspond to the memorandum, since it was signed by the government and we are obliged to fulfil it," Kovylin said.
The prosecutor general's press service, which told Russian news agencies on Tuesday of the investigation, said it was investigating ARS' finances but stressed no formal criminal charges had been filed.
"At this point, there are no indictments," said press spokesman Natalya Vishnikova, declining to comment on whether formal charges would be pressed. "We are investigating and the matter has been passed to the Federal Tax Inspectorate."
The investigations revolve around alleged unpaid taxes and breaches of hard currency regulations for which fines could total $379 million, according to Russian news agencies. The probe has generated further uncertainty over the relationship between Russia and De Beers.
"There's a whole lot of political infighting going on between Moscow and Yakutia," said analyst Roger Chaplin at T Hoare &amp; Co in London, referring to the main diamond-producing region in Siberia where ARS is based.
"It could possibly affect the agreement with De Beers -- but then again, it could be somebody in Moscow trying to throw a spanner into the works."
The diamond world, recovering from the decision of Australian producer Argyle to say goodbye to De Beers, is impatiently waiting for Russia to finalise its relationship with the South African cartel.
Russia has been accused in the past of leaking hundreds of millions of dollars' worth of diamonds on to world markets outside its previous deal with De Beers. The new deal, once approved by Moscow officials, could give De Beers greater control of Russian output.
But it may not give greater comfort to Russia's increasingly ambitious mineral-rich regions -- especially to Yakutia, which wants a greater cut from exports of rough gems.
Russia-De Beers relations were first hit by uncertainty when Russia's Komdragmet, the precious metals and gems agency which participated in talks, was shut down by presidential decree in August.
Under the February memorandum, which replaced an expired five-year deal, De Beers would take about 85 percent of Russian rough diamonds. That is less than 95 percent under the previous deal, leaving Russia more for its own nascent cutting and polishing industry.
Crude oil output in Russia, the world's third-largest oil producer, is finally ending a decade of dramatic decline, but it is still a long way from switching back into top gear.
"We could see 1997 output stabilise at 1996's level," said Vitaly Kamenev of the Economy Ministry's fuel department. "But we won't see any real pick-up until at least 1998."
Russian oil output slipped two percent year-on-year to 146 million tonnes in the first half of 1996, after falling three percent in the first half of 1994, according to the State Statistics Committee. Most of the decline came from companies producing over 10 million tonnes a year.
"It is the ministry's opinion that output will fall two or three percent next year," said a Fuel and Energy Ministry source who declined to be named, saying that the matter was sensitive.
That would still be one of the lowest declines Russia's beleaguered oil industry has seen in recent years.
It would also be a sign that the era of steep plunges is finally drawing to a close.
Russia's 1995 output of 305 million tonnes, or 6.2 million barrels per day, is stabilising at just over half of 1987's peak of 570 million tonnes (11.4 million bpd).
The numbers matter because they indicate the pace at which Russia, once the world's largest oil producer, may regain that place as its economy and domestic oil prices grow.
But it is still early.
"There are a lot of expectations that the barrier will be broken next year, but it won't -- output will be flat," said Tamara Okhundova, energy analyst at the Centre for Economic Trends, a research institute set up by the government.
Moscow is for now committed to subsidising domestic oil prices to help flagging industrial enterprises, and export levels cannot rise significantly until new pipelines are built -- two key factors that do not inspire higher production levels.
"Production next year is going to be pretty flat, and if anything, slightly lower," said energy analyst Jeremy Hudson of Salomon Brothers in London.
He said that if parliament soon approved a list of reserves open to production-sharing, an initial, positive impact on output could be felt by the end of 1997.
Russia's joint ventures, which account for less than five percent of production, are showing the biggest increases in output, with their production up 18 percent in the first half 1996 to seven million tonnes.
When the big-ticket joint ventures and production-sharing deals begin producing in several years, total output could soar.
A bull-run in world prices and Moscow's scrapped export duties have inspired Russian producers to put even more oil into already over-strapped export pipelines.
But a tax clampdown on high foreign-exchange earners and a lack of commitment by new shareholders in Russian oil companies to reinvest in production are both sucking up cash.
Julian Leigh, Russia analyst at the Centre for Global Energy Studies in London, said higher export dollars were not necessarily finding their way back into production.
He said domestic commercial banks, some of which are major stockholders in big Russian oil companies, preferred to pump cash into markets with better returns, like equity.
Rehabilitating wells is one of the fastest and cheapest ways to boost output, but most of the easy, less expensive workovers have been completed and average well production rates have not been as high as expected.
Russia has 144,000 oil wells, of which nearly 40,000, or 28 percent, are idle. Hudson said average workover rates -- the cost of bringing these back on stream -- could rise to $100,000 per well from $25,000.
Russian diamond giant Almazy- Rossii Sakha (ARS) said on Wednesday officials were battling for control over Russia's lucrative gem sector but a forthcoming deal with De Beers was in sight.
ARS president Vyacheslav Shtyrov told a news conference that a long-delayed trade agreement with the South African gem giant could be signed by December.
But he said Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin, who could have a chance to sign the deal as soon as this week, would put it off until next month because of a government probe of ARS's finances -- a probe Shtyrov says may be part of manoevres among government officials for influence over the group.
The investigation and struggle for control over ARS come as the diamond company seeks more scope to export independently of De Beers. ARS supplies a quarter of De Beers output, nearly all Russia's diamonds and is Russia's sole authorised exporter.
Shtyrov said that under the trade agreement with De Beers, based on a memorandum initialled in February, ARS would have the right to export $180 million of gems a year independent of De Beers, or 5.8 percent of ARS's $1.38 billion in sales last year.
That could yield a rich trove of influence and power for whichever government ministries succeed in gaining the upper hand in controlling those sales.
ARS, which gave London investment bank NatWest Markets a mandate in July to raise $500 million in capital, wants to increase exploration and mining operations -- giving officials more incentive to grapple for control of the state-owned firm.
"We're very seriously worried about the recent accusations, which come at, and I say this in quotation marks, at an appropriate moment," said Mikhail Nikolayev, president of the vast Sakha-Yakutia region in Siberia where ARS is based.
He told the news conference he was referring to the impending De Beers deal and to ARS's plan to raise funds abroad.
The probe, which follows charges from tax officials and the prosecutor-general's office that surfaced last week, revolve around alleged unpaid taxes and breaches of hard currency regulations for which fines could total $379 million.
Nikolayev said ARS had no tax arrears to the federal budget, and that Finance Ministry investigations into ARS finances turned up so-called insufficiencies but no major problems.
"They (the charges) are extremely debatable," said Shtyrov, adding that government questions over how to value raw gems supplied to ARS when the company was set up in 1991 were questions for accountants, not for lawyers.
He said ARS would defend itself in Russia's courts if it had to and restore its reputation with partners.
"If the result of all of this is that we lose our investment projects, then we will consider that Russia has lost -- and we will just eat bread and butter," he said.
Shtyrov, who is also vice-president of Sakha-Yakutia, said industry officials were struggling for influence over ARS.
Shtyrov said Yevgeny Bychkov, former head of the recently disbanded State Committee for Precious Metals and Stones, or Komdragmet, was still an influential figure in the industry.
Komdragment was broken up by presidential decree in August and the Finance Ministry has assumed its functions.
Shtyrov said Russia's diamond sector would see stability, in spite of plans by some officials to give domestic cutters and polishers a greater cut of gem output.
"There are always rumours of a major shake-up and reorganisation of the Russian diamond industry, but they are not founded," he said.
Russia's state oil pipeline firm Transneft on Tuesday cast a shadow of doubt over the go-ahead for a proposed new pipeline across Russia when it said it had demanded a stronger role in the strategic deal.
Transneft spokesman Ravil Polyanin said the monopoly, which owns and operates Russia's vast, existing oil pipeline network, was not content to play the role of daily operator and wanted an equity stake in the important project.
"We want to be a shareholder," he said. "But the oil firms have not valued our technical expertise highly enough."
Companies holding a 50 percent stake in the Caspian Pipeline Consortium (CPC) that will build the proposed link are Chevron, Russian LUKoil, Mobil Corp , Rosneft, Oman Oil Company, British Gas Plc, Agip SpA of Italy, Kazakh Munaigaz and Oryx Energy Company.
Kazakhstan, Oman and Russia hold the remaining 50 percent.
A CPC official, speaking after a meeting last week in Moscow to try to push a long-delayed restructuring agreement ahead, said the deal would be signed next month.
But the consortium has not made any formal announcements on what was achieved and shareholders declined to give details.
The CPC consortium, in one of the former Soviet Union's most ambitious and important energy projects, wants to build a $1.5 billion pipeline from Kazakhstan's vast Tengiz oilfield through war-torn Chechnya to Russia's Black Sea port of Novorossiisk.
But a cloak of secrecy around last week's meeting raised questions over whether the group had overcome hurdles that have dogged it in the past, including prickly issues of Transneft's participation and of corporate and international financing.
"The transition committee successfully completed negotiations on restructuring and the final agreement will be signed in Moscow on December 6," said the CPC official, who added that he was not allowed to provide any details.
But several shareholders said the deadline was optimistic and stumbling blocks remained. "The subject is extremely sensitive and I cannot say one single word about CPC," said a Western oil executive whose company is a CPC shareholder.
A second similar Western source said: "I'm reluctant to say the deal is going to be signed on x or y date."
Polyanin said it was premature to say all outstanding problems had been resolved, adding that Transneft would seek to persuade consortium members to reallocate equity stakes.
He said Transneft was lobbying Deputy Fuel and Energy Minister Anatoly Shatalov to push CPC to give Transneft a share.
Transneft has a big strategic card to play, since it will operate the pipeline and help set and collect transit fees that will fill its coffers. If the fees are too high, it will throw a wrench into the economics of the deal for the Western partners.
CPC's main customers are Chevron and Mobil. Desperate to ship more oil out of their Tengiz project, they are already sending crude to Western markets via unconventional routes through Azerbaijan, Georgia and Finland on trains and barges.
CPC sources said Transneft's role and Russian taxes were the main issues preventing a final agreement for the pipeline which should eventually carry up to 70 million tonnes of oil a year (1.4 million barrels per day).
They also said it was a barometer of the extent to which Caspian onshore and offshore oil and pipeline projects will be able to get off the ground, and of Russia's willingness to see oil-rich former Soviet republics develop their own energy deals.
Russia is trying to make things tougher for exporters of non-ferrous scrap metals, but impending tighter regulations will not keep Russian supplies from finding Western markets, industry sources said on Wednesday.
"There was a big once-and-for-all surge in scrap exports in the early stages of the break-up of the Soviet Union, but that's now over," said copper specialist Kevin Norrish of CRU International in London.
"The domestic market is tighter than it used to be, so there is a lot less going to Western Europe."
But he could not see proposed licensing of exporters hitting sales abroad, and other sources said Russia would still find European markets more attractive than the domestic one.
Moscow wants to license the export of scrap ferrous and non-ferrous metals to help provide steady supplies to domestic metals enterprises for processing and then export.
Russian news agencies said on Wednesday a decree on licensing could be signed by the end of this month.
The Industry Ministry in September sought to limit scrap exports to two million tonnes a year, but compromised by agreeing to a plan to license exporters.
"Maybe this scrap will be processed in Russia and then exported -- but the fact is that this material costs more abroad than it does in Russia," said a senior source at Tsvetmetexport, the former state metals export agency, who declined to be named.
Other industry sources said domestic metals firms were short of funds and that barter operations -- the means by which they would buy scrap -- were increasingly unattractive.
Nearly one third of Russian copper is produced from scrap, and officials are seeking ways to ensure steady supplies.
"There's no market for people to supply scrap to domestic enterprises and for them to then export it and get paid," said Sergei Bagrov, a non-ferrous export specialist at Promstalsyryo.
"Licensing will increase export of metal through all channels."
He said enterprises had already found ways to find the raw materials they needed.
Russian scrap copper exports were 54,000 tonnes in the first half of 1996, and Interfax news agency, which reported the data in September, said this was up 70 percent on total 1995 exports.
Western traders have said scrap availability on Western markets is often spotty and even unofficial estimates on scrap non-ferrous exports are hard to come by.
But two trends appear certain.
The exodus of large amounts of scrap copper, aluminium, nickel, steel, lead and iron that took place after the 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union is over, and Russia's scrap metal trade is consolidating as bigger, richer domestic and foreign players move in.
In the immediate post-Soviet years much of the scrap was smuggled from military bases and trade was so brisk that Russian industry sources described the Baltics as the world's largest non-ferrous metals exporters -- even though the three countries produce virtually no metals.
The Russian press is no longer full of tales of smugglers riding the train to the Baltics with copper cable in backpacks.
But the market is still one of the wildest and least transparent in Russia and dealers said licensing may not help.
"Russia is no longer just bleeding metal," Bagrov said. "(But) I would not say the market has become civilised."
Official export statistics, most of which do not include the scrap trade, were unreliable, he added.
The world's biggest aluminium smelter, Russia's Bratsk plant, opposes any output-cutting schemes and wants to boost production and to compete better on world markets, a senior company official said on Thursday.
"Bratsk is an inveterate supporter of market-economy principles and not of schemes that violate such principles or of anti-monopoly laws," said Yuri Shlaifshtein, a Bratsk board member based in London who conducts corporate strategy and watches London Metal Exchange prices.
"Each company should choose the strategy best suiting it."
AOOT Bratsky Aluminievy Zavod (BrAZ), based in southern Siberia close to plentiful hydroelectric power, has already increased output of A7 higher-grade material to 69 percent of total production from 30 percent.
Shlaifshtein declined to provide production figures but said competitiveness abroad and at home were essential to Bratsk's long-term strategy.
An independent metals source who asked not to be named said Bratsk produced 62,800 tonnes of primary aluminium in October after 61,500 tonnes in September and 64,500 tonnes in August.
Bratsk's costs, already some of the lowest among Russian aluminium producers, are an average $1,250 per tonne of aluminium produced and transported to Rotterdam via St Petersburg, said Boris Arlyuk of the Alumconsult consultancy.
"Their production is pretty profitable," he said.
But Shlaifshtein said Bratsk was seeking to streamline costs even further and that a new, tough attitude to debtors by Russian tax officials could put flagging competitors in the European part of Russia out of business.
"Each factory should improve its economic situation and cost factors in order to be competitive on the market," he said.
Bratsk does not like to talk about a recently-ended global output-cutting deal which required Russian producers to cut back production to boost sagging world prices.
World prices are again flagging --- but Shlaifshtein said that this time, cutting output was not an option.
"The volume of output at the plant should change only on the basis of one's own strategic interests, of the overall economic situation and of the market situtaion," Shlaifshtein said.
He said it made economic sense for the plant to use its capacity, but gave no further details.
Bratsk, Russia's flagship aluminium smelter, wants to top its Soviet-era record output of 857,000 tonnes a year after 772,500 tonnes in 1995.
Its total capacity is at least 820,000 tonnes and possibly one million tonnes, according to Western industry sources.
Bratsk had already closed a unit for technological and environmental reasons by the time Russia, Canada, Australia, Norway, the United States and the European Union signed a two-year global output-cutting memorandum of understanding in March 1994. The deal expired this spring.
Bratsk produces most of its metal under tolling arrangements with London-based shareholder Trans-World Group, which has at least a 50 percent stake in the plant. --Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
Russia's demand for feed grains will outstrip any output increases its agriculture sector manages in coming years, which could turn the country into a big importer, industry officials said on Friday.
Russia, which has just completed its second poor harvest in two years, the third worst in 30 years, is heading into the next crop cycle with few signs that its dismal track-record will soon recover.
"For now, consumption is still low enough to offset the decline in output, but demand is still going to rise faster than production," said Alexander Yukish, president of the Grain Union, which groups leading private traders.
Russian farmers have to struggle to get their hands on whatever seeds, tractors and fertilisers they can scrape together.
The agriculture sector, one of the most inefficient and least-reformed in Russia, has not adopted the pro-market changes reshaping some other domestic industries.
"Russia will need at least 120 million tonnes of grain when livestock levels and consumption return to the levels we had in 1990," said Yukish. But he said Russian grains output, which has nearly halved in recent years, would not stage a comeback for at least another five or 10 years.
"There is just not enough feed grain in Russia -- we've got to produce more soymeal and maize," Alexander Vasyutin, deputy head of the Agriculture Ministry's crops growing section, said.
Russia has been slaughtering livestock because it does not have enough grain to feed it. Bread is a staple in Russia but people are eating less and product quality is patchy.
Russia's just-completed 1996 gross harvest was 74.6 million tonnes, according to preliminary official figures -- just eight percent above 1995's disastrous net 63.4 million tonnes, the worst since about 1965.
About eight percent of the 1996 total will be lost after cleaning -- putting net output at about 68.6 million tonnes.
Some analysts say up to 20 percent of Russia's harvest was lost in the Soviet era due to inefficient, obsolete combines, and that losses now, with even less money for adequate equipment, may still be severe.
"Next year, we'll see the same harvest we had this year, maybe a little more, maybe a little less," Yukish said. "But to expect sharp increases in output next year is not realistic."
Industry officials said that with the domestic economy showing signs of turning around and a growing middle-class hungry for meat, Russia must act fast if it is to satisfy demand in the future.
Already the signs do not point to big increases next year.
Vasyutin said farmers, afraid of unseasonably warm, dry weather that has lasted into November across Russia's grain belt, had sown 1.2 million fewer hectares, or around 14.5 million hectares, to winter grains for harvesting in 1997.
"Crops are in a satisfactory condition, but moisture levels are not adequate," he said, adding government officials had targeted a 1997 harvest of at least 70 million tonnes."
Winter wheat accounts for about 15 percent of Russian wheat output and can crucially tip the balance.
"Russians want to eat meat -- but this desire has to be preceeded by very serious structural changes in agriculture," Yukish said. "Russia will be a big feed grains importer for quite a while -- of that I am quite sure."
-- Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
Azerbaijan is proving more successful in attracting foreign oil investment dollars than big brother Russia, but the Caspian state must still deal with Moscow if it wants to become a major world energy player.
In the latest deal underscoring the shift, Azeri oil officials said Amoco Corp, Unocal Corp, Japan's Itochu Corp and Saudi Arabia's Delta Nimir would initial a $1.5 billion agreement with Azeri officials on December 14 to tap unexplored reserves in the Azeri sector of the Caspian.
The deal is the fourth multi-billion-dollar project Baku has won since the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991 and takes place as a chill settles over Western oil companies struggling to push Russian-based deals through a legal maze.
"I think there's really a question of how much Russia really wants the investment," said one Western oil executive in Moscow. "With the Azeris, it's never really a question."
Douglas Hill, resident manager of Amoco unit Amoco Caspian Sea Petroleum Ltd in Baku, said the Azeri government had done much to make deals attractive to foreign investors.
"There's a strong realisation here that some assistance is needed and that oil is going to be the primary driver of the economy," he said.
Actual foreign oil investment in Russia has all but dried up as Moscow struggles to pass tax and resource laws backing investors' projects and is less than $1 billion out of a planned $60 billion. No deals are close to the production stage.
In contrast, Azerbaijan's flagship $8 billion Azerbaijan International Operating Company (AIOC) project grouping 13 international oil companies is scheduled to start pumping in the third quarter of next year.
Moscow is not indifferent to the change in focus to high-yielding Caspian reserves and has pushed to get Russian oil giant LUKoil involved in the projects -- partly, some analysts say, in exchange for not arguing over who owns Caspian oil.
Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan and Russia all border the sea. Russia says its resources should be shared equally but Azerbaijan follows a sectoral approach and is proceeding with deals in its area.
"Of course, Azerbaijan is now our competitor," said Nikolai Bolmasov, deputy head of the Russian Fuel and Energy Ministry's section for cooperation with the Commonwealth of Independent States.
He said Moscow was "analysing" Azerbaijan's role in landing foreign oil deals but declined to say if the ministry would produce policy directives on the issue.
Caspian oil projects are next door to the Middle East Gulf region, which contains nearly 70 percent of world oil reserves and produces one quarter of global oil supplies. They will make Azerbaijan and neighbouring Kazakhstan big competitors to Russia.
"Over the next three or four years, production will shift from Siberia to higher yielding Caspian and Sakhalin projects," Stephen O'Sullivan, associate director of oil and gas at MC Securities in London, said in a recent interview.
But the deals on Far Eastern Sakhalin island do not have Russian majors as shareholders, and analysts say LUKoil's participation in leading Azeri deals has kept Moscow quiet on the Caspian status issue.
LUKoil could yet join the latest Caspian group, which will tap the unexplored Dan-Ulduzu and Azhrafe reserves.
One hand Moscow has not forced is the question of how the region's oil will be transported to Western markets.
Russia is keen to earn crude oil transit tariffs and control supplies, but knows some new pipelines will probably go through Turkey due to worries over increased tanker traffic through the Bosphorus.
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
Russia's state oil holding firm Rosneft said on Friday it would protest against a local decision to award Exxon Corp the right to tap Arctic oilfields, signalling Moscow's tougher line towards Western energy companies.
Rosneft spokesman Vladimir Tumarkin said Exxon, which regional officials declared the winner of a tender to develop the Central Khoreiverskaya oilfields in the northern Timan-Pechora area, would be given too many privileges.
"Exxon's bid violates the terms of the tender in that it would give Exxon the exclusive right to these resources as well as the right to tell the Russian side under what terms it should work," he told Reuters.
The protest is the most concrete evidence to date that Moscow, in a significant change of policy, is serious about giving its own oil companies a greater role in developing Russian oilfields.
The legal basis upon which Rosneft -- which bid jointly with a subsidiary and Amoco Corp in the tender -- would protest was not immediately clear.
Exxon officials could not be reached for comment.
"What are you talking about; how can they protest this?" said Anatoly Kazakov, deputy head of the Arkhangelsk oblast regional administration and a member of the region's Nenets autonomous district tender committee that on Thursday declared Exxon the winner.
"Everything was done absolutely normally."
Under the tender, Exxon would have a 50 percent stake and conduct negotiations to bring Rosneft, Russian oil firm KomiTEK and exploration body Arkhangelskgeoldobycha in to split the remaining 50 percent in a production-sharing contract.
Rosneft is the state's agent in all production-sharing contracts and has the right to dispose of the state's share of output from such deals.
Tumarkin said that under the original terms of the Central-Khoreiverskaya tender, no foreign firm had the right to tell the Russian side how to work.
"Exxon did not conduct negotiations with us when it bid and its proposal gives it an exclusive right to the reserves," he said.
The quarrel over who will develop the fields, which contain about 160 million tonnes of oil and require about $1.5 billion to develop, underscores the ambivalence Russia feels about attracting foreign oil investment.
One the one hand, it desperately needs the money. On the other hand, it is loath to repeat the kind of contracts signed to develop reserves off the Far Eastern island of Sakhalin, contracts in which foreign firms hold nearly 100 percent stakes.
"Fifty-fifty -- what's the problem?" said Kazakov."As a Russian, I agree we should support our companies. But if our companies don't have the money or financing, we have to do something else."
The squabble is the first test of how much more difficult Russia could make it for Western oil companies seeking to tap big reserves.
Tumarkin said Rosneft had wanted Exxon to form a consortium with at least some of the other bidders, including the informal Rosneft/Amoco alliance, Texaco Inc, Total SA of France and Norsk Hydro ASA.
But the idea had received little support, he said.
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
Russia, whose sudden introduction of export curbs each winter can wreak havoc in the world's heavy fuel oil market, is unsure about what to do this season, traders said on Tuesday.
Most traders expected an export duty of up to 80,000 roubles per tonne of mazut, as heavy fuel oil is known in Russian. But Moscow is keeping the industry guessing longer than usual on the timing and size of a possible tariff.
"My crystal ball is broken, so you'll have to ask somebody else," said a senior source at a major Western trading house.
Yevgeny Lukashov, adviser to the Federal Energy Commission and close to the government's debate on how to regulate mazut exports, said the cabinet might debate the issue on Tuesday.
But he had no idea what the outcome would be.
Moscow has in recent years raised mazut export tariffs or banned deliveries abroad outright, which has conditioned traders to expect a restriction each winter.
But some industry sources questioned why Russia -- which usually slaps the curbs on in November to ensure cheap heating fuel supplies for factories and power plants -- is already in December with no decision yet on the matter.
Sarah Anderson of Energy Security Analysis Inc in Washington said Russia, which must ship some mazut to domestic users along its waterways before they freeze, was defeating the purpose of bolstering supplies by waiting so long.
"If you don't have a curb in place by October, the purpose is defeated. They really have to start dealing with this in October, because January is too late."
Other sources said the uncertainty over tariffs reflected not careful planning by Moscow but haphazard and inefficient decision-making based on Soviet-era thinking.
"It's item number 999 on a list of a thousand things to do," said Matthew Sagers of PlanEcon in Washington. But he said any curbs would not hit export levels because Russia was oversupplied with mazut in winter.
Others say demand at home is exceptionally difficult to fathom, since there is no domestic market and enterprises using the material are usually verging on bankruptcy.
"They'll in theory use as much as they can and pay as little as they can," one trader said, referring to traditional wasteful use of resources at factories and heating plants.
The lack of transparency makes it nearly impossible for traders to estimate how much extra mazut Russia needs during the winter and, correspondingly, what kind of tariff Moscow might slap on to achieve the supply balance it needs at home.
"It ends up going straight to users, so who knows how big the market is," a Russian trader said.
Some industry sources said an apparent shift in policy on the part of Russia's domestic oil companies was adding to the murkiness of the situation this year.
A second, senior Russian trader said the old logic of producers seeking to export to free up storage tank space and get cash, even at a net loss, was disappearing.
"The logic now is that it really might be better not to produce at all," he said, citing low refinery runs as producers seek to export crude oil instead.
The trader was one of a handful who thought there would be no curbs. "My gut feeling is there won't be a tariff. It's senseless. It could absolutely stop the trade," he said.
Others said a tariff would only dent export volumes.
"Refineries are very short of crude oil these days," said a Russian source at a Swiss trader. "But they'll still try to push something out (on world markets)."
Russia is trying to shift financing of its tarnished gold sector to commercial banks while keeping control of exports, putting it on a collision course with the banks who say sales abroad are what interest them.
Moscow bullion officials view recent Central Bank decisions outlining new procedures for working with gold as a cautious, experimental step toward opening one of the country's most closed industries, the banks say.
"Administrative measures in Russia always mean something," said Dmitry Smirnov, head of precious metals operations at Vneshtorgbank, commenting on whether recent changes detailing accounting procedures for working with gold were Soviet-style bureaucratic paper-shuffling or more significant.
But he said: "Honestly, I wouldn't expect a sharp rise in output any time soon."
Russian bullion officials say they want to open up the domestic market, since the federal budget can no longer finance gold output or keep the state's strategic reserves well-stocked.
Canadian industry sources say Russia has the world's third-largest untapped gold reserves but is only the world's fifth-largest producer, a fact that reflects the difficulty it is having in channeling funds to mines.
Output in 1995 fell to about 130 tonnes and will slip in 1996 and 1997. About 130 banks have the right to trade in gold domestically but only five to eight can export gold abroad.
Banks financed only five tonnes of output last year.
Western bullion bankers say bank-financed output makes Russia a potential loose cannon on world markets, since it could quickly send output soaring.
Gold, which struck three-year lows earlier this week but has picked up slightly since, hovered around $368 an ounce on Thursday on the London Metal Exchange.
Domestic banks, some of which bought government gold-backed certificates in 1991 which they cashed in for metal, may already have significant stockpiles of gold which they are unable to export due to strict quota and licensing rules.
Boris Yeltsin's press service said on Thursday the president had decreed that Russia would not issue certificates backed by about 30 tonnes of gold as planned last year.
"I know that there are a lot of banks with a lot of gold that they are just waiting to sell abroad," said Dmitry Parmeshin, head of Inkombank's precious metals sales section.
"We all want to take this stuff out if the (domestic) market becomes liberalised enough."
Bankers declined to put a figure on the number of tonnes of gold held in Russian commercial banks, but one said the figure could be at least in the dozens.
The Central Bank in October introduced new accounting procedures for banks seeking to work on the domestic gold market. But the institution still largely controls exports through quotas and licences.
Interfax news agency quoted Central Bank precious metals director Sergei Kyshtymov as saying the rules would soon be simplified further.
"This can be viewed as the first step toward a more open gold market in Russia," said Sergei Brazhenko, deputy head of precious metals department at Rossiisky Kredit, one of the few banks with a licence to export gold abroad.
"The task is to hook up our output with world market demand, given that our domestic consumption is low."
Bullion bankers said domestic consumers bought 15 tonnes of gold last year, mostly as jewellery -- but they said trade restrictions hid the fact that consumer demand was higher.
"Once things become truly liberalised, the domestic market could really explode," Parmeshin said.
Russian Finance Minister Alexander Livshits warned financially-troubled Norilsk Nickel on Friday that it must pay overdue taxes, but analysts said the firm would not be liquidated or that its would assets would be frozen.
"Norilsk  really is a big debtor, both to the federal and regional budgets," said Konstantin Chernyshev, equities analyst at Moscow brokerage Rinaco Plus and a Norilsk watcher. "Livshits's words are an attempt to put pressure on the company."
The official Itar-Tass news agency quoted Livshits as telling parliamentary deputies that RAO Norilsky Nikel 0#NKEL.RUO had to pay its tax arrears and that bankruptcy procedures applied to the metals group.
"If it was an unsolicited statement and a bolt out of the blue, then it obviously means something," said Christopher Granville, chief economist at United City Bank in Moscow.
"But if it was a response to a deputy's question that was essentially loaded, then it was the only answer he could have given."
Russian tax and cabinet authorities, under pressure from the International Monetary Fund to boost tax revenues as a condition for receiving payments of a $10 billion, three-year loan to Moscow, have been striking fear into the hearts of some of Russia's most prominent industrial firms by saying they must pay up or face liquidation.
"They could freeze metal, but it's not a long-term solution to the problem and wouldn't put money in the budget," Chernyshev said. "I don't think they would do that."
Entire social infrastructures in the icy Far North where Norilsk is based depend on the company, and Moscow has said it has no finances to resettle hundreds of thousands of people -- an expenditure which could far outstrip Norilsk's debts.
Norilsk officials declined to comment.
Analysts said the government, while anxious about Norilsk's debts, is highly unlikely to bring the nickel, copper, cobalt, platinum and platinum group metals producer to its knees or take measures that could significantly affect output.
But it also wants Norilsk, the world's second-largest nickel producer, to clean up its act.
"The procedure of bankruptcy will be applied," Tass quoted Livshits as telling Duma deputies about Norilsk.
It indirectly quoted him as saying Norilsk should first pay salary arrears, which in the past have led to worker strikes.
"It is unlikely that Norilsk will pay these debts in the near-term -- the company will remain a debtor in the near future," Chernyshev said.
He estimated the company's regional debts at least one trillion roubles and said 30 percent of the giant Krasnoyarsk regional budget was fuelled by Norilsk money.
Norilsk's new majority shareholder, Russian commerical bank Uneximbank, has said it is reorganising metal exports through Interrosimpex in order to boost revenues.
But the changes have yet to improve significantly Norilsk's situation.
"Uneximbank has inherited a mountain and whether or not they climb out and over it remains to be seen," said one metals source.
Norilsk said in September that it total debts, including unpaid salaries to workers, were 13 trillion roubles. The company said last month that it had worked out a tax payment schedule with authorities, after regional tax officials threatened to seize some nickel and copper assets.
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
A multinational group trying to build a $1.5 billion oil pipeline linking Kazakhstan and Russia held frantic, last-minute talks on Friday to try to resolve how much involvent Russia's pipeline firm will have in the deal.
The Caspian Pipeline Consortium, or CPC, which groups eight international oil companies and the states of Russia, Kazakhstan and Oman, hoped to sign off on a new restructuring deal on Friday afternoon after talks.
But Western oil executives and Russian energy officials, speaking hours before they hoped to sign, said it was far from clear what would happen because of a last-minute push by Russia's Transneft oil pipeline monopoly to take potentially the largest equity stake in the scheme.
"Are we going to sign? Well, I hope so, but I cannot say for sure," said a Western executive representing a CPC shareholder. "We're burning the midnight oil to work out the issues."
State-run Transneft's bid to be not just the operator but also a shareholder and strategic decision-maker in the group has made the Western shareholders very uneasy.
"Transneft could end up being the equity holder representing the Russian government," said one senior CPC source.
A breakthrough deal in April 1996 brought on board new equity holders but has yet to produce a share transfer. The companies involved are Chevron, which will own 15 percent of CPC, Russia's LUKoil with 12.5 percent, Mobil and Russia's Rosneft, 7.5 percent each, British Gas Plc and Italy's Agip SpA, two percent each, and Oryx Energy Company and Kazakhstan's Munaigaz 1.75 percent each.
The remaining 50 percent stake would be divided between Russia, 24 percent, Kazakhstan, 19 percent, and Oman, through the Oman Oil Company with seven percent. Transneft, with backing from Moscow, wants the other participants to agree to it taking the Russian government's 24 percent stake.
The proposed 1,580 km (990 mile) pipeline to link Kazakhstan's Tengiz oil field and Russia's Black Sea oil export outlet Novorossiisk would give Chevron and Mobil, partners in Tengiz, a much-needed dedicated export route for output that will peak at around 700,000 barrels per day (bpd) by 2010.
But if Transneft takes all or part of Russia's nearly one-quarter stake, it could use its leverage to raise transit tariffs or insist that some Russian oil flow through the link, which would cut into the economics of Chevron's and Mobil's $20 billion TengizChevroil (TCO) project and other Kazakh oil deals.
"The concern is Transneft's role in the management of the project. Conflict of interest is something very unpalatable to the Western side," a CPC source said.
Transneft spokesman Ravil Polyanin said the monopoly wanted the whole 24 percent stake and to be the operator of the pipeline, but that it might settle for a smaller equity share.
"Various states have used Russia's pipeline system in the past without contributions to Transneft," he said.
CPC executives are anxious to sign a deal, since the project is already years behind schedule and has stymied development of Caspian oil fields that require export routes before they can be economically tapped.
"There is an awful lot of pressure to sign," said one source.
But four senior Western CPC shareholders, including Mobil Oil Kazakstan Inc president Carl Burnett, told Reuters last month that if a deal was signed on Friday, it would probably not be for the crucial share transfer, the key step to getting the project off the ground.
The Caspian pipeline, to be built in phases across southern Russia but bypassing war-torn Chechnya, could eventually carry 1.4 million barrels per day, but other Kazakh projects will take up the extra capacity and leave little room for Russian oil.
Russian and foreign oil companies signed a $2 billion deal on Friday to build a pipeline bringing oil from energy-rich Kazakhstan to Western markets, but frantic last-minute negotiations left questions unresolved.
In a delayed signing ceremony that saw Russia's leading oil officials huddling for secret consultations, the Caspian Pipeline Consortium inked documents splitting itself into two for tax reasons.
Russia said its oil pipeline monopoly Transneft might still take a stake. The role of Transneft has been a contentious issue among CPC members and a key negotiating point.
But the signing raised questions over how much closer CPC is to resolving differences and getting its pipeline project off the ground.
"We are extremely satisfied with the commercial structure that has been accomplished and we believe it offers a realistic approach to such an important project," said Chevron senior Vice-President Jeet Bindra.
"We are anxious now to move it to the next stage and hope that a share acquisition will be accomplished by February 1997 and that construction will begin next year."
A raft of officials, including LUKoil President Vagit Alekperov, Kazakh Oil and Gas Minister Nurlan Balgimbayev, former Fuel and Energy Minister Yuri Shafranik, Deputy Fuel and Energy Minister Anatoly Shatalov, attended the signing.
Chevron spokesman Edward Chow said the two entities -- CPC Russia and CPC Kazakhstan -- would have an identical management structure.
But Russian Deputy Prime Minister Valery Serov said it had not yet been decided whether Transneft would acquire the Russian government's 24 percent stake in the consortium.
Chevron will own 15 percent in the CPC, Russia's LUKoil 12.5 percent, Mobil and Russia's Rosneft 7.5 percent each, British Gas Plc and Italy's Agip SpA two percent each, and Oryx Energy Company and Kazakhstan's Munaigaz 1.75 percent each.
The remaining 50 percent is divided between Russia (24 percent), Kazakhstan (19 percent) and Oman (seven percent).
Transneft Chief Executive Officer Valery Chernayev told Reuters that the firm wanted Russia's entire 24 percent stake -- a demand that could delay the project even further.
CPC, set up in 1992, is seeking to build a 1,580 km (990 mile) pipeline linking Kazakhstan's Tengiz oil field and Russia's Black Sea oil expot outlet Novorossiisk.
Chevron and Mobil, with a $20 billion oil project in Tengiz, are the main future customers of the CPC pipeline.
Officials signed the deal in a Moscow hotel conference area, but only after breaking out of negotiations repeatedly to run to corners of the room and consult.
"This concludes the first phase of the project," Serov said. "Now a follow-up step, which will be no easier than what we accomplished today, must be made -- project implementation."
CPC nominated Transneft as operator, but CPC sources said they had a stringent list of conditions Transneft had to agree to and fulfill if it wanted the role.
Serov said Western firms bidding to construct the link would have to do so jointly with Russian or Kazakh partners and said the latter would be given preference as equipment suppliers.
"From our point of view, Transneft has been designated as an operator," Chevron's Bindra told Reuters, adding that the group must still negotiate an operating agreement.
"For three years, we failed to find a common language," Balgimbayev said, adding that he was pleased with the deal.
The pipeline will initially move 28 million tonnes a year (560,000 barrels per day) of Kazakh and possibly Russian crude and will have a peak capacity of 67 million tonnes a year (1.34 million bpd).
A big diamond deal between Russia and De Beers has been caught up in political manoeuverings in Moscow. Bickering ministries and a shake-up in the leadership of the Russian diamond industry are conspiring to delay a crucial agreement.
Senior officials on both sides declined on Tuesday to predict when the government would sign the long-delayed deal, whose absence has kept world gem markets on edge.
Russian officials said Moscow and De Beers could head into 1997 with no formal contract signed.
Vladimir Piskunov, head of the Industry Ministry's new precious metals and stones section, said the government had been poring over a draft deal for at least a month since it said it was about ready to sign it and said unspecified pricing issues needed more scrutiny.
"Yes, I will admit that this (a final signing) could drag out into 1997," Piskunov said after a news conference.
De Beers representatives in Moscow declined to comment, with one saying, "As we've told you, when we have something to tell you, we'll tell you."
A spokesman for Almazy Rossii-Sakha, or ARS, De Beers' partner in the deal and Russia's diamond producer and sole legal exporter, said big shake-ups over 1996 in Russia's diamond industry were behind the delay.
"Do you want to know my opinion -- it's that there are some battles going on," said ARS spokesman Valentin Logunov.
De Beers controls about three quarters of the world diamond market and Russia accounts for about 25 percent of all the gems De Beers sells, so delays to the deal have worried gem watchers.
ARS produces nearly all of Russia's diamonds and had sales of $1.38 billion last year.
Piskunov said Moscow was committed to working with De Beers and that leaving the cartel was out of the question -- but he admitted negotiations had dragged on for over a year because of power struggles in Moscow.
"Some have said that we don't need this agreement, but time is playing against us," he said. "There are strict rules on this market and you have to play by them."
Asked if Russia could leave the cartel, he said, "No, no."
Piskunov said the Finance Ministry was struggling with the Industry Ministry for influence over diamond production, while federal budget drafters were arguing with the diamond-rich regions over their cut from taxes paid on exported gems.
De Beers has seen Russia's diamond sector go through turmoil this year, when President Boris Yeltsin disbanded one of its former negotiating partners, the State Committee for Precious Metals and Stones, and sacked its head, Yevgeny Bychkov.
Now Piskunov's department is wrangling with Goskhran, the Finance Ministry arm that will store and export precious metals and stones. Adding to the muddle is a formal investigation by Russia's tax police into ARS finances.
But Piskunov said the probe and Bychkov were not the fundamental reasons for the delay -- raising questions over just what Moscow objects to in the February memorandum.
"There are other processes involved," Piskunov said. "It's a battle of opposing sides. Russia's diamond industry has always been in the hands of several people."
He cast a cloud over an agreement De Beers said on Monday it had signed with Russia's Northern Mining-Geological Company Terra to set up a diamond exploration joint venture.
"We principally insist on the position that foreigners should not mine diamonds in Russia," he said, adding that Russian law prohibited the publication or sale of geological information on diamond deposits in the northern Arkhangelsk region.
Russia's Western oil joint ventures are finding it increasingly difficult to export their output in the amounts needed to stay profitable as Moscow seeks to give domestic producers more pipeline space.
Joint ventures (JVs) produce only a trickle of Russia's crude oil -- but they need to export most, if not all, of their output to make money on their investments.
But Russian energy officials, who once courted Western oil majors and independents with promises of tax breaks and priority access to crowded pipelines, are rethinking the terms on which they want foreign oil firms to work in Russia.
"The pipelines are fairly close to capacity, so any increase (in exports) will be at somebody's expense, and that will be the JVs," said Julian Leigh of the Centre for Global Energy Studies in London in a recent interview.
Russia's tightening of access to its export pipelines is a barometer of how willing Moscow will be in coming years to let big-ticket foreign investors with planned, multi-billion dollar production-sharing contracts export the volumes they need.
Most of those projects will require new pipelines -- but in the initial stages, they will probably use existing pipelines.
"It's becoming more and more difficult," said Igor Ishkayev, Moscow-based representative for the Tatex joint venture, whose foreign partner is Global Natural Resources of the United States' unit Texneft Inc.
"The big companies, like LUKoil, can send out as much as they want. Nobody cares about a little joint venture."
About six joint ventures out of the 40 or so producing in Russia and exporting have the right to export 100 percent of their output until September 1997. Others enjoy tax breaks.
Most ventures in theory have priority access.
But in practice, they are often elbowed aside from month to month depending on world oil prices, the amount domestic producers want to export and government export programmes.
When asked about priority access for the ventures, a Transneft official dealing with exports, who declined to be identified, said:
"We don't distinguish between oil produced by our companies and oil produced by joint ventures."
Transneft, the state oil pipeline monopoly, works with so-called designated coordinators -- Russia's large producers, who are often interested in increasing their own exports -- to allocate pipeline space.
"Access to Transneft pipelines is based on personal relationships with the Transneft people," said analyst Zarko Stefanovski of T Hoare &amp; Co in London in a recent interview.
"Russian producers are going to increase the pressure to be given more pipeline capacity -- this will certainly be a problem in the future."
Joint ventures accounted for 4.8 percent of total Russian output last year, or around 250,000 barrels per day (bpd), according to State Statistics Committee figures, up from four percent in 1994. But they account for about 10 percent of Russia's 2.0 million bpd exports.
"Priority access will hardly be continued next year, which will affect the operations of this joint venture very negatively," said Alexander Khrustalov, marketing specialist at KomiArcticOil, whose Western partner is British Gas Plc and which exports about 90 percent of its 25,000 bpd output.
Customs officials, who now make policy as well as implementing it, said in September that some prominent ventures could be liable for millions of dollars in taxes and fines for so-called "excess" exports outside their exemptions.
"The issue is not necessarily the length of the tax exemption, it's the intent behind it," said one top Western oil executive who asked not to be named.
Western oil companies frustrated by Moscow's foot-dragging on foreign investment laws presented a study Tuesday designed to convince officials that Russia will take the lion's share of rewards in oil deals.
The study, outlining the benefits from six flagship production-sharing contracts requiring $129 billion in expenditure, could be the evidence nationalist and conservative parliamentarians need to pass energy and tax laws in 1997 to get the projects off the ground.
Foreign oil firms have to date invested only a tiny fraction of that total, citing high taxes, a flawed production-sharing law and Moscow's inability to ratify a list of reserves open to output-sharing deals.
"No investments are going to happen until there's a firm legal base," said a top Western oil executive who declined to be identified, speaking after a conference where the study was presented.
The document, prepared by the Petroleum Advisory Forum, or PAF, and a group of Russian academics, said six major international projects requiring $102 billion in Western funding over 57 years would generate $591 billion in total benefits, with Russia getting 87 percent of the total.
The deals would create up to 550,000 jobs, raise real gross domestic product by $450 billion, boost state revenues by $257 billion and Russian private sector revenues by $258 billion.
The foreign side would reap $76 billion in benefits, including $40 billion in foreign investor profits.
"With the overwhelming majority of benefits accruing to Russia, these projects will make an important contribution towards Russia's future economic growth and to the stability of its emerging market economy," a study group statement said.
Russian officials have blocked passage of key energy laws, saying they want to prevent what they call a fire-sale of Russia's natural resources to the West and in effect hampering Western investment in Russia's oil sector.
"Under the current licensing regime regulating the use of subsoil resources and the current gross revenue-based tax system, large-scale investments in the Russian oil industry are not forthcoming," the statement said.
Deputy Fuel and Energy Minister Valery Garipov said the study showed the necessity of Western investment in the oil industry, but he said Russian companies would have to have at least a 50 percent stake in production-sharing deals.
"We don't need stop-gap loans -- we need long-term investments," he told the same conference.
"Domestic investments are not appearing," he said, adding that only Western-financed production-sharing contracts would reverse Russia's steep oil output decline. "There are Russian banks that bought oil companies, but where are their investments?"
The study said that for each dollar directly invested in the oil sector, an additional 90 cents in revenues would be generated in related domestic industries.
Western oil firms frustrated by Moscow's foot-dragging on foreign investment laws presented a study on Tuesday designed to convince conservative officials that Russia will take the lion's share of rewards in oil deals.
The study, outlining the benefits from six flagship production-sharing contracts requiring $129 billion in expenditure, could be the evidence nationalist and conservative parliamentarians need to pass energy and tax laws in 1997 to get the projects off the ground.
Foreign oil firms have to date invested only a tiny fraction of that total, citing high taxes, a flawed production-sharing law and Moscow's inability to ratify a list of reserves open to output-sharing deals.
"No investments are going to happen until there's a firm legal base," said a top Western oil executive who declined to be named, speaking after a conference where the study was presented.
The document, prepared by the Petroleum Advisory Forum, or PAF, and a group of Russian academics, said six major international projects requiring $102 billion in Western funding over 57 years would generate $591 billion in total benefits, with Russia getting 87 percent of the total.
The deals would at peak create 550,000 jobs, raise real gross domestic product by $450 billion, boost state revenues by $257 billion and Russian private sector revenues by $258 billion.
The foreign side would reap $76 billion in benefits, including $40 billion in foreign investor profits.
"With the overwhelming majority of benefits accruing to Russia, these projects will make an important contribution towards Russia's future economic growth and to the stability of its emerging market economy," a study group statement said.
Conservative Russian officials have blocked passage of key energy laws, saying they want to prevent what they call a fire-sale of Russia's natural resources to the West and in effect hampering Western investment in Russia's oil sector.
"Under the current licensing regime regulating the use of subsoil resources and the current gross revenue-based tax system, large-scale investments in the Russian oil industry are not forthcoming," the statement said.
Deputy Fuel and Energy Minister Valery Garipov said the study showed the necessity of Western investment in the oil industry, but he said Russian firms would have to have at least a 50 percent stake in production-sharing deals.
"We don't need stop-gap loans -- we need long-term investments," he told the same conference.
"Domestic investments are not appearing," he said, adding that only Western-financed production-sharing contracts would reverse Russia's steep oil output decline. "There are Russian banks that bought oil companies, but where are their investments?"
The study said that for each dollar directly invested in the oil sector, an additional $0.90 in revenues would be generated in related domestic industries.
Referring to the study, PAF director Ed Verona said, "It's a tool to show that this (foreign investment) produces benefits."
Alexei Mikhailov, a parliamentarian and supporter of Western oil firms, said the six Western-sponsored projects -- Sakhalin I and II, Priobskoye, West Salym, Timan-Pechora and Yuzhnoye Khylchuyu -- could eventually account for two percent of GDP.
Mikhailov said he hoped parliamentarians would pass the revised reserves list and Western-friendly amendments to the production-sharing law in the first half of 1997.
"It is not enough just to provide financing and funds," said Dan Westbrook, senior vice-president of Amoco Eurasia Petroleum Company, the partner in Priobskoye. "The point is, the projects must be economical for anyone (Western or Russian) to do the work."
Russia's diamond industry, bogged down by structural chaos and unauthorised exports, cast a shadow over world gem markets on Wednesday by saying that prospects for a trade deal with De Beers by 1997 looked grim.
But a senior spokesman for Russia's diamond company Almazy Rossii-Sakha, or ARS, which is De Beers' negotiating partner and Russia's near-monopoly producer, said Moscow would eventually negotiate a deal and quitting the cartel was not an option.
De Beers, frustrated over Moscow's lack of response on a new trade deal and irritated by gem exports outside an interim scheme, gave Russia until the end of 1996 to sign a trade deal and said it would otherwise terminate the interim arrangement.
ARS spokesman Valentin Logunov, asked if the government would meet the deadline, said, "You should ask the government, especially the finance minister. This is his question --- and it's hard to say whether he'll find time."
Russia is a key player in the world diamond trade, supplying De Beers with about 20 percent of its total rough gem sales. De Beers accounts for 75 percent of global rough diamond sales.
But the two sides have gone through 1996 with no formal trade agreement and have functioned via a February memorandum which De Beers said Russia had violated with secret gem exports.
"We have been extremely patient and have respected Russia's current interests," Raymond Clark, general director of De Beers' Moscow representation, told a news conference.
"Moreover we would have probably continued (with the interim deal) had the contract been respected," he said, citing what he called "major leakages" of Russian gems onto world markets.
He declined to say how large the leaks were, adding, "We only know that the total of the leaks is substantial."
Logunov slammed the assertion, which is widely supported by international diamond traders.
"Let De Beers figure it out themselves -- if they can't say concretely where they're from, how do they know it's happening?
"Of course this alarming and of course we want an agreement signed. Therefore, De Beers should not push worried colleagues into a corner."
He said the Sakha republic -- where ARS is based and which has its own draft trade deal with De Beers -- had been buying up to one-fourth of ARS output, last year valued at $1.38 billion, over the past couple of years.
Clark said he did not know where the leaks were coming from but said De Beers was frustrated with the government's lack of response to a draft trade agreement presented in October.
"From that date, we have been continually knocking on their door to get some kind of response," he said. "We have had not one official statement made from the government."
Finance Minister Alexander Livshits told Russian news agencies on Tuesday that Moscow wanted to rework the agreement before signing it.
Logunov said it was ARS's task to guide the October draft deal through the government.
"We are doing this, maybe not as actively as we should -- but not because we are not interested in the agreement, but because of the situation on the territory where several processes are taking place."
He was referring to presidential elections set for December 24 in Sakha, which is also known as Yakutia.
"There are a lot of opponents to the company that have the right to sell diamonds, and this of course doesn't make things easier for De Beers," Logunov said.
But he said: "These two companies cannot part -- otherwise, it's chaos. There would be no rules to the game."
Russia is finding the return of competitive Iraqi oil to world markets a bitter pill to swallow, but may use the occasion to revamp further its own marketing strategies to compete better, energy analysts said on Wednesday.
Russian Urals sour crude is similar in quality and composition to Iraq's Kirkuk blend and was Iraq's main competitor in the Mediterranean before Gulf War sanctions shut Baghdad out of the market.
"If I was a Russian and had a lot of crude to sell, I'd think about pricing competitively," said Sarah Anderson of Energy Security Analysis Inc in Washington.
"When you talk to Med refiners, they say they have a long history of buying Iraqi crude."
Sour Urals differentials in the Mediterranean -- pressured this week by the first Iraqi exports in six years -- have already begun to tumble.
"In an environment where Russian oil producers were really only making profits on the (world) price rise since July, Russian gains could be effectively wiped with the appearance of Iraqi oil," said Gavin Rankin, research head at Troika-Dialog.
Three Russian oil companies have signed contracts with Iraq to buy 1.3 million tonnes of Iraqi oil and are awaiting U.N. approval.
All three firms -- Zarubezhneft, NK LUKoil and Nafta-Moskva -- declined to discuss how they would market the Iraqi barrels.
Some analysts saw more than Russia's Soviet-era political associations with Baghdad and higher world prices behind the Russians' interest in signing the contracts.
"One of the reasons the Russians were keen to get involved was to get some transparent pricing for their own oil," said analyst James Bunch of Renaissance Capital.
Urals, a medium-gravity sour oil with a 1.4 percent sulphur content, comprises the bulk of Russia's exports into the Mediterranean.
Analysts said the renewed competition as Baghdad seeks to recapture customers it lost to Russia and other producing countries could spur changes in the way Russia sells oil abroad.
"Their marketing strategies have changed in recent years -- it's no longer a free-for-all," said Peter Houlder, managing director of CentreInvest Group consultancy in Moscow.
"Increasingly companies are setting up their own marketing divisions in a bid to cut out the middle man and make more money" - a trend he said Iraqi competition could fuel further.
Stephen O'Sullivan, associate oil and gas director at MC Securities in London, said producers might seek to move more oil out of the Baltics than out of Russia's Black Sea outlet of Novorossiisk to avoid price pressures from Iraqi supplies.
Russia exports about one third of its 6.2 million barrels per day output, with a third of the total leaving Novorossiisk, mostly for Mediterranean markets.
One analyst said Russian oil companies' marketing outfits abroad had already become "surprisingly sophisticated".
"They are very aggressive -- but I don't think they're making Shell nervous that they have these great trading operations."
Under the U.N. deal Iraq can export $2 billion of its oil over six months to pay for food and medicine after six years of crippling international sanctions following its invasion of Kuwait.
The strictly-monitored scheme allows Baghdad to export only from the Turkish Mediterranean port of Ceyhan and Mina al-Bakr through U.N.-approved contracts.
Russia's Finance Ministry said on Thursday that Moscow was ready to cooperate with De Beers on a deal which a deputy minister said was vital to support the diamond market.
"The Russian Federation is further ready to cooperate with the De Beers company in the matter of continued support of the stability of the world diamond market," it said in a statement.
However, the ministry said it had received no official word from the South African group on its announcement on Wednesday that it had given the Russian government until the end of the year to sign a new trade agreement to export Russian rough gems.
The statement said the ministry, which plays a key role in the trade agreement, was studying what it termed De Beers' unilateral cessation of an agreement to sell Russian gems through De Beers' Central Selling Organisation.
De Beers had said not that it was unilaterally halting the agreement, but that if a formal deal were not reached by 1997, it would cancel its interim arrangement with Russia.
De Beers said it had made its announcement on Wednesday because its patience had worn thin over government delays in replying to the long-delayed deal.
First Deputy Economy Minister Vladimir Panskov said an agreement with De Beers was necessary.
"If this agreement is not signed, we will simply destroy the world diamond market. Neither the De Beers company nor Russia will be able to work normally without such an agreement," Interfax news agency quoted Panskov as saying.
De Beers controls about three quarters of the world diamond market and Russia accounts for about 25 percent of all rough gems De Beers sells.
A five-year deal expired in December 1995 and was replaced by a memorandum signed in February 1996.
Panskov said that in the course of work on the agreement, differences of opinion between Russian diamond producer Almazy Rossii-Sakha (ARS), domestic gem processing plants and De Beers had become clear.
"But I think that in any circumstances we cannot set off on the road of mutual ultimatums."
A senior official with ARS said the Russian government had been dragging its feet on the deal with De Beers but he thought a deal would come in 1997.
Interfax quoted Lev Safonov, first vice president of the company, as saying that if an interim agreement were broken off before a new deal was in place, the two sides would conduct trade under "other conditions".
The head of war-torn Chechnya's oil company said on Thursday that Russia's rebellious region would guarantee the safety of a major oil pipeline across its land but demanded a cut in foreign deals that will use the link.
Khozhakhmed Yarikhanov, president of the Southern Oil Company, which is based in the devastated capital Grozny, told a news conference that an $8 billion multinational consortium that will use the link to export oil in 1997 should not worry because the pipeline was safe and sound.
"We guarantee the link's safety," he said. "But remember that with pipelines all over the world, things sometimes happen -- sabotage, technical errors, human errors."
He said Chechnya should get a cut from transit fees via the so-called northern link, which can carry 17 million tonnes of oil a year.
"The Chechen part is approximately in the same condition as the rest of the link," he said, referring to the stretch running through Grozny and linking the Azeri capital Baku to Russia's Black Sea oil export outlet of Novorossiisk.
The 13 international oil companies in the Azerbaijan International Operating Company plan to reverse the flow of the pipeline to ship up to 100,000 barrels per day (bpd) of early oil from their Caspian offshore projects near Baku from August 1997.
The consortium is led by an alliance of British Petroleum Plc and Norway's Statoil.
Protracted bloodshed and instability in the 21-month Chechen conflict have given the consortium the jitters ever since Moscow sent troops into Grozny in December 1994 in a bloody bid to rein in the breakaway region.
The oil firms, worried that exports from their big ticket investments could fall prey to a separatist war, have access to a second export route via the former Soviet republic of Georgia.
Underscoring the fragility of the region for oil investors, six foreigners working with the International Committee of the Red Cross were shot dead at a Chechen hospital on Wednesday and six ethnic Russians were killed on Thursday.
Yarikhanov, who said he had faced a cool reception at Russia's Transneft oil pipeline monopoly, which owns and operates the pipeline, and at the Fuel and Energy Ministry, said Moscow was not doing enough to resurrect the region's once-glorious oil sector.
While he said the pipeline was no worse for the war, Chechnya's production and refining facilities had been laid waste.
At least eight trillion roubles ($1.44 billion) were needed to bring the facilities back on line. Yarikhanov said financing could come from a Chechen cut in the transport fees that the Azeri oil consortium will pay to ship oil via Chechnya.
"We want our share of profits from the transport of oil across our country," he said, adding the Azeri group would pay $16.57 per tonne to send oil from its Caspian Sea platforms near Baku to Novorossiisk.
The Azeri oil consortium also includes Azeri state firm SOCAR, Amoco Corp, Pennzoil Co, Unocal Corp, Exxon Corp, Ramco Energy Plc, Russia's LUKoil, Turkish TRAO, McDermott International Inc, Itochu Corp and Saudi Arabia's Delta Nimir.
The Southern Oil Company, also called the Chechen Oil Company, had hoped to stabilise output at three to four million tonnes a year before the breakaway region descended into bloodshed.
Chechnya accounted for one-third of Soviet oil production in the 1970s, or around 22 million tonnes a year, before Moscow began tapping its massive Siberian reserves.
Refining capacity in the south Caucasian region is 20-22 million tonnes a year, but operations have ceased.
($1=5549 Rouble)
Russia's aluminium industry, in private hands and learning market-savvy moves in ways its former state owners never could, still holds surprise cards but may no longer terrorise world markets with sudden, secret exports.
Metals analysts said on Friday that Russia, which accounts for about 15 percent of world output, would not cut production or exports in 1997 even in the face of rising costs at home, low margins and weak world prices.
Instead, smelters -- now mostly in private hands after years of turbulent shareholder battles -- would do all they could to turn profits.
"What has happened over the last year in particular is that ownership has settled down so that you can be fairly sure of the conduits of the smelters' metal," said a senior London metals trader who declined to be identified.
"They will continue to sell the metal, come what may."
Russia, fresh off a two-year global output cutting agreement that expired this spring, seized the opportunity to restart some idled capacity and increase exports.
The increases laid to rest market talk that Russia wanted to craft a new output cutting deal to boost low London Metal Exchange prices. But analysts still wonder how much Russian aluminium could flood onto sensitive markets.
Asked if Russia had learned anything from the March 1994 memorandum of understanding that reduced global output 10 percent to draw down bloated stocks, the senior London source said, "It has not learned. I don't think they care."
Igor Prokopov, director of Kontsern Alyuminiy, the producers' group uniting Russia's aluminium industry, said 1996 primary aluminium output would rise 1.5 percent from 1995 to 2.79 million tonnes.
Production could rise another 1.5 to 2.0 percent in 1997.
The group put Russian 1996 primary aluminium exports at 2.37 million tonnes, against what it said were 2.11 million in 1995.
"Some noise has appeared in the West that Russia has cranked things up, which is not really true," Prokopov said.
But two base metals analysts said the figures seemed on the low side and Russian smelters had undoubtedly increased output.
But they have done so while consolidating sales operations to try to make more money on exports, which has introduced more transparency into deliveries abroad.
Shareholders, many of them Western commodities power houses, were having a greater hand in that transparency, since they were increasingly buying direct from smelters.
Pechiney of France, Glencore AG of Switzerland and London-based powerhouse Trans-World Metals and its units already have major stakes in Russian smelters.
Analysts said the Bratsk smelter, the world's largest, with annual capacity of about 850,000 tonnes, had major plans to modernise with the help of a top European industrial firm.
LME three-month aluminium futures are around $1,550 a tonne, clawing back from October's 2-1/2 year low of $1,305 but below a $2,195 in January 1995, the last major peak.
Prices had been even lower before Russia and five other countries -- the United States, Canada, Australia, Norway and the European Union -- signed the 1994 accord. The five said Russia was to blame because it had flooded markets with metal.
Those exports were largely orchestrated by the state, which needed cash to fill its coffers.
Now smelters say they are reining in trade and marketing operations to be closer to markets in a way that Soviet-style ministries in Moscow were not.
"Integration could have a positive affect," Prokopov said, citing expense rationalisation and consolidated balances.
Russia is an aluminium powerhouse because its Siberian smelters, which account for 90 percent of output, have endless, cheap hydroelectricity generated by rivers.
Russia's aluminium sector will consolidate more in 1997 as domestic smelters, perplexed by limp world prices, seek to rationalise costs, a top aluminium official said on Friday.
Igor Prokopov, director of Kontsern Alyuminiy, the producers' group uniting Russia's aluminium industry, said in an interview that domestic smelters were worried about low metals prices, and he blamed what he said was speculation.
"We have been concerned by the sharp fall in prices, which is why we set up the statistical body with other major producing nations to exchange information," he said.
"But our conclusion is that the market situation is not a catastrophe. We are not going to stop output and will continue next year with at least our 1996 volumes."
He said Russian primary aluminium output this year would be 2.79 million tonnes, a 1.5 percent increase on 1995's level, and 1997 production could rise by 1.5 to 2.0 percent.
The group sees Russia's 1996 primary aluminium exports at 2.37 million tonnes compared with 2.11 million in 1995. Prokopov declined to forecast 1997 exports.
Kontsern Alyuminiy said exports of primary aluminium, alloys and semi-fabricated items over January-October had already risen seven percent from year-ago levels.
The State Customs Committee puts the rise at 16 percent.
Prokopov said he was confused by low London Metal Exchange prices and said he saw no basis for weak prices in view of supply and demand patterns.
"I can't prove there's speculation going on, but I look at the charts and these are what the facts lead me to think."
"Some noise has appeared in the West that Russia has cranked things up, which is not really true. There's no reason for the fall in prices," he said, citing lower world stocks.
But he said Russia's survival as an aluminium power was not in question, since the Siberian smelters, accounting for 90 percent of output, had captive, plentiful sources of hydroelectricity, a main cost in production.
Depressed prices would be the motor for Russian smelters to consolidate operations as they completed their transition from state-run enterprises to market-nimble corporations.
"The Russian aluminium industry should be consolidated and act as a large transnational company like Alcoa or Pechiney," Prokopov said. "We won't be like Gazprom," he said, referring to the natural gas monopoly. "But there will be three or four teams that will act on world markets."
The process has already started. Siberian Aluminium, a so-called financial industrial group, includes Bratsk -- the world's biggest smelter -- and Sayansk, Trans-World Group, Zalogbank, and Kazakhstan's Pavlodar alumina plant.
The Krasnoyarsk smelter is in a group with the Achinsk alumina plant and wants to bring Ukraine's Nikolayevskiy alumina plant on board.
"Integration could have a positive affect," Prokopov said. "It will lead to expense rationalisation, lower costs and consolidated balances. Smelters are in a satisfactory state, but we want better -- we want more resources to modernise them."
-- Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
Russia's Rosneft oil firm won a new lease of life on Monday after a Moscow court ruled it could keep its crown-jewel asset, a key Siberian oil producer coveted by a major rival.
An arbitration court said prize producer AO Purneftegaz would stay at Rosneft, ending a high-stakes tussle between Rosneft and the big SIDANKO oil company for control over the enterprise.
"The decision is key to Rosneft's survival," said Dan Lubash, managing director of Emerging Markets Europe at Merrill Lynch in London.
Rosneft, the state oil holding company which is slowly being privatised, lost most of its assets in recent years when President Boris Yeltsin carved up the once government-owned oil industry into vertically-integrated, privatised companies.
Monday's ruling could help keep Rosneft -- once Russia's number-one producer but now near the bottom of the list -- alive by letting it keep a company sitting on big untapped reserves.
"Purneftegaz is not just a promising producer now -- it has a lot of promising reserves," said Rosneft press director Vladimir Tumarkin. "We consider today's decision an act of legal justice in Russia and a victory for Rosneft."
Attractive Purneftegaz, a Western Siberian enterprise that pumped over eight million tonnes of crude in 1995, has long been the object of a corporate wrangle between Rosneft and SIDANKO.
Under Yeltsin's sweeping oil industry restructuring, a 1994 government resolution awarded Purneftegaz to SIDANKO (the Siberian-Far Eastern Oil Company) -- but a 1995 executive order shifted ownership back to Rosneft.
Vladimir Vetluzhky, an arbitration court member, told Reuters that the body had ruled against SIDANKO's lawsuit to have the 1995 decision reversed.
Purneftegaz's output accounted for about two-thirds of Rosneft's production of 13 million tonnes last year.
"Purneftegaz is much more important to Rosneft than it is to SIDANKO," said Stephen O'Sullivan, associate director of oil and gas at MC Securities in London.
Spokesmen at SIDANKO, one of Russia's top five oil majors in terms of output, were not available for comment.
SIDANKO, which energy analysts said wields little control over its key subsidiary, producer Chernogorneft, badly wanted Purneftegaz and its exports to pay off debts and taxes.
"Purneftegaz is one of Russia's most promising oil firms," said petroleum economist Rustem Shagiyev of the government's Academy of Economics. "The ruling is very positive for Rosneft."
But other analysts said Rosneft may need more to prosper in Russia's newly-competitive oil industry.
"The decision means Rosneft is still in business as a vertically-integrated oil company -- but it will need more than just one big producer to compete," said oil analyst Steve Allen of CentreInvest consultancy in Moscow.
Rosneft's other major asset is Sakhalinmorneftegaz, partner to four giant foreign energy projects in Russia's Far East.
O'Sullivan said the tug-of-war for Purneftegaz may yet continue and that SIDANKO could appeal against Monday's court ruling -- but Tumarkin said the corporate tussle had come to an end.
Purneftegaz shares barely reacted to the decision, nudging down to $2.28 on the Russian Trading System at 1445 GMT from Friday's close of $2.30.
"If the decision had been different, it would have been a major blow to Rosneft," Lubash said.
Russia's oil industry earned higher export revenues from booming world prices in 1996 but has started 1997 increasingly worried about the slow pace of recovery in demand at home, energy analysts said on Wednesday.
Domestic producers, taking advantage of international oil prices which soared about 30 percent in 1996 to their highest in six years, jammed crude oil export outlets last year.
But analysts said that while companies would continue to try to sell as much as possible abroad, higher demand at home -- Russian oil's main future customer -- was not yet in sight.
Eugene Khartukov of Moscow's independent World Energy Analysis and Forecasting Group and the International Centre for Petroleum Business Studies said 1997 could show either a recovery in output or yet another slide.
"It's possible we will see stabilisation and possibly even some growth but it all depends on what the government does with taxes and the production-sharing law," he said.
Russian crude oil output in 1997 could rise to 6.3 million barrels per day (bpd) from the 1996 estimate of 6.1 million bpd and would probably not dip below that level, he added.
That could mean a significant turnaround for the world's third-largest oil producer, which has seen output nearly halved since its 1987 Soviet-era peak of 11.5 million bpd and is still struggling to slow the pace of decline.
The Fuel and Energy Ministry, which has not finished compiling 1996 results, said in December that crude oil and gas condensate output over January-November 1996 had slipped two percent to 275.9 million tonnes.
Exports of about one third of Russia's output jumped 4.7 percent year-on-year over the same period to 92.8 million tonnes, it said.
But producers used the extra cash to pay off debts and wage arrears, not to rehabilitate wells or drill new ones.
Deputy Fuel and Energy Minister Garipov said in December that Russia conducted no exploration for new oilfields last year for the first time since World War Two.
"We believe that the general trend is stabilisation but that it will differ from company to company," said Maxim Shashenkov, a Russia analyst at Merrill Lynch in London.
"But further growth is constrained by limits in domestic demand and export capacities," he said, adding that higher export earnings had not underwritten the giant cost of structural transformation needed in the Russian industry.
Russian wholesale producer prices for crude oil are a mere 50-55 percent of world levels and reach only 70-75 percent after tariffs and transport costs are tacked on.
Khartukov said crude oil exports would at least equal 1996's 2.5 million bpd this year and possibly hit 2.7 million and refinery throughput would be flat at around 3.4 million bpd.
But he also said Moscow's political and economic uncertainties could wreak havoc in the industry, adding: "It's a big crazy mixture of unpredictable things."
Russia's oil industry earned higher export revenues from booming world prices in 1996 but has started 1997 increasingly worried about the slow pace of recovery in demand at home, energy analysts said on Wednesday.
Domestic producers, taking advantage of international oil prices which soared about 30 percent in 1996 to their highest in six years, jammed crude oil export outlets last year.
But analysts said that while companies would continue to try to sell as much as possible abroad, higher demand at home -- Russian oil's main future customer -- was not yet in sight.
Eugene Khartukov of Moscow's independent World Energy Analysis and Forecasting Group and the International Centre for Petroleum Business Studies said 1997 could show either a recovery in output or yet another slide.
"It's possible we will see stabilisation and possibly even some growth but it all depends on what the government does with taxes and the production-sharing law," he said.
Russian crude oil output in 1997 could rise to 6.3 million barrels per day (bpd) from the 1996 estimate of 6.1 million bpd and would probably not dip below that level, he added.
That could mean a significant turnaround for the world's third-largest oil producer, which has seen output nearly halved since its 1987 Soviet-era peak of 11.5 million bpd and is still struggling to slow the pace of decline.
The Fuel and Energy Ministry, which has not finished compiling 1996 results, said in December that crude oil and gas condensate output over January-November 1996 had slipped two percent to 275.9 million tonnes.
Exports of about one third of Russia's output jumped 4.7 percent year-on-year over the same period to 92.8 million tonnes, it said.
But producers used the extra cash to pay off debts and wage arrears, not to rehabilitate wells or drill new ones.
Deputy Fuel and Energy Minister Garipov said in December that Russia conducted no exploration for new oilfields last year for the first time since World War Two -- an unsettling sign since most of Russia's "easy" oil has already been produced.
"We believe that the general trend is stabilisation but that it will differ from company to company," said Maxim Shashenkov, a Russia analyst at Merrill Lynch in London.
"But further growth is constrained by limits in domestic demand and export capacities," he said, adding that higher export earnings had not underwritten the giant cost of structural transformation needed in the Russian industry.
Khartukov said bottlenecks in export outlets and flat demand from industrial consumers meant the Russian market was in fact oversupplied with crude oil and oil products for most of 1996.
"To increase output which can't be disposed of on the domestic market or be exported due to bottlenecks is crazy," he said, adding that oil companies could have technically produced an additional 70,000 to 100,000 bpd in 1996 but elected not to.
Russian wholesale producer prices for crude oil are a mere 50-55 percent of world levels and reach only 70-75 percent after tariffs and transport costs are tacked on.
Khartukov said crude oil exports would at least equal 1996's 2.5 million bpd this year and possibly hit 2.7 million and refinery throughput would be flat at around 3.4 million bpd.
But he also said Moscow's political and economic uncertainties could wreak havoc in the industry, adding: "It's a big crazy mixture of unpredictable things."
- Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
Russia's metals sectors, key suppliers to world markets, showed varying degrees of concern about President Boris Yeltsin's latest ailment on Thursday, but most said they were no longer hostage to Kremlin health scares.
Aluminium officials were the least worried and said the Russian leader's admission to hospital with pneumonia on Wednesday would not affect production or exports.
"It's business as usual," said Galina Stelmakova, deputy director for development and investment at AO Kontsern Alyuminiy, the producers' group.
"Yeltsin hasn't the slightest relationship to the aluminium sector. If anybody has anything to do with us, it's (Prime Minister Viktor) Chernomyrdin."
Russia supplies 15 percent of the world aluminium market.
London Metal Exchange aluminium prices -- which in the past have swung on Kremlin health dramas -- ignored Yeltsin's pneumonia and hit a seven-month high of $1,602.
London palladium prices rose on Russia's continuing failure to sign 1997 export contracts with Japan, the world's largest consumer of platinum group metals, including palladium.
But a senior precious metals official said Yeltsin's illness would have no effect on the contracts -- despite the fact that Russia's precious metals industries are tightly controlled by the highest government officials.
Alexander Kulichkov, a deputy director in charge of platinum and palladium exports at export agency Almazjuvelirexport, said contracts to supply Japan depended upon the Duma lower house of parliament passing a delayed federal budget and on the government in general, headed by Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin.
Nickel and copper producer Norilsk Nickel which received major support when Yeltsin signed a decree in 1996 promising state aid -- was keeping an eye on the health crisis.
"Indirectly of course we are concerned because Yeltsin did sign a decree promising help," said spokesman Sergei Vetchinin.
Norilsk is the world's second largest nickel producer and also produces platinum and platinum group metals.
Russian non-ferrous metals enterprises have not yet released official 1996 output and export figures and forecasts for 1997.
Russia's aluminium industry has roared back to life with strong 1996 output figures and forecasts of small growth, but analysts say no new investments which could fundamentally reshape the sector are on the horizon.
"The situation for the Russian aluminium industry is quite stable and healthy," said a London-based spokesman for Trans-World Commodities, which controls major stakes in key Russian smelters.
The Kontsern Alyuminiy producers' group put 1996 Russian primary aluminium output at 2.87 million tonnes, up from earlier estimates of 2.79 million and above 1995's 2.67 million.
It said output in Russia, one of the world's top producers with 15 percent of global output, would rise 1.5-2.0 percent in 1997, but it had not yet compiled export data.
Russia's total primary aluminium capacity -- some still idle after a two-year global output-cutting deal expired in spring 1996 -- is about 3.20 million tonnes.
Russia is one of the least transparent of world producers and sensitive markets are keen to know of plans to increase or improve production.
"There was a generally-held view in early 1996 that output would fall back because of alumina shortages," said Nigel Kieser, mining analyst at Paribas Capital Markets in London.
But he said Western trading houses became more active in Russia last year to smoothe out raw materials supply problems and that the 1996 output figure was strong but not surprising.
While output may inch up this year, big infrastructural changes are not yet on the horizon -- in spite of the fact that smelters plan strategic alliances with each other and Western commodities houses are major shareholders in some plants.
"I don't see any serious investments in modernisation in Russiam aluminium in 1997," said a senior Alusuisse-Lonza Holding AG source, citing fears over shareholder rights that scare deep-pocketed investors.
Russian smelters spent 1996 complaining about rail tariff and production costs and can still only dream of the integration and long-term energy contracts that Western smelters have.
While these two items are still major factors dividing the Russian industry into the profitable Siberian smelters and loss-making plants in western Russia, other concerns will come to the fore in 1997.
"Companies are going to focus on the raw materials question a lot -- on how to get alumina," said the Alusuisse source.
Seventy percent of the region's alumina, the raw material used to make aluminium, is in former Soviet countries like Kazakhstan, Ukraine and Tajikistan, and the old planned-economy Soviet-era links that once guaranteed steady supplies have disintegrated.
Russia has only two functioning alumina plants which meet less than one third of demand, and smelters are hungrily eyeing Kazakhstan's Pavloday and Ukraine's Nikolayevsky alumina plants.
One metals source said smelters were so desperate for alumina that they were extracting it from the mineral nepheline, in a costly and obscure procedure used almost nowhere else in the world, instead of from the more traditional bauxite.
Scarce raw materials are the Achilles heel of Russia's big southern Siberian smelters, which account for about 90 percent of Russian primary aluminium output and are fuelled by vast amounts of electricity generated by Siberia's mighty rivers.
The Bratsk, Irkutsk, Sayansk and Krasnoyarsk smelters are at least 4,000 km (2,500 miles) from the nearest port-based export outlet and functioning alumina sources -- vast distances which carry expensive rail tariffs.
Russia's largest alumina plant, Achinsky, is in the region, but it is bankrupt and barely producing at any of its capacity of 400,000 tonnes a year.
Russia's Norilsk Nickel metals group, a key supplier to world markets, said on Tuesday it was struggling with a shaky financial future despite keeping output steady at its top plant.
"We are undoubtedly in a state of financial crisis," said Viktor Feldman, deputy economics director at the Norilsk group.
Feldman singled out the high cost of maintaining social services in the inhospitable Far North of Russia where many of its leading plants are based. "Our biggest woe is supporting the social sphere, a sphere which, I might add, the government should be supporting," he said.
A senior official at the Norilsk combine, the flagship plant of the RAO Norilsk Nickel group, said the facility's output had gone according to plan, with 1996 nickel production at 100,000 tonnes and forecast flat in 1997.
Norilsk is the world's second largest producer of refined nickel, a principal component in stainless steel, and also accounts for about 45 percent of world platinum and palladium production, according to metals analysts.
But First Deputy Prime Minister Vladimir Potanin was quoted by Interfax news agency on Tuesday as saying the plant might have to issue stock to pay off what the agency said was its 1.7 trillion rouble ($300 million) in debts or face bankruptcy.
Potanin is the former head of Uneximbank, the big Russian commercial bank that controls a 38 percent state-owned stake in Norilsk from a 1995 government shares-for-loans auction.
"We are constantly improving Norilsk's financial situation," said Alexei Parshikov, director of Interrosimpex, the powerful Russian group that now handles nearly all of Norilsk's exports and is trying to streamline trading operations to boost profits.
"I wouldn't use the word crisis to describe us, because crisis is when production stops, and that is not happening. We are producing according to plan."
Norilsk officials have for the first time in years declined to provide immediate total group production results for 1996 and 1997 forecasts.
Uneximbank press relations director Yuri Oleinikov said the group had slightly overfulfilled its plan to boost nickel output by three percent and copper output by six percent in 1996, but gave no absolute figures.
The group's 1995 nickel output was 180,100 tonnes, while its refined copper output was 338,700 tonnes.
About one third of Norilsk's profits go to supporting social services in the expensive and vastly remote Far North, where four of the group's six key enterprises, including the flagship combine, are based.
"We want 1997 to be the year we stabilise, and we are doing a lot to make sure that this happens," Feldman said. "But my position does not permit me to say this actually will happen."
Potanin said Norilsk, if it did not agree to a share issue to raise capital, would be put in the hands of a special tax commission which could institute liquidation proceedings.
Oleinikov said he did not think a share issue would solve Norilsk's cash problems and called on the government to understand the logistics of producing metal in a frozen, inhospitable section of the globe.
"Our sector should have a strong state role because it is a core industry -- it supports people and, through its exports, the federal budget," Feldman said. "Production will undoubtedly continue normally -- we take a lot of measures to ensure that.
Norilsk ordinary shares had fallen 8.95 percent to $6.00 at 4.26 p.m.(1226 GMT) on the Russian Trading System.
"The state should understand that to demand too much is to cut into production," Oleinikov said. "They will not want to kill the goose that lays the golden egg."
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520 ($1 = 5,597 roubles)
Russia is quietly importing some Western grain to offset its second meagre harvest in a row, but traders said on Wednesday that the country was too broke to be a big presence on world grain markets this year.
A senior Russian grains source who declined to be identified said unnamed Russian organisations had quietly bought several 12,000-tonne cargoes of U.S. No. 2 corn (maize) at the end of last year, importing the grain through the Baltic port of Riga.
But other Moscow sources -- eager to preserve secrecy in a market scarce on hard information and anxious about loose talk -- talked down the prospects for imports.
"There's enough grain on the (domestic) market," said Andrei Ambartsumyan, a vice-president at big traders Exportkhleb. "Quality is a different issue. But today I don't see any significant import orders."
Wildly varying estimates of how much Russia will import after its 69.0 million tonne harvest last year, one of the worst in three decades, have kept Western markets guessing about their chances of selling to the world's former biggest grain buyer.
The Soviet government imported tens of millions of tonnes of grain in the 1970s, staging a "great grain robbery" that markets have had trouble forgetting. In 1972 Moscow emptied the U.S. grain larder by buying heavily from all the major grain exporters simultaneously.
While Russia has said markets should forget the past and the Kremlin is no longer a buyer, private companies are combing Western and Central Asian markets for supplies.
"Russia will import this year because otherwise it doesn't get the quality it needs," said Vladimir Totsky, vice-president of Russia's Grain Union, referring to the fact that much Russian wheat from the 1996 crop is unfit for human consumption.
Anatoly Manellya of the Centre for Economic Trends, a government-sponsored think-tank, put Russia's total grain imports over 1997 from all sources at 5.0-6.0 million tonnes, repeating a forecast made earlier by farm expert Andrei Sizov.
Russia's 1996 harvest saw maize output slip to 1.5 million tonnes, down more than a third on 1995 levels.
But there is no consensus on Russia's overall import plans.
"I don't think they'll go back to buying large quantities of grain," said Tom Wiley, a European Union agriculture adviser, adding that imports of ready-made food were the trend.
One prominent Russian trader estimated Russia's total maize imports over the 1996/1997 crop marketing year at only 120,000 tonnes due to falling livestock numbers.
But Agriculture Minister Viktor Khklystun said in September 1996 that Russia would import 4.0-4.5 million tonnes of maize and soymeal to supplement the 1996 harvest, with maize purchases three times higher than soymeal purchases.
State Customs Committee figures show Russia imported a robust 114,000 tonnes of wheat in December, including 30,000 tonnes from the United States. Maize figures were not available.
Analysts said Russian farmers were worried less by plummeting production levels and more by the fact that domestic customers lacked purchasing power to buy their grain.
Russia's costly and inefficient farm sector, an economic basket-case, accounted for one quarter of gross domestic product in the Soviet era and wasted up to 20 percent of grain output.
Farmers, unable to adjust rapidly to market economy ways, have seen grain output nearly halved from peak levels, and food imports now comprise up to half of the Russian market.
One U.S grains source forecast fewer winterkill losses this year and said a protective blanket of snow had kept winter crops snug and tight. But the source said warm weather and floods in parts of the Northern Caucasus grain-belt could hit output.
Analysts said prospects for higher grain output this year were muted, with the area sown to winter crops last autumn down 10 percent on 1995's level.
"The signs aren't very good," Manellya said.
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
Russian oil company officials said on Friday that Moscow would not slap a duty on heavy fuel oil exports this winter, leaving traders to breathe a sigh of relief but still wary of secretive government manoeuvres.
The prospect of no restrictions on exports of mazut, as Russian heavy fuel oil is known, soothed traders who had been worried about short supplies of Russian material, which keep much of European and Mediterranean markets warm.
But while traders said they were now almost one hundred percent certain there would be no export duty, they cautioned that anything could happen in the Byzantine world of Russia.
"I am convinced that there will be no duty -- but I also know how all sorts of unexpected nightmares can happen in Russia," said a source at a European buyer in Moscow.
State oil holding company Rosneft's chief spokesman Vladimir Tumarkin told Reuters that a Fuel and Energy Ministry plan for a duty had fallen flat on its face with senior cabinet officials.
"They (the government) have decided not to introduce any restrictions," he said.
A second official at Rosneft, which ministry employees said was handling the mazut issue, also said there would be no duty.
"It is safe to say there will be no duty. It's too late. We had all expected one, but it has not come," Gennady Grigoryev, deputy head of Rosneft's financial-commercial directorate, said.
The Rosneft officials said Fuel and Energy Minister Pyotr Rodionov -- who had reiterated publicly as recently as last month that there would be a duty -- had failed to excite Kremlin officials with the idea.
"Rodionov was insisting on his position, but there are many corridors of power in Russia and he just did not score enough points with government officials to get them to agree to this," one of the Rosneft officials said.
One trader likened Rodionov's comments to "a soldier's talk designed to pump people up and reflect his interests".
"It's really possible it's true (that there will be no export duty)," said a senior trader at a European company.
"But it comes a little too late to make me happy. I'm not thinking about mazut until May or so."
Russian heavy fuel oil exports tail off sharply in the colder winter season from November to around May, as waterways and export outlets freeze and consumption increases at home.
The mazut export issue was a hot item of debate in government halls, with Rodionov's camp arguing for a tariff to bolster domestic supplies, and those against the proposal saying Russia needed fewer restrictions and more of a market economy.
Traders are conditioned to expect a Russian heavy fuel oil export restriction.
Moscow raised the export tariff on mazut to 16 Ecus per tonne from six Ecus during December 1995 to March 1996 to curb deliveries abroad. It banned mazut exports outright from December 1994 to April 1995.
"Russia has grown up," said one of the traders, adding that the decision not to levy a tariff was a triumph for Russia's new market-minded leaders over the old generation.
"I think there were a lot of people in the government who realised that such tariffs are just not advantageous."
-- Moscow Newsroom +7095 941 8520
Russia's oil sector has staged its first real comeback by nearly closing the door on a decade of dizzying output declines, but analysts said on Monday that the troubled industry was not yet in the clear.
"The larger declines are over; is that a turnaround? Yes," said Dan Lubash, managing director of Emerging Markets Europe at Merrill Lynch, commenting on 1996 oil production figures.
The State Statistics Committee said Russia's 1996 crude oil output fell two percent on 1995 levels to 293 million tonnes (around 5.86 million barrels per day).
That is Russia's lowest crude oil output rate in nearly three decades.
But the decline is the smallest since Russia -- still the world's third-largest oil producer -- discovered its huge West Siberian reserves and pushed oil output to a peak 570 million tonnes (11.4 million bpd) in 1987.
The story has been a downhill one ever since, and double-digit percentage output declines throughout the late 1980s and early 1990s have left Russia's 1996 output at a meagre 51 percent of 1987's record level.
But the picture, as the 1996 data shows, is getting prettier.
"The fall is finally coming to an end," said Stephen O'Sullivan, associate director of oil and gas at MC Securities in London. "It's not just a flash in the pan like LUKoil -- it's clearly more broad-based."
Analysts say the recovery showed its first real signs in the second quarter of 1996, possibly as Russian producers began to cash in on a world oil price rally and jammed export outlets.
But not all analysts were as sanguine about 1996's results.
"The fact that it almost levelled out this year is significant," said a U.S. oil executive involved in the Petroleum Advisory Forum, a Moscow lobby of foreign oil majors.
"But I don't really think it means a whole lot, because there's a problem with domestic demand and with export capacity. It doesn't make sense for producers to produce as much as they can right now."
Russia's oil firms have limited export options and other domestic industries are recovering more slowly.
Russian gross domestic product fell by six percent in 1996 and industrial output shrank in every sector of the economy to plunge five percent overall, official figures showed.
Declining domestic demand spurred Russian exports outside the Commonwealth of Independent States to rise by five percent in the first 11 months of 1996 to 92.8 million tonnes.
But analysts say Russia's increasingly hungry tax-man has eaten up a large portion of the extra export earnings, leaving Russia's newly-privatised companies with little to reinvest.
Still, the export boom has spurred Russia's 13 or so vertically-integrated oil companies' appetite for growth, and both Lubash and O'Sullivan said domestic crude oil demand might pick up slightly next year.
"Any arrest in decline must be heartening and what we must be looking to see is some growth," said Martin Cocker, a partner in Ernst &amp; Young's World Energy Group unit in Moscow.
But Russia's oil companies, most heading into their third or fourth years as restructured, privatised companies, will have problems in breaking completely free of Russia's economic woes.
"It's all a function of when domestic industry turns around," said the U.S. executive. "Producers and refiners both have an incentive to export and will for quite some time."
Russian cocoa importers hope business will be sweeter this year, but increasing competition from Western chocolate bars and a lack of precise data on buying patterns have clouded the market, trade sources said on Monday.
"The general tendency is one of growth -- we'll be buying more cocoa this year," said Yuri Granilin, supplies director at the large Babayevsky confectionery plant in Moscow. He declined to give figures.
Domestic producers are competing against a flood of Western ready-made chocolates, with the latter in an upward trend as domestic firms struggle to find recipes for success in a market economy.
The State Statistics Committee said imports of cocoa from outside the Commonwealth of Independent States edged higher to 47,700 tonnes in the first eleven months of 1996 from 47,000 tonnes over the same 1995 period.
The International Cocoa Organisation puts Russian grindings over 1995/96 flat at 75,000 tonnes for the third marketing year in a row.
One Nestle source said Russia's ready-made chocolate products market would grow 15-20 percent this year but that overall growth in cocoa imports was unlikely.
Alexander Pavlov, head of the Agriculture Ministry's food industry department, said Russia's 1996 imports of cocoa and cocoa derivatives slipped eight percent year-on-year.
"I don't think we'll see much growth this year," he said, putting imports of cocoa beans, liquor, powder, butter, grated chocolate and semi-fabricated whole cocoa bars at 130,000 tonnes, including about 75,000 tonnes of beans.
But he cautioned that figures were difficult to pin down, since some imports do not show up in the official statistics and producers had stocks left over from 1995.
Pavlov estimated that imported ready-made chocolate products comprise 10-15 percent of the domestic market for such goods.
Companies like Nestle SA, Switzerland's Andre et Cie, Cargill Inc of the United States and E.D. &amp; F. Man International Inc are suppliers to Russian confectionery plants, which now buy direct instead of going through the Soviet-era agencies that bought about 100,000 tonnes of beans a year.
"The Russian market is quite different from the U.S. and European ones," said a senior source at a major Western confectionery. "It's a question of taste," the source said, adding that three times as many Russians prefer dark chocolates to those who prefer milk chocolates.
Individual chocolate bars are a relative novelty in Russia and are having to work hard to compete with the traditional large, block chocolates, wafers and biscuits Russians love.
One source guessed the size of the bar market at 100,000 tonnes a year, but cautioned this was a rough estimate.
The market for chocolate-covered wafers and biscuits could be three times higher, while the market for small chocolate candies was possibly four times greater, the source said.
Bars, packaged for on-the-go consumption, are a relative novelty to Russians, who traditionally treat chocolate as a treat to be consumed at home or on special occasions.
"Russians are into plain chocolate; these fillings, nuts and souffles the Europeans love aren't our tradition," Pavlov said.
Moscow grocery stores are filled with imported and domestic chocolates, but the abundance does not extend to the rest of this vast country to the same extent.
Trade sources said the Russian market was in such a state of change that Western confectioners were keener to launch new brands rather than increase an existing brand's market share.
"Everything is changing really quickly," said one source.
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
Russia said on Wednesday it would restructure natural gas monopoly Gazprom's operations, but Western analysts and even a junior company official said the move would leave the world's largest gas company intact.
"What Gazprom has suggested for itself is not a restructuring but a commercialisation of their services in Russia," said Jonathan Stern, vice-president of Gas Strategies in London and an expert on Russian gas.
Asked if Russia would reshape one of its most powerful companies in the formal sense of the word, Stern said: "No. But it is corporatisation in the Western sense."
Economy Minister Yevgeny Yasin told a news conference the goverment would restructure Gazprom's home operations and possibly split its domestic output and transport arms.
He said the changes at Gazprom -- whose American Depositary Receipts (ADRs) keep investors drooling -- would in no way affect foreign shareholders.
"Domestic restructuring, yes. But we will not weaken Gazprom as an international corporation," he said.
Carving up Gazprom, whose gas accounts for 60 percent of Europe's gas imports, could deregulate the firm along the lines of British Gas Plc if carried out Western style.
"There's more smoke than fire here," said Stephen O'Sullivan, associate oil and gas director at MC Securities in London. "I don't think there's any serious restructuring here.
"Third-party access is not enshrined in Russia," he said, referring to the fact that Gazprom controls 94 percent of Russia's gas production and most of its transmission but has hesitated to allow other companies sell its output.
Lira Rozenova, an economic adviser to Gazprom chairman Rem Vyakhirev, said any changes would keep the company whole.
"An Economy Ministry programme to 2000 assumes that restructuring and state regulation in the gas industry will be carried out while preserving in the medium-term the organisational and production unity of RAO Gazprom," she said.
Gazprom accounts for a quarter of world gas output and its 1996 production rose one percent to 575 billion cubic metres (20.31 trillion cu ft). It raised $429 million last year with ADRs and plans a Eurobond issue this year.
"ADR investors should be more worried about other things," O'Sullivan said, citing questions over whether Gazprom will ever liberalise trade in its very illiquid shares in Russia.
Stern said Yasin's remarks were essentially about accounting changes rather than structural ones.
"Transport units would pay the producers' units costs," he said, adding that the plan aimed to improve Gazprom finances. "The Russians don't mean what we mean by restructuring."
A senior British energy consultant said Yasin's remarks were "kite-flying by the government".
Gazprom was once an entire ministry run by Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin. Analysts said the firm would owe $7-$8 billion in annual taxes to the government if it could collect 50 trillion roubles in domestic debts.
Gazprom still has friends in high places and plans to sell even more gas to Europe from vast untapped Arctic reserves. But it has come under pressure to contribute more to the federal budget.
But Moscow may lack the will to alter one of Russia's most profitable and powerful firms substantially.
"Periodically, some radical economists in Russia have suggested truly restructuring Gazprom," Stern said. "But they have always failed. The political risk of destroying the Gazprom structure is too great."
($1 = 5,612 roubles)
