French diversified conglomerate Bouygues on Thursday said Italy's STET was joining its efforts to become a leading player in France's telecommunications market after full liberalisation of the sector in 1998.
Bouygues, active in construction, television and communication, said STET would take a 49 percent stake in a new joint venture with Bouygues, called Bouygues-STET, in which the French group would hold 51 percent.
This company, together with German partner VEBA, plans to bid to run the telephone infrastructure of French state railways group SNCF.
Bouygues will compete in French telecommunications with state-owned France Telecom, of which a 20 percent stake will be floated in April, and with CEGETEL the telecoms company majority owned by Generale des Eaux.
STET will also buy into the BDT holding company which is 51-percent owner of Bouygues Telecom. Bouygues said that BDT was valued at 13.75 billion francs and STET would during 1996 and 1997 pay 1.71 billion francs to buy new shares in BDT.
After this increase, Bouygues will have 59.5 percent of BDT, Jean-Claude Decaux International 20.9 percent and STET 19.6 percent.
VEBA has a 15 percent direct stake in Bouygues Telecom. Other stake holders are Cable &amp; Wireless Plc, US West International and banks BNP and Paribas.
Last month, Generale des Eaux said it was forming a telecoms unit CEGETEL with British Telecommunications Plc, SBC of the United States and Mannesman AG of Germany.
Analysts have said they are also awaiting a move by AT&amp;T on the French market.
France Telecom has Deutsche Telekom and Sprint Corp as partners.
Bouygues in May started France's third mobile telecommuncitions network, aiming at a 20 percent market share in the year 2000.
The activity in the French telecommunications sector are similar to alliances forming in Germany.
British Telecom Plc is allied to German utility Viag AG. On Wednesday, RWE dropped their company from an alliance with Veba and Cable and Wireless.
A decision on the fate of ailing airline Air Liberte is not due until the start of next week and no bidder has yet formally submitted an offer to acquire the company, the president of the Creteil commercial court said.
"At the moment, no bid has been submitted," Dominique Leveque told Reuters by telephone. He denied newspaper reports that there was a 1400 GMT deadline for the bids.
"Bids have to be in today. That can be this afternoon or this evening. We are not going to close the mailbox," Leveque said.
He said the court would on Tuesday afternoon at the earliest make a statement about the bid or bids. After that it would study the offers.
"According to the law we have six months to study the situation. But it is clear that the company's cash position cannot hold another six months," he said.
"We will do all we can but the court cannot decide in 48 hours," Leveque said, adding a decision was due at the start of next week at the earliest.
British Airways is preparing a bid for the regional airline, proposing to merge it with its French TAT unit.  
A spokesman for British Airways in London said the company feared the French government would like a French company to acquire Liberte to prevent BA or another foreign airline from obtaining the carrier and its valuable slots at Orly airport.
Air Liberte owns between 20 and 25 percent of the slots at Orly, Paris' second largest airport specialising in domestic routes, which represents 20,000 take-offs and landings per year.
Air Liberte lost 650 million francs in the first nine months of 1996 and has debts of 1.5 billion francs. The company was placed under bankruptcy protection on September 26 after merger talks with other French airline AOM failed.  
Jacques Maillot, head of French travel company Nouvelles Frontieres and charter airline Corsair, said he planned to bid for both Air Liberte and AOM.
AOM, formerly Air Outre-Mer, is being put on sale by the state agency Consortium de Realisation (CDR) which is divesting former Credit Lyonnais assets.
Richard Branson, chairman of Virgin Atlantic, said last week he might also bid for Air Liberte if BA did so. But a Virgin executive told Le Monde on Monday that the company was not yet sure whether a bid for Air Liberte was the best way to develop its business in France.  
Air Liberte is owned 32.3 percent by Groupe Rivaud. Banque Indosuez has 13 percent, International Lease Finance Corporation (ILFC) 12 percent, Euralair 10 percent, Club Mediterranee has 8.5 percent, Lyonnaise de Banque 6.2 percent and SAE five percent.
Chairman and founder Lotfi Belhassine has six percent and other interests have the remaining seven percent.
Air Liberte expanded its network rapidly in the past year, making full use of the opening up of the big national routes such as Paris-Marseilles, Paris-Toulouse, Paris-Nice and Paris-Bordeaux.
Air France unit Air Inter, renamed Air France Europe, previously had a monopoly over these routes.
Air Liberte, AOM, Eurolair, BA's TAT and others cut their prices in order to win market share on the routes prior to the complete opening up of the French -- and European -- air market in 1997.
But Air Liberte was unable to fill its planes and posted losses. The company also claimed it suffered from a forced regrouping of its activities to Orly Sud terminal, while Air France and Air France Europe remained based in Orly Ouest.
-- Paris newsroom +33 1 4221 5452
The future of French electronics group Thomson SA could be decided later on Monday when the government will say whether Alcatel-Alsthom or the Lagardere Groupe can buy the group.
Sources close to the government said that the decision, prepared in close consultation with President Jacques Chirac, could be announced late on Monday, or at the latest on Wednesday after a cabinet meeting.
The timing of the announcement could be brought forward due to a planned journalists strike on Tuesday over tax increases.
At stake is more than the identity of the industrial group that can take an indebted and loss-making firm off the state's hands. The decision also has consequences for of France's defence industry and its consumer electronics sector.
French newspapers suggest that Alcatel-Alsthom, headed by former arms engineer Serge Tchuruk, stands a better chance of winning than the Lagardere Groupe and its foreign allies.
Thomson SA is 76 percent owned by the state while 20 percent is held by telecommunications operator France Telecom.
Thomson SA has full ownership of Thomson Multimedia, one of the world's leading television set companies, as well as a 58 percent stake in Thomson-CSF which is among the top five world defence electronics companies.
Thomson SA made a 1995 loss of 1.379 billion francs ($266 million) and has debts of some 25 billion francs, of which 14 billion are at the multimedia arm which made a 1995 loss of 1.09 billion francs.
Thomson-CSF returned to the black in 1995 with a profit of 1.01 billion francs. Thomson-CSF has a 20 percent stake in semiconductor group SGS-Thomson Microelectronics NV.
Both bidders have unveiled the main lines of their business plan for Thomson but neither has detailed the financial elements of their bids. French newspapers speculate the state may have to pump billions of francs into Thomson prior to the transfer.
Lagardere Groupe, led by its founder Jean-Luc Lagardere, is a conglomerate with interests spanning from the media business to its Matra defence business.
Lagardere plans to control Thomson-CSF while British Aerospace Plc, GEC Plc and perhaps Daimler-Benz Aerospace GmbH (DASA) could take minority stakes.
This deal, in which Lagardere would merge its Matra Defense Espace arm with Thomson-CSF, would be a major restructuring of Europe's sprawling defence industry.
Lagardere has lined up South Korea's Daewoo to run Thomson Multimedia. Daewoo's chairman said he saw synergies in components and he has promised to create jobs in France.
Alcatel-Alsthom unveiled its Thomson plans on September 18.
For Tchuruk, the acquisition of Thomson is part of a programme to make Alcatel a large French group capable of competing globally.
Tchuruk said he wanted to hoist Thomson-CSF to the number two spot of the world defence industry, behind Lockheed Martin but ahead of GM Hughes Electronics Corp.
For that, Tchuruk planned a "wide-scale partnership with another major industrial player" in Britain, Germany or both.
Tchuruk said he plans to restructure Thomson Multimedia and would seek an Asian partner to bring market access to the rapidly growing southeast Asian markets.
Despite the planned deals with unnamed foreign groups, Tchuruk said he did not want to be commited prior to a Thomson decision. ($1=5.182 French Franc)
France announced plans to create a major new force in the world defence industry on Wednesday, by selling state-owned defence and consumer electronics group Thomson SA to Lagardere Groupe, which owns missile maker Matra.
The government said in a statement it preferred Lagardere's bid to the rival offer of largely civilian industrial group Alcatel Alsthom SA.
Prime Minister Alain Juppe's office said the Thomson Matra giant thus created would be a leading force in the world military industry.
"The merger is an important stage in the reinforcement of the European professional electronics and defense industry," it said in a statement.
The government said it would pump 11 billion francs into loss-making Thomson, which is a leading maker of televisions under brand suchs as SABA and RCA, as well as a specialist in defence electronics such as missile guidance sustems.
The decision was a surprise as the stock market and the media had gambled Alcatel's no-nonsense chairman Serge Tchuruk would take the prize over self-made entrepreneur Jean-Luc Lagardere, 69, who is approaching retirement and soon to hand over power to his son, Arnaud.
Lagardere's conglomerate also owns publisher Hachette.
The government did not spell out exactly how it had reached the choice, but its statement stressed the importance of a merger between Lagardere's Matra and Thomson's majority-owned defence unit Thomson-CSF.
It said it was sending both offers for Thomson SA to the independent Privatisation Commission, which has an important say in the sale of state assets, while recommending Lagardere's bid.
After advice from this consultative body, which reviews the terms of bids, and clearance from European Commission, the sale is expected to be concluded before the end of the year.
The government said it would raise Thomson's capital by nearly 11 billion francs, blaming past Socialist administrations for leaving the group undercapitalised after nationalisation in 1982 and for the excessive debts of the early 1980s.
France will keep a golden share to safeguard defence interests, it said.
Thomson SA lost 1.379 billion francs in 1995 and has 25 billion francs of debt. Fully-owned Thomson Multimedia lost three billion in the first half of 1996, but Thomson-CSF is profitable and had 1995 earnings of 1.01 billion francs.
Political sources had said President Jacques Chirac was determined to pick a bidder who kept Thomson's key defence technologies firmly in French hands.
Lagardere has in the past said that British Aerospace Plc, with which is has a missiles joint-venture, and Germany's Daimler Aerospace could also be involved.
The government said Lagardere wanted to leave the share capital of microelectronics maker SGS-Thomson Microelectronics NV by selling to the other main shareholders.
Thomson-CSF has a 20 percent stake in SGS-Thomson which is controlled by an Anglo-Italian shareholder group including state entities such as CEA and IRI.
Thomson Multimedia, one of the world's leading television set and decoders makers with brands suchs as RCA, SABA, GE, will be sold to Daewoo Electronics of South Korea.
The government said Daewoo was a well known investor in France and had knowledge of mass production techniques. It said Daewoo has promised to maintain Thomson Multimedia jobs in France and even create new jobs.
Alcatel's shares rose sharply on Thursday morning on market relief. Analysts doubted its capacity to finance the Thomson deal. Lagardere shares were suspended for the day.
On Tuesday, Alcatel closed down 2.22 percent at 444.90 francs on rumours its bid would prevail while Lagardere closed up 2.94 percent at 133.10 francs.
France announced plans to create a major new force in the world defence industry on Wednesday, by selling state-owned defence and consumer electronics group Thomson SA to Lagardere Groupe for a symbolic franc.
The government said it had preferred the bid by Lagardere, which owns defence company Matra, to the rival offer of largely civilian industrial group Alcatel Alsthom SA.
"The choice I made yesterday and which has been made public today is entirely based on a defence industrial logic," Prime Minisiter Alain Juppe told parliament
"We have opted for the offer which was the best to further our defence interest and which would constitute a world leading industrial group with strong export capacities," he said.
"The offers were comparable on a financial level. They both needed a capital increase," Finance Minister Jean Arthuis told a news conference. The state will make an 11 billion franc ($2.1 billion) cash injection to Thomson SA prior to the sale.
Challenged in parliament about the cash injection, Arthuis said that "Both Alcatel and Lagardere valued Thomson SA at minus 11 billion francs"
Loss-making Thomson SA owns 58 percent of defence electronics company Thomson-CSF and 100 percent of consumer electronics maker Thomson Multimedia which specialises in digital television and decoders and has Saba and RCA as brands.
Lagardere said it is bidding 156 francs a share, or 7.8 billion francs in total, to buy the minorities in Thomson-CSF which it will then merge with Matra. Lagardere will keep 60 percent of Thomson Matra while the French state will have a golden share to safeguard national security interests.
Lagardere will sell Thomson Multimedia to Daewoo Electronics of South Korea.
The government said Daewoo was a well known investor in France and had knowledge of mass production techniques. Daewoo has made commitments on jobs -- creating 3,000 new jobs in France -- technology and investments.
Thomson Multimedia management will remain French-based.
Arthuis said the European Commission would have to approve the cash injection and study competition issues. He said the sale would take place before the end of the year and the cash for the injection would come from other privatisations.
The independent privatisation commission, which has an important say in the sale of state assets, still has to give its advice on the sale. Arthuis said the government had not wanted to keep its choice secret, as would have been usual, until the privatisation commission's advice "to avoid insider trading".
The decision was a surprise as markets and the media had gambled Alcatel's no-nonsense chairman Serge Tchuruk would take the prize over self-made entrepreneur Jean-Luc Lagardere, 69, who is preparing to hand over power to his son, Arnaud.
Lagardere also owns publishers Hachette and Filipachi.
Thomson SA lost 1.379 billion francs in 1995 and has 25 billion francs of debt. Wholly-owned Thomson Multimedia lost three billion in the first half of 1996, but Thomson-CSF is profitable and had 1995 earnings of 1.01 billion francs.
The government said Lagardere wanted to leave the share capital of microelectronics maker SGS-Thomson Microelectronics NV by selling its 20 percent stake to the other main shareholders. France Telecom said it and CEA Industries were ready to buy that stake and keep French interests at the same level as the stake of Italian companies .
Alcatel's shares rose sharply on Thursday morning on market relief. Analysts doubted its capacity to finance the Thomson deal. Lagardere shares were suspended for the day.
Jean-Luc Lagardere, chairman of Lagardere Groupe, said on Saturday that his group was not going to sell Thomson's prized digital television know-how to South Korea's Daewoo Electronics.
Lagardere, adressing students at the Sorbonne university during a weekend seminar on industry, said in his first public comments after winning the bidding for state-owned Thomson that he had selected Daewoo as partner because it was the best guarantee for jobs at Thomson's French production units.
The French government on Wednesday announced it had selected Lagardere to buy state-owned Thomson SA for one franc, after an 11-billion francs capital injection.
Lagardare had been bidding against telecommunication equipment and industrial engineering group Alcatel Alsthom.
Lagardere Groupe plans to merge its Matra defense business with Thomson's 58-percent unit Thomson-CSF, after buying out the minorities on the Paris Bourse, and has agreed to sell Thomson Multimedia to Daewoo -- also for a symbolic franc.
Lagardere heard the news that his group had won the bidding, -- against expectations as the French media expected Alcatel Alsthom and its no-nonsense chairman Serge Tchuruk to be the winners -- on Tuesday evening during an official dinner at the start of a Picasso exhibition in Paris.
"I did not feel like I received the golden medal," Lagardere said. "I felt like I was selected to play for France," the 69-year old businessman said.
"In four year's time, while I will then still be involved in our business, I hope that people like (Matra boss) Noel Forgeard can celebrate the award of a golden medal. We will have a good team in an industry where competition is without pity," he said.
Lagardere, a Gascogne farmer's son who built a worldwide books-to-missiles business empire from a small company he joined 32-years ago, is facing criticism by some French media and labour unions for selling the Multimedia business to Daewoo.
The critics blame him for selling French technology to a South Korean company and they also expect massive job losses.
Lagardere said these remarks were not true.
He said that back in February when President Jacques Chirac first mentioned the privatisation, he believed the state was only going to sell Thomson-CSF as part of a defence overhaul.
"But then the Finance Ministry came from behind and integrated Multimedia into the deal," Lagardere said.
"So I went to look for partners. I searched in Europe, the U.S., Japan and Korea. I choose Daewoo because I thought they were the best guarantee for jobs, " he said.
Daewoo Electronics plans to create 5,000 jobs in France at Thomson Multimedia, the world's fourth biggest maker of televisions which employs some 49,500 people world-wide.
"I give my personal guarantee to those (French) jobs. Daewoo has made commitments to the government and to us," he said.
While Daewoo is taking over the television and video recorder production activities. Thomson Multimedia's digital television know-how will be put into a special joint-venture.
"We took the technology out of the company and put it in a joint venture (with Daewoo) in which we have 51 percent," Lagardere said. While he used the past tense on Saturday, the French Privatisation Commission and European Commission still have to approve the deal, which is scheduled for completion at the end of the year.
The 1,400 staff of ailing French regional airline Air Liberte, under bankruptcy protection, on Sunday published a full-page newspaper advert demanding to get a look at the takeover bids made to the administrators.
"How is it possible that a company which has been fighting with succes for eight years to improve the quality of air transport could disappear today," staff said in an "open letter" advert in the Journal du Dimanche main French Sunday paper.
British Airways Plc, Richard Branson's Brussels-based Virgin Express, a consortium headed by Nouvelles Frontieres chairman Jacques Maillot, and commercial pilot Fernand Denan have made offers for Air Liberte.
The commercial court of Creteil, a southeastern Paris suburb, is expected to decide early this week which of the options will be pursued. Air Liberte went into administration on September 26 with debts of about 1.5 billion francs.
In the advert paid by the airline's works council, staff of Air Liberte (Air Liberty in English) blamed the French authorities for much of the companies' woes.
"By multiplying the obstacles to its development -- difficulties to obtain slots, difficulties to get ground handling services equal to those of the state airline (Air France /Air Inter ) -- the public authorities have pushed Air Liberte into a dead-end," the advert read.
They also blamed certain Air Liberte shareholders for "abadoning" the company at the eve of a recapitalisation and said they feared the final solution would be liquidation.
"We staff of Air Liberte, we cannot accept anymore to lose our jobs, put our families in distress nor to interrupt the service we have to give to passengers," the advert said.
Staff asked in the advert it wanted to see the bids made for the company and was ready to take its responsibilities -- ousted chairman and founder Lotfi Belhassine had been preparing a last-minute capital increase in which staff would put six weeks' pay into the company.
"Today, some people seem to wish the liquidation of Air Liberte rather than the arrival of a European company. Who has interest in seeing the return of a monopoly?," the ad asked in a reference to political unease about BA's bid.
British Airways plans to pay 25 million francs for Air Liberte and aims to merge it with its French TAT unit. The British airline said on Friday it had plans to spend 440 million francs on getting Air Liberte back into profit in three years.
Air Liberte owns about a quarter of the landing and take-off slots at Orly airport, Paris' second airport specialising in domestic flights, and this would dramatically boost BA's presence and competitiveness in France.
Air Liberte lost 650 million francs in the first nine months of 1996 due to an air fare war and insufficient passenger numbers. Since the start of the year the main French domestic routes are open to competition ahead of full liberalistaion in 1997. Air Liberte and other regional group AOM have been fighting to take market share from former monopolist Air Inter.
Jacques Maillot, also chairman of smaller airline Corsair, counts the Rivaud bank, travel group Club Mediterranee and Royal Air Maroc in his consortium.
Maillot has not given financial details but he plans to merge Air Liberte with AOM, which is for sale.
The Rivaud bank, a very secretive and influential financial group, is headed since last week by entrepreneur Vincent Bollore and the bank is close to the ruling RPR party.
The Le Monde newspaper said last week Prime Minister Alain Juppe was pushing for a domestic buyer for Air Liberte.
The 1,400 staff of ailing French regional airline Air Liberte, which is under bankruptcy protection, published a full-page newspaper advert on Sunday demanding that they be shown takeover bids made to the administrators.
"How is it possible that a company which has been fighting with success for eight years to improve the quality of air transport could disappear today," staff said in an "open letter" advert in the Journal du Dimanche main French Sunday paper.
British Airways Plc, Richard Branson's Brussels-based Virgin Express, a consortium headed by Nouvelles Frontieres chairman Jacques Maillot, and commercial pilot Fernand Denan have made offers for Air Liberte.
The commercial court of Creteil, a southeastern Paris suburb, is expected to decide early this week which of the options will be pursued. Air Liberte went into administration on September 26 with debts of about 1.5 billion francs.
In an ad paid for by the airline's works council, staff of Air Liberte blamed the French authorities for much of the companies' woes.
"By multiplying the obstacles to its development -- difficulties to obtain slots, difficulties to get ground handling services equal to those of the state airline (Air France /Air Inter ) -- the public authorities have pushed Air Liberte into a dead-end," the advert read.
They also blamed certain Air Liberte shareholders for "abandoning" the company at the eve of a recapitalisation and said they feared the final solution would be liquidation.
"We staff of Air Liberte, we cannot accept anymore to lose our jobs, put our families in distress nor to interrupt the service we have to give to passengers," the advert said.
The ad said the staff wanted to see the bids made for the company and were ready to take on responsibilities.
Ousted chairman and founder Lotfi Belhassine had been preparing a last-minute capital increase in which staff would put six weeks' pay into the company.
"Today, some people seem to wish the liquidation of Air Liberte rather than the arrival of a European company. Who has interest in seeing the return of a monopoly?," the ad asked.
British Airways plans to pay 25 million francs for Air Liberte and aims to merge it with its French TAT unit. The British airline said on Friday it had plans to spend 440 million francs on getting Air Liberte back into profit in three years.
Air Liberte owns about a quarter of the landing and take-off slots at Orly airport, Paris' second airport specialising in domestic flights, and this would dramatically boost BA's presence and competitiveness in France.
Air Liberte lost 650 million francs in the first nine months of 1996 due to an air fare war and insufficient passenger numbers. Since the start of the year the main French domestic routes are open to competition ahead of full liberalistaion in 1997. Air Liberte and other regional group AOM have been fighting to take market share from former monopolist Air Inter.
Jacques Maillot, also chairman of smaller airline Corsair, counts the Rivaud bank, travel group Club Mediterranee and Royal Air Maroc in his consortium.
Maillot has not given financial details but he plans to merge Air Liberte with AOM, which is for sale.
The Rivaud bank, a very secretive and influential financial group, is headed since last week by entrepreneur Vincent Bollore and the bank is close to the ruling RPR party.
The Le Monde newspaper said last week Prime Minister Alain Juppe was pushing for a domestic buyer for Air Liberte.
France Telecom chairman Michel Bon said on Tuesday the French operator wanted to grow internationally in order to offset the impact of competition in France.
"We will not enjoy all the market growth in France," Bon told a news briefing.
From 1998, France Telecom will lose its monopoly position entirely and both Generale des Eaux and Bouygues have formed international alliances to take it on.
France Telecom officials said the group aimed to generate at least 10 percent of its sales abroad.
Bon, in Belgium for the inauguration of the country's second mobile telecommunications operator, Mobistar, said France Telecom's international policy was based on three main goals.
Firstly, the group wanted to answer the international needs of its clients. This is mainly done through the Global One joint venture with Deutsche Telekom and Sprint Corp of the United States.
Secondly, the group wants to use its know-how in building modern infrastructure networks and is setting up such networks in Latin America and Indonesia.
Thirdly, the group is looking for "new growth areas" to compensate for the impact on sales of the new competition in France, Bon said.
Mobistar, in which France Telecom has a majority stake, is part of this policy. The Beglian operator started six weeks ago and has 20,000 subscribers, aiming for a 25 percent market share in 2005.
France Telecom hopes to hear in November that a consortium it leads has won a GSM licence in Romania and the group is in negotiations with the government of Poland.
In Poland, France Telecom is operator of an analogue network but was excluded from getting a GSM digital licence. After a state visit by French President Jacques Chirac, the situation has improved for France Telecom, but negotiations are still continuing.
In Italy, France Telecom has no ambitions in mobile telecommunications, because of the presence of state-owned TIM Omnitel, which is run by Olivetti.
France Telecom is talking with Olivetti about co-operating in Infostrada, a fixed-line venture which is bidding for the network of the Italian railways.
Daewoo Electronics on Tuesday tried to placate French critics of its planned purchase of Thomson Multimedia with job and investment promises while calling a counter-bid "not realistic"
But Bae Soon-hoon, chairman of the South Korean company, declined to discuss financial details of the proposed takeover until the French government's decision to sell the world's fourth-biggest television maker became final.
Both the French Privatisation Commission and the European Commission still have to approve the deal.
The French government announced last week it had selected Lagardere Groupe over Alcatel Alsthom to buy state-owned Thomson SA for one franc after an 11 billion franc ($2.12 billion) capital injection.
Lagardere plans to merge its Matra Defence Espace unit with defence electronics group Thomson-CSF and sell off Thomson Multimedia (TMM) to Daewoo, also for one franc.
The French financial newspaper La Tribune on Monday suggested a rival French bid for TMM could still emerge. The Liberation daily on Tuesday said Sagem, which fell out of the race earlier on, was preparing such a bid.
Sagem denied planning a bid, however, and the idea was dismissed by Bae.
"I saw the newspaper article. I thought it was a joke," he said. "We have been working with the government for six months and have been respecting the rules of the procedure. Unless the government changes the procedure, nobody can make a proposal at the present time."
Bae said he planned to make Thomson Multimedia, reported to have made a three billion franc first half loss and to have debts of at least 14 billion, "very profitable and prosperous."
He confirmed a pledge to create 5,000 French jobs at TMM in five years, saying French labour conditions were competitive.
The partnership between Thomson Multimedia and Daewoo, which will create the world's biggest maker of televisions, video recorders and cathode ray tubes, would allow a 13 billion franc worldwide investment plan between now and 2000.
Daewoo said that would create a total of 6,600 jobs in final assembly and 2,500 jobs in component production.
Bae declined to indicate how much of Thomson Multimedia's debt Daewoo would assume but said he expected some of the state capital injection to go to TMM.
"The Daewoo group will keep a significant part of the TMM debts and has the means to do so," said Michel Jacob, managing director of Daewoo's French financial advisers Rothschild's.
Daewoo said it would keep the Thomson identity and French headquarters and would continue research and development in the French city of Rennes. It said all the group's products would be sold under Thomson brand names in Europe and the U.S.
The digital television know-how of Thomson will be put in a special joint venture with Lagardere. Bae said the joint-venture would be 50/50 owned, while Jean-Luc Lagardere said on Saturday his group would have a 51 percent majority.
The government decision to sell TMM indirectly for one franc to Daewoo has attracted fierce criticism, with Socialist Party leader Lionel Jospin saying he was "shocked".
Jacques Delors, former president of the European Commission, said at the weekend: "I would have preferred to maintain a European pole in consumer electronics."
Some Thomson labour unions have also attacked the sale of "French technology" to a South Korean company. ($1=5.199 French Franc)
The chairman of Daewoo Electronics on Tuesday tried to placate French critics of a planned acquisition of Thomson Multimedia with repeated job and investment promises and said a counter-bid was "not realistic"
But Bae Soon-hoon declined to discuss financial details of the proposed takeover until the government's decision to sell the world's fourth-biggest television maker to the South Korean company is final. Both the French Privatisation Commission and the European Commission still have to approve the deal.
The French government on Wednesday announced it had selected Lagardere Groupe over Alcatel Alsthom to buy state-owned Thomson SA for one franc after an 11 billion franc capital injection.
Lagardere plans to merge its Matra Defence Espace unit with defence electronics group Thomson-CSF while selling Thomson Multimedia (TMM) to Daewoo, also for one franc.
Bae said he would make Thomson Multimedia, reported to have made a three billion franc first half loss and to have debts of at least 14 billion francs, "very profitable and prosperous."
He confirmed a vow to create 5,000 French jobs at TMM in the five years, saying French labour conditions were competitive.
Bae said that the partnership between Thomson Multimedia and Daewoo would allow a 13 billion franc world-wide investment plan between now and the year 2000, creating 6,600 jobs in final assembly and 2,500 jobs in component production.
He declined to indicate how much of Thomson Multimedia's debt Daewoo would assume but said he expected some of the state capital injection to go to TMM.
"The Daewoo group will keep a significant part of the TMM debts and has the means to do so," said Michel Jacob, managing director of Daewoo's French financial advisers Rotschild's.
The Daewoo/Thomson combination would be the world's biggest maker of television, video recorders and cathode ray tubes.
Daewoo said it would keep the Thomson identity and French headquarters and would continue research and development at Rennes, France. It said all the group's products would be sold under Thomson brand names in Europe and the U.S.
The digital television know-how of Thomson will be put in a special joint venture with Lagardere. Bae said the joint-venture would be 50/50 owned while Jean-Luc Lagardere said on Saturday that his group would have a 51 percent majority.
The government decision to sell TMM indirectly for one franc to Daewoo has attracted fierce criticism. The leader of the Socialist Party, Lionel Jospin, said on Sunday he was "shocked" by the Thomson privatisation.
Jacques Delors, former president of the European Commission, said the same day, "I would have preferred to maintain a European pole in consumer electronics."
Some Thomson labour unions also attacked the sale of "French technology" to a South Korean company.
French financial newspaper La Tribune on Monday suggested a rival French bid was being prepared and newspaper Liberation on Tuesday said Sagem, who fell out of the race earlier on, was preparing such a bid. Sagem denied planning a bod.
"I saw the newspaper article. I thought it was a joke," Bae said. "We have been working with the government for six months and have been respecting the rules of the procedure. Unless the government changes the procedure, nobody can make a proposal at the present time," he said.
British Airways Plc (BA) on Wednesday boosted its position in France when French bank Groupe Rivaud joined its bid for ailing French regional airline Air Liberte.
Rivaud, a founding shareholder in Air Liberte and a former partner in a rival consortium, agreed to join BA after marathon talks that began on Tuesday afternoon and ended this morning.
It is the only bid left on the table and the commercial court in Creteil is expected to approve the offer on Friday. Richard Branson's Virgin Express and commercial pilot Fernand Denan had also been working on takeover offers.
The BA/Rivaud proposal still needs the blessing of Air Liberte's creditors and French authorities.
Air Liberte has a 12 percent stake of the domestic French market, while BA's TAT unit has eight percent. The market is still dominated by the state-owned Air France group.
"The situation is delicate," said Mark Rochet, chairman of TAT, adding he hoped the court would take a quick decision.
"Our partnership with the Groupe Rivaud offers the ideal solution for Air Liberte's very poor financial position. To save it requires swift action," BA chief executive Robert Ayling said in a statement.
"It's an excellent solution. We keep all the assets. I do not see another French solution, the last deadline was Friday," Air Liberte founder and chairman Lotfi Belhassine told Reuters.
British Airways will make a 440 million franc equity investment for a 70 percent stake in Air Liberte and Rivaud will put up 190 million for the remaining 30 percent.
In addition, Rivaud will also write off existing convertible debt of just over 500 million francs and will provide Liberte with 50-60 million francs of new loan capital.
Both companies will also pay the costs of running Air Liberte during administration, estimated at 150 million francs.
Rochet told a news conference that Air Liberte's debt now stands at 800 million francs. Creditors can either get 20 percent of their money in cash or get fully paid over 10 years.
Rivaud, headed by industrialist Vincent Bollore, had originally been part of a consortium of travel groups Nouvelles Frontieres, Club Mediterannee and Royal Air Maroc.
Nouvelles Frontieres chairman Jacques Maillot said he and the Moroccan airline had withdrawn because of what he described as the "extraordinary, disastrous financial situation" of Air Liberte.
Bollore is chairman of the shipping and financial group Bollore. He was made the chairman of Rivaud last week and the bank is increasing its capital especially for Air Liberte.
A Bollore official said Rivaud had changed camps on Tuesday after Nouvelles Frontieres and other partners said they were unwilling to provide the money needed for a two-thirds stake.
Rivaud, Club Med and airplane leasing company ILFC were among the original backers of Air Liberte eight years ago.
The BA/Rivaud plan is based on the three-year busines plan for Air Liberte drawn up by BA. It will safeguard 1,250 out of 1,400 Air Liberte jobs and aims for break-even in 1999.
Air Liberte owns about a quarter of the landing and take-off slots at Orly airport, Paris' second airport specialising in domestic flights.
It lost 650 million francs in the first nine months of 1996 due to an air fare war and insufficient passenger numbers in the run-up to full liberalisation of French airspace in 1997.
British Airways Plc on Wednesday joined with French bank Groupe Rivaud to bid for ailing French regional airline Air Liberte, the airlines' administrator told Reuters on Wednesday.
"It's a bid to continue the company. British Airways will have 70 percent, Rivaud 30 percent. It's a bid which satisfies my conditions, assures the jobs and is also good for the creditors," Maitre Baronnie said by telephone.
Rivaud, headed by industrialist Vincent Bollore, had originally been part of a consortium of travel groups Nouvelles Frontieres, Club Mediterannee and airline Royal Air Maroc.
Nouvelles Frontieres chairman Jacques Maillot said he was now withdrawing his bid. The BA/Nouvelles Frontieres bid was the only one remaining, Nouvelles Frontieres said.
Bollore is also the chairman of a shipping and financial group with his name. He was made the chairman of bank Rivaud last Friday and the bank was increasing its capital especially for Air Liberte.
Rivaud, Club Mediterrannee and airplane leasing company ILFC were among the original financial backers of Air Liberte, founded eight years ago.
Baronnie said that creditors could chose to either get cash now with a discount to the outstanding amount, or wiat for a maximum of ten years to get fully paid.
Air Liberte has debts of some 1.5 billion french francs ($290.7 million).
He said there was no price attached to the bid, as was the case with the former TAT bid of 25 million francs, because it was a bid to continue running the company, instead of an offer to buy the assets.
He said that 1,250 jobs at Air Liberte were safeguarded.
He said that the Creteil commercial court would meet on Friday to discuss the offer and a meeting with creditors was schduled within a month.
Meanwhile Air Liberte could dispose of its cash funds.
"I think this is the best we could get for the company and the creditors," Baronnie said, speaking from Air Liberte headquarters.
Air Liberte founder and chairman Lotfi Belhassine will keep his post, he added.
Air Liberte went into administration on September 26 with debts of about 1.5 billion francs.
Apart from British Airways and Maillot there were bids from Richard Branson's Brussels-based Virgin Express, and commercial pilot Fernand Denan.
British Airways planned to merge Air Liberte with TAT and said last Friday it had plans to spend 440 million francs on getting Air Liberte back into profit in three years.
Air Liberte owns about a quarter of the landing and take-off slots at Orly airport, Paris' second airport specialising in domestic flights, and this would dramatically boost BA's presence and competitiveness in France.
Air Liberte lost 650 million francs in the first nine months of 1996 due to an air fare war and insufficient passenger numbers.
Since the start of the year the main French domestic routes have been open to competition ahead of full liberalistaion in 1997.
Air Liberte and other regional group AOM have been fighting to take market share from former domestic monopolyt carrier Air Inter, part of Air France. ($ = 5.16 French Francs)
British Airways Plc (BA) on Wednesday boosted its position in France when French bank Rivaud joined its bid for ailing French regional airline Air Liberte.
Rivaud, a founding shareholder in Air Liberte and a former partner in a rival consortium, agreed with BA after marathon talks started on Tuesday afternoon and ending at this morning.
It is the only bid left on the table and the commercial court in Creteil is expected to approve the offer on Friday. Richard Branson's Brussels-based Virgin Express and commercial pilot Fernand Denan had also been working on takeover offers.
The BA/Rivaud proposal still needs the blessing of Air Liberte's creditors and French political authorities.
Air Liberte has a 12 percent stake of the domestic French market and BA's TAT unit eight percent. The market is still dominated by the state-owned Air France group.
"The situation is delicate," said Mark Rochet, chairman of TAT, adding he hoped the court would take a quick decision.
"Our partnership with the Groupe Rivaud offers the ideal solution for Air Liberte's very poor financial position. To save it requires quick action," BA chief executive Robert Ayling said in a statement.
"It's an excellent solution. We keep all the assets. I do not see another French solution, the last deadline was Friday," Air Liberte founder and chairman Lotfi Belhassine told Reuters.
British Airways will make a 440 million franc ($85.3 million) equity investment for a 70 percent stake in Air Liberte and Rivaud will put up 190 million for the remaining 30 percent. On top of that Rivaud will make a write down on 500 million francs of its old stake and also on some 60 million francs in loan stocks.
Both companies will pay the costs of running Air Liberte during administration, estimated at 150 million francs.
Rochet told a news conference Air Liberte's debt now stands at 800 million francs. Creditors can either get 20 percent of their money in cash or get fully paid over 10 years.
Rivaud, headed by industrialist Vincent Bollore, had originally been part of a consortium of travel groups Nouvelles Frontieres, Club Mediterannee and Royal Air Maroc.
Nouvelles Frontieres chairman Jacques Maillot said he and the Moroccan airline had withdrawn because of the "extraordinary disastrous financial situation" of Air Liberte.
Bollore is chairman of a shipping and financial group with his name. He was made the chairman of Rivaud last week and the bank is increasing its capital especially for Air Liberte.
A Bollore official said Rivaud had changed camps on Tuesday after Nouvelles Frontieres and other partners said they were unwilling to stump up the money needed for a two-third stake.
Rivaud, Club Med and airplane leasing company ILFC were among the original backers of Air Liberte eight years ago.
The BA/Rivaud plan is based on the three-year business plan for Air Liberte drawn up by BA. It will safeguard 1,250 out of 1,400 Air Liberte jobs and aims for break-even in 1999.
Belhassine will continue to run Air Liberte which owns about a quarter of the landing and take-off slots at Orly airport, Paris' second airport specialising in domestic flights.
It lost 650 million francs in the first nine months of 1996 due to an air fare war and insufficient passenger numbers in the run-up to full liberalisation of French airspace in 1997. ($1=5.157 French Franc)
French state-owned Air France said on Thursday it was ready to take on the tougher competition posed by the planned foray into the French domestic market of British flag-carrier British Airways Plc (BA).
BA's TAT French unit on Wednesday announced a joint 780 million franc bid ($151.2 million) with French private bank Rivaud for domestic carrier Air Liberte that will double its share of takeoff and landing slots at Paris' busy second airport Orly to 20 percent.
An Air France spokeswoman acknowledged BA's increased presence in France aviation would have an impact.
"It certainly has consequences for us. But we will continue with improving our product and service while cutting our costs and prices," she said.
BA, one of the world's most profitable airlines, will in first instance manage its French assets from a distance. TAT and Air Liberte will operate separately at least until 1999 when the latter should have returned to profit.
The Creteil commercial court will meet on Friday to study the BA/Rivaud offer while an Air Liberte creditors meeting has the final say. Such a meeting is due within a month.
But the way to the finishing line is not without obstacles.
In Brussels, Richard Branson's Virgin Express said it planned to raise its bid for Air Liberte, in administration since September 26. The court-appointed administrator, Maitre Baronnie, reacted sceptically.
"I have never seen any bid by Virgin so I do not see how they can increase a bid," he told Reuters by telephone.
"Strictly theoretically, a new bid could be made just up to the moment that the creditors meet and accept the offer on the table. In the end the creditors decide," he added.
The pilot's union of Air France's domestic unit Air France Europe urged the government and chairman Christian Blanc to join the bidding battle for Air Liberte.
"It will allow our country to remain master of its skies. Otherwise, there will not be any French competition because there will be no French air transport industry left," the SNPL pilots union said in a statement.
Air France is constrained from expanding in France until 1997, under conditions imposed by the European Commission for state rescue capital injections.
Air Inter dominated French domestic routes and Orly airport until as recently 1995 when the French government decided to open some major domestic routes to competition ahead of full liberalisation from April 1997.
A spokesman for Air Inter, now renamed Air France Europe, said the company had at the moment a 60 percent share on the total French market.
Domestic airlines Air Liberte, AOM and TAT have all tried to carve out market share ahead of liberalisation with a price war. As a result they have suffered financially.
Industry sources said Air France could strike back in 1997 and make a bid for AOM to prevent another foreign airline from setting foot in France alongside British Airways.
French state-owned Air France said on Thursday it was ready to take on the toughening competition in its domestic market posed by British Airways Plc (BA).
BA's TAT French unit on Wednesday announced a joint 780 million franc bid ($151.2 million) with bank Rivaud for domestic carrier Air Liberte that will double its share of takeoff and landing slots at Paris' busy second airport Orly to 20 percent.
An Air France spokeswoman acknowledged BA's increased presence in France aviation would have an impact.
"It certainly has consequences for us. But we will continue with improving our product and service while cutting our costs and prices," she said.
BA, one of the world's most profitable airlines, will in first instance manage its French assets from a distance. TAT and Air Liberte will operate separately at least until 1999 when the latter should have returned to profit.
The Creteil commercial court will meet on Friday to study the BA/Rivaud offer while an Air Liberte creditors meeting has the final say. Such a meeting is due within a month.
But the way to the finish line is not without obstacles.
In Brussels, Richard Branson's Virgin Express said it planned to raise its bid for Air Liberte, in administration since September 26. The court-appointed administrator, Maitre Baronnie, reacted sceptically.
"I have never seen any bid by Virgin so I do not see how they can increase a bid," he told Reuters by telephone.
"Strictly theoretically, a new bid could be made just up to the moment that the creditors meet and accept the offer on the table. In the end the creditors decide," he added.
The pilot's union of Air France's domestic unit Air France Europe urged the government and chairman Christian Blanc to also make a bid for Air Liberte.
"It will allow our country to remain master of its skies. Otherwise, there will not be any French competition because there will be no French air transport industry left," the SNPL pilots union said in a statement.
Air France is constrained from expanding in France until 1997, under conditions imposed on European Commission for state rescue cas.
Air Inter dominated mestic routes and Orly airport until as recently 1995 when the French government decided to open some major domestic routes to competition ahead of full liberalisation from April 1997.
A spokesman for Air Inter, now renamed Air France Europe, said the company had at the moment a 60 percent share on the total French market.
Air Liberte, AOM and TAT have all tried to carve out market share ahead of liberalisation with a price war. As a result they have suffered financially.
Industry sources said Air France could strike back in 1997 and make a bid for AOM to prevent another foreign airline from setting foot in France alongside Brr airlines in France are Air Littoral, owned by the Dufour family, the Dubreuil family's Regional airlines, Xavier Leclerq's Brit Airlines as well as Nouvelles Frontieres' Corsair and Euralair.
Jacques Maillot, the chairman of travel group Nouvelles Frontieres who dropped out of bidding for French regional airline Air Liberte, is planning to buy airline AOM and expects formal talks to start in weeks.
"I have had several talks with CDR executives and we have started to exchange information," Maillot said. "We have not talked about a price or anything. There is an old valuation by bank Warburgs and I have asked bank Paribas to look at the company," he told Reuters by telephone.
AOM, created in 1991 by the merger of Air Outre Mer and Minerve, is owned by the Consortium de Realisation (CDR), a state entity charged with selling former assets of the Credit Lyonnais bank.
Maillot announced on Wednesday he had withdrawn from talks on the rescue Air Liberte, in administration since September 26, because of the size of the financial commitment required.
A 780 million french franc ($151.2 million) bid by British Airways Plc French TAT unit and bank Rivaud is now the only remaining one on the table and expected to be approved by the Creteil commercial court on Friday.
Maillot had planned to buy Air Liberte with the help of Royal Air Maroc, the Moroccan national airline, holiday resorts group Club Mediterranee and Rivaud.
In a second stage he had planned to enlarge his consortium to acquire AOM and merge it with Air Liberte in a big French private company to rival the state-owned Air France group.
"First there will be talks between Paribas and Warburgs, then we will start official talks with CDR," Maillot said.
"Because CDR is part of the state there have to be discussions with Bercy (the Finance Ministry) and the privatisation commission," he added.
Maillot said Warburg had put a value of one billion francs on AOM but he noted the study was a bit outdated as much had changed in the market since.
A spokesman for the CDR confirmed that there had been informal contacts with Maillot but no formal sale procedure had been started.
"We have had informal contacts," Jean-Michel Raingeard, spokesman at the CDR told Reuters. "But we have not started a sale procedure, which is a very strict procedure," he added.
"The financial situation at AOM is better than at many other airlines," he said. CDR would only decide to start a sale procedure for AOM "When we feel that the time is ripe."
"We always planned to sell AOM at the time of the liberalisation of French airspace (in 1997)," Raingeard said.
"What we need now is a period of calm. A lot has happened recently and at a quick pace. We need to wait at least a few weeks to see the new lie of the land," he said.
This summer, AOM chairman Alexandre Couvelaire had been in talks with Air Liberte chairman and founder Lotfi Belhassine about a merger. But the deteriorating financial situation at Air Liberte led to a break-up of talks.
A spokeswoman for AOM said the company would now go it alone."There's British Airways, Groupe Air France and us. We have 10 to 12 percent of slots at Orly and we will go it alone," she said.
French state-owned airline Air France said on Thursday it was ready to take on the toughening competition in its domestic market posed by British Airways Plc (BA).
BA's TAT French unit on Wednesday announced a joint 780 million franc bid ($151.2 million) with bank Rivaud for domestic carrier Air Liberte that will double its share of takeoff and landing slots at Paris' busy second airport Orly to 20 percent.
An Air France spokeswoman acknowledged BA's increased presence in France aviation would have an impact.
"It certainly has consequences for us. But we will continue with improving our product and service while cutting our costs and prices," she said.
After approval by the Creteil commercial court, scheduled to meet on Friday, and an Air Liberte creditors meeting due within a month, BA would take a 70 percent stake in loss-making Air Liberte.
A spokesman for Air France Europe, the domestic wing of the Air France operation, said the company had an 80 percent market stake on the routes it operates and 60 percent on the total French market.
But from April 1997, European liberalisation of the airline industry will fully throw open French airspace to competition.
The French government moved the door ajar at the start of 1996 by allowing competition on the busy Paris-Toulouse and Paris-Marseille routes which were controlled by state-owned Air Inter, part of the Air France group.
Other French airlines had been allowed to fly less busy domestic routes as well as European and international routes.
British Airways bought its first 49.9 percent stake in TAT in 1993 and obtained the remainder last July.
Air Liberte, AOM and TAT have all tried to carve out market share ahead of liberalisation with a price war against Air France Europe, the renamed Air Inter. As a result they have suffered financially.
AOM, headed by Alexandre de Couvelaire, had been in talks with Air Liberte with an eye to a merger but the worsening financial situation at Air Liberte, which sought creditor protection on September 26, made a deal impossible.
AOM, 99 percent owned by the Consortium de Realisation (CDR) which was set up to sell assets of bank Credit Lyonnais, is now going it alone with some 10 percent of the slot at Orly.
But industry sources said Air France could strike back in 1997 and make a bid for AOM to prevent another foreign airline from setting foot in France alongside British Airways.
Air France Europe plans to launch its "Shuttle" service between Paris and Toulouse next Monday, offering more departure times and a "turn up and go" service without reservations, as a major plank in its new commercial approach.
Other airlines in France are Air Littoral, owned by the Dufour family, the Dubreuil family's Regional airlines, Xavier Leclerq's Brit Airlines as well as Nouvelles Frontieres' Corsair and Euralair.
For Air France, these domestic lines are important potential feeder operations for its international operations.
Last week Air france signed cooperation pacts with Continental Airlines and Delta Airlines Inc of the U.S. and it aims to sign a similar deal with an Asian airline in 1997.
These pacts are based on the "hub and spoke" theory in which airlines boost traffic by taking passengers from a smaller airport to a big "hub" for long distance flights to another hub. From the second hub another smaller plane can be used to take the passenger to the final destination. ($1=5.157 French Franc)
French state-owned airline Air France said on Thursday it was ready to take on the toughening competition in its domestic market posed by British Airways Plc (BA).
BA's TAT French unit on Wednesday announced a joint 780 million franc bid ($151.2 million) with bank Rivaud for domestic carrier Air Liberte that will double its share of takeoff and landing slots at Paris' busy second airport Orly to 20 percent.
An Air France spokeswoman acknowledged BA's increased presence in France aviation would have an impact.
"It certainly has consequences for us. But we will continue with improving our product and service while cutting our costs and prices," she said.
After approval by the Creteil commercial court, scheduled to meet on Friday, and an Air Liberte creditors meeting due within a month, BA would take a 70 percent stake in loss-making Air Liberte.
A spokesman for Air France Europe, the domestic wing of the Air France operation, said the company had an 80 percent market stake on the routes it operates and 60 percent on the total French market.
But from April 1997, European liberalisation of the airline industry will fully throw open French airspace to competition.
The French government moved the door ajar at the start of 1996 by allowing competition on the busy Paris-Toulouse and Paris-Marseille routes which were controlled by state-owned Air Inter, part of the Air France group.
Other French airlines had been allowed to fly less busy domestic routes as well as European and international routes.
British Airways bought its first 49.9 percent stake in TAT in 1993 and obtained the remainder last July.
Air Liberte, AOM and TAT have all tried to carve out market share ahead of liberalisation with a price war against Air France Europe, the renamed Air Inter. As a result they have suffered financially.
AOM, headed by Alexandre de Couvelaire, had been in talks with Air Liberte with an eye to a merger but the worsening financial situation at Air Liberte, which sought creditor protection on September 26, made a deal impossible.
AOM, 99 percent owned by the Consortium de Realisation (CDR) which was set up to sell assets of bank Credit Lyonnais, is now going it alone with some 10 percent of the slot at Orly.
But industry sources said Air France could strike back in 1997 and make a bid for AOM to prevent another foreign airline from setting foot in France alongside British Airways.
Air France Europe plans to launch its "Shuttle" service between Paris and Toulouse next Monday, offering more departure times and a "turn up and go" service without reservations, as a major plank in its new commercial approach.
Other airlines in France are Air Littoral, owned by the Dufour family, the Dubreuil family's Regional airlines, Xavier Leclerq's Brit Airlines as well as Nouvelles Frontieres' Corsair and Euralair.
For Air France, these domestic lines are important potential feeder operations for its international operations.
Last week the company signed cooperation pacts with Continental Airlines and Delta Airlines Inc of the U.S. and Air France aims to sign a similar deal with an Asian ailrine in 1997.
These pacts are based on the "hub and spoke" theory in which airlines boost traffic by taking passengers from a smaller airport to a big "hub" for long distance flights to another hub. From the second hub another smaller plane can be used to take the passenger to the final destination. ($1=5.157 French Franc)
Jacques Maillot, the chairman of travel group Nouvelles Frontieres who dropped out of bidding for Air Liberte, is now talking to acquire airline AOM, a spokeswoman for his travel group said.
Maillot on Wednesday announced that he and partner Royal Air Maroc had withdrawn their participation in talks to rescue Air Liberte, in administration since September 26, because of the size of the financial commitment required.
A 780 million franc bid by British Airways Plc French TAT unit and bank Rivaud is now the only remaining on the table and expected to be approved by the Creteil commercial court on Friday.
But Maillot, also chairman of small French airline Corsair, told La Tribune that his withdrawal did not mean he had given up his ambitions to create a private French airline group.
"I remain a candidate for the takeover of AOM, that remains my priority," he told the paper. He was not immediately available for comment on Thursday.
Maillot had planned to buy Air Liberte with the help of Royal Air Maroc, holiday resorts group Club Mediterranee and Rivaud. In a second stage he had planned to enlarge his consortium to acquire AOM and merge Corsair, Air Liberte and AOM in a big French group to rival the state-owned Air France group.
AOM, created in 1991 by the merger of Air Outre Mer and Minerve, is owned by the Consortium de Realisation (CDR), a state entity charged with selling former assets of the Credit Lyonnais bank.
AOM is worth about one billion francs, according to industry sources. Maillot said that talks with the CDR had already started but he added that no timetable had been fixed.
"Before anything, we need to know the price of AOM. That is not the case today," he told La Tribune.
This summer, former AOM chairman Alexandre Couvelaire had been in talks with Air Liberte chairman and founder Lotfi Belhassine about a merger.
But the deteriorating financial situation at Air Liberte led to a break-up of talks. The CDR has since fired Couvelaire.
Couvelaire had a 10 percent stake in Air Liberte and previously headed small airline Euralair. He was appointed in June 1996 to replace Mark Rochet who had jumped ship to TAT.
In his statement on Wednesday, announcing his withdrawal from Air Liberte, Maillot said his ambitions were unchanged.
"The first tourist group in France, Nouvelles Frontieres, which is active in air transport since many years through its Corsair subsidiary, the only airline in France with systemic postive results since the takeover in 1990, remains available to participate in the constitution of a a private group of which the necessity seems, at least as far as words are concerned, to be felt unanimously and which has become more urgent today than yesterday," he said in the statement.
"It is necessary not to compromise the success of such an ambition which implies the both restucturing of the Groupe AOM and, later, the privatisation of Groupe Air France," he said.
"It is totally clear that there is urgency and there is no more time for hesitations," he added.
French chemicals and drugs group Rhone-Poulenc SA on Friday announced a larger than expected 13 percent rise in third quarter profits but said the increase would have been 25.1 percent but for a product recall.
Investors cheered the figures, encouraged by a good rise at its pharmaceuticals unit and the limited impact of the product recall. Rhone shares closed up 3.16 percent at 147 francs.
The company, which reported net income of 756 million francs ($147 million) versus 669 million at the same stage last year, said the earnings rise would have been almost twice as big but for the product recall.
Operating profit was 2.05 billion francs in the third quarter compared with 1.83 billion. Net sales were 20.47 billion francs, up from 19.62 billion.
Rhone-Poulenc and its Rhone-Poulenc Rorer U.S. drugs unit issued a profit warning on October 10 after the Centeon joint venture with Germany Hoechst recalled its albumin products due to the risk of bacterial infection.
Finance director Jean-Pierre Tirouflet reiterated that the recall would cut six to seven percent from analysts' forecasts for 1996 results.
Asked to comment on 1996 forecasts going as high as 2.75 billion francs, Tirouflet said: "I have lower forecasts in my head."
According to Jacques Chahine Finance, the market consensus for 1996 is 2.631 billion francs, rising to 3.426 billion in 1997, after 2.134 billion in 1995.
For the first nine months, net income was up 10.5 percent at 2.17 billion francs.
"This progress is a consequence of an improvement in results in the pharmaceutical, animal health and agro businesses," the company said.
"The figures are better than we had forecast," said analyst Guy Phillips at BZW in London. "Especially the operating profit at life sciences, pharmaceuticals pleased. It was an encouraging set of results."
Phillips said he may increase his profit per share forecast from eight francs to 8.5 francs. Brokers Leven in Paris said it saw no reason to make any adjustments to its forecast.
Rhone said the agro sector recorded a 14.7 percent increase in sales and a 54.9 percent rise in its profit contribution, due to a good global economic climate and the successful marketing of new products, especially Fipronil.
In chemicals and the fibres and polymers divisions, a rise in volumes failed to compensate for falling prices.
Operating profit on the chemicals side was relatively steady at 281 million francs versus 278 million, while in fibres and polymers it took a dive to 115 million from 248 million.
The company said it had completed sales of non-strategic assets to the tune of six billion francs by September 30 and that its net debt-to-equity ratio had fallen to 0.63 versus 0.72 at the end of 1995.
Tirouflet said Rhone expected assets sales to reach seven to nine billion francs by the end of the year.
Pharmaceutical earnings would grow in the fourth quarter as the synergy savings of the 1995 Fisons acquisition came through and because of new products, such as the June launch of anti-cancer drug Taxotere in the United States. ($1=5.141 French Franc)
French chemicals and drugs group Rhone-Poulenc SA on Friday announced a larger than expected 13 percent rise in third quarter profits.
The company, which reported net income of 756 million francs ($147 million) versus 669 million at the same stage last year, said the rise in earnings would have been 25.1 percent but for an expensive product recall.
Operating profit was 2.05 billion francs in the third quarter compared with 1.83 billion. Net sales were 20.47 billion francs, up from 19.62 billion.
The share market cheered the earnings figures, encouraged by a good rise at its pharmaceuticals unit and the limited impact of the product recall. At midday, Rhone shares were nearly two percent higher at 145.30 francs.
Rhone-Poulenc and its Rhone-Poulenc Rorer U.S. drugs unit issued a profit warning on October 10 after their Centeon joint venture with Germany Hoechst recalled albumin products due to the risk of bacterial infection.
The company is still working on replacing recalled stocks of the blood plasma products. Rhone-Poulenc took a 81 million franc charge in the third quarter and will take a total 1996 charge of 100 to 200 million francs.
Finance director Jean-Pierre Tirouflet reaffirmed the recall would cut six to seven percent from analysts' forecasts for the 1996 results.
Asked to comment on 1996 forecasts going as high as 2.75 billion francs, Tirouflet said: "I have lower forecasts in my head."
According to Jacques Chahine Finance, the market consensus for 1996 is 2.631 billion francs, rising to 3.426 billion in 1997, after 2.134 billion in 1995.
For the first nine months, net income was up 10.5 percent at 2.17 billion francs.
"This progress is a consequence of an improvement in results in the pharmaceutical, animal health and agro businesses," the company said.
"The figures are better than we had forecast," said analyst Guy Phillips at BZW in London. "Especially the operating profit at life sciences, pharmaceuticals pleased. It was an encouraging set of results."
Phillips said he may increase his profit per share forecast from eight francs to 8.5 francs. Brokers Leven in Paris said it saw no reason to make any adjustments to its forecast.
Rhone said the agro sector recorded a 14.7 percent increase in sales and a 54.9 percent rise in its profit contribution, due to a good global economic climate and the successful marketing of new products, especially Fipronil.
In chemicals and the fibres and polymers divisions, a rise in volumes failed to compensate for falling prices.
Operating profit on the chemicals side was relatively steady at 281 million francs versus 278 million, while in fibres and polymers it took a dive to 115 million from 248 million.
The company said it had completed sales of non-strategic assets to the tune of six billion francs by September 30 and that its net debt-to-equity ratio had fallen to 0.63 versus 0.72 at the end of 1995.
Tirouflet said Rhone expected assets sales to reach seven to nine billion francs by the end of the year.
Pharmaceutical earnings would grow in the fourth quarter as the synergy savings of the 1995 Fisons acquisition came through and because of new products, such as the June launch of anti-cancer drug Taxotere in the United States. ($1=5.141 French Franc)
Analysts were mixed on the Rhone-Poulenc SA third quarter results and some said they might raise full-year forecasts while others left forecasts unchanged.
"The figures are better than we had forecast," said analyst Guy Phillips at BZW in London.
"Especially the operating profit at life sciences, pharmaceuticals pleased. It was an encouraging set of results," he said.
Phillips said he was considering raising his profit per share forecast from eight francs to 8.5 francs.
But Brokers Leven in Paris said there was no reason to adjust estimates.
Shaw Bridges at Merill Lynch said that while health care earnings were better than expected, the performance of fibres and chemicals had been weaker. He kept his forecast for 1996 net attributable profit of 2.7 billion francs, against 2.134 billion in 1995.
He also maintained his "hold" rating for the shares because they were "fairly valued". He said the company was an attractive long-term investment.
Bridges said he expected a full-year provision of 500 million francs at Rhone-Poulenc, mainly at chemicals and fibres. Rhone took 1.73 billion in provisions in 1995.
"The results are in line with expectations. They confirm that Rhone-Poulenc is a company pulled forward by its pharmaceuticals and agro," said Liliane Gauffre at Paris brokers BNP Du Bouzet.
Rhone-Poulenc reported a third quarter net income of 756 million francs versus 669 million at the same stage last year and an operating profit of 2.054 billion francs versus 1.828 billion previously.
Net sales were 20.468 billion francs versus 19.621 billion.
For the first nine months, net income was up 10.5 percent at 2.166 billion francs.
The operating profit at health sciences, which includes pharmaceuticals and animal health, jumped to 1.583 billion francs from 977 billion.
Finance director Jean-Pierre Tirouflet said the increase was in line with the company's forecasts about the synergy effects of the acquisition of Fisons in 1995 and was also due to new products.
He cited the anti-cancer drug Taxotere, Lovenox, Granocyte as well as Hepatitis A and B vaccines as examples.
Tirouflet also said there had been good sales in anti-fever vaccines in the United States.
But brokers Lehman Brothers said Taxotere and Rilutek were taking off slowly. It downgraded the share to neutral from outperform, after a good recent run.
Thierry le Francois of Massonaud said he expected a 1996 net income of 2.5 billion and further charges for the recall of albumin products. He re-itereated his buy advice on the share.
-- Paris newsroom +33 1 4221 5452
The planned sale of state-owned Thomson Multimedia to Daewoo Electronics has whipped up a storm of protest, which on Monday drove down shares in the Korean company's French partner Lagardere Groupe.
Lagardere shares closed nearly seven-percent lower on Monday on investor worries about the backlash of the Thomson sale that risks clouding the outlook for future French privatisations.
French opposition parties, labour unions and most French people, according to polls, are unhappy with the government's plan to sell Thomson SA, the world's fourth biggest television set maker and a leading defence group, to Lagardere and Daewoo for a symbolic one franc.
Thomson Multimedia workers protested against the deal on Friday and plan a demonstration in November against what they have likened to an enforced "fire sale."
The mounting opposition and the strongly nationalist tone, could augur badly for foreign buyer interest in future privatisations as the government prepares to sell insurer GAN, Credit Lyonnais and Air France.
The backlash also took the steam out of a rally in shares in Lagardere, which had risen as much as 32 percent after the government announced on October 16 that it had selected it over rival Alcatel Alsthom to buy Thomson.
Thomson has a 58-percent stake in defence group Thomson-CSF and 100-percent of Thomson Multimedia (TMM), a leader in new digital images technology.
"Lagardere is down because of the recent news articles that put in doubt the Thomson deal," a dealer said.
French Finance Minister Jean Arthuis said on Monday the procedure followed by the government was "sheltered from all politicial criticism."
The government tilted toward Lagardere's bid because of the defense connection. Lagardere plans to merge its Matra unit with Thomson-CSF and sell TMM to Daewoo -- also for one franc.
"The public authorities focused on the military aspect of the Thomson deal. They neglected the civilian (consumer electronics) aspect...it's now sticking in their throats," said the newsletter La Lettre de l'Expansion.
A survey of 1,004 voters published by the newspaper La Tribune found 72 percent disapproved of the sale price, saying it did not reflect TMM's value. Only 12 percent agreed with the government that the price was right given the group's debts.
TMM is saddled with the bulk of Thomson's debt, expected to reach 28 billion francs ($5.44 billion) by the end of the year.
Loser Alcatel broke its silence on Friday and said it would not have sold control of TMM to a foreign group but put together a 50-50 joint venture with an Asian partner.
"This new group would have formed the basis of a global industrial project in which French interests would have been solidly represented," Alcatel said in a statement.
The deal hinges on the approvals of France's Privatisation Commission and the European Commission, and speculation is rising that the privatisation commission -- which had been expected to make only a procedural review -- may turn into a more serious stumbling block.
The commission, a body of seven independent experts chaired by Pierre Laurent, has the mandate to ensure that any deal reflects the value of the company.
"Of course, they can disagree with the government," a Finance Ministry official said. "If they agree, the deal can go ahead. If they disagree, the privatisation procedure has to be started over again," he added.
($1=5.151 French Franc)
French Finance Minister Jean Arthuis said on Monday the procedure followed in the planned sale of Thomson SA was beyond criticism.
France's independent privatisation commission, however, always had the right to block the deal, he added.
"It is my conviction that the procedure followed by the government is unassailable. The law has been respected," Arthuis told Reuters on Monday.
"The privatisation commission is an independent body. It has full authority and I cannot prejudge the decision it will take. It is sovereign," he said.
Thomson's planned privatisation has raised a storm of criticism in France. The opposition Socialists and Communists in the National Assembly have called for a committee of inquiry into the conditions of Thomson's privatisation.
The French privatisation commission, comprising seven "wise men", is currently assessing the value of Thomson SA and its proposed sale to Lagardere Groupe and Daewoo Electronics. The commission is expected to issue its decision early December.
Commission members are appointed by decree for five years during which they cannot hold any other function.
The commission is currently chaired by Pierre Laurent, a former section chairman at the country's highest constitutional authority, the Conseil d'Etat or State Council.
Its members are Pierre Alby, a honorary chairman of Gaz de France, Andre Blanc, Daniel Deguen, honorary chairman of bank Credit Commercial de France, Daniel Hua, honorary managing director of bank Societe Generale, Jean Serise and Jean Pineau.
The Bank of France's Francoise Pallo-Guillabert is the commission secretary general.
The commission has the task of determining the value of state assets which are being sold, and to express an opinion about the government's choice.
A spokeswoman for the Finance Ministry said that the goverment always made its preference clear to the commission but sofar has never publicly stated its preference.
In the case of Thomson, however, Arthuis judged it necessary to publish the government's preference to avoid insider dealing because both bidders, Lagardere and Alcatel Alsthom, are quoted companies.
There is only one case known where the privatisation commission did not agree with the government -- at the start of 1996 the commission opposed the sale of the state's 83.3 percent stake Radio Monte Carlo (RMC) because it considered the bids too low.
"The first thing the commission has to do is to establish the value of Thomson and see whether indeed it is worth minus 11 billion francs, as both bidders say," a ministry official said.
"After that they will have to express their opinion on the government's choice," he added.
If the privatisation commission's decision, expected by the end of the year, would be in line with the government's preference there still remain hurdles.
The European Commission in Brussels has to agree with the planned state capital injection of 11 billion francs and has to consider the competition aspects of the deal.
The planned sale of state-owned Thomson Multimedia to Daewoo Electronics has whipped up a storm of protest which on Monday drove down shares in the Korean company's French partner Lagardere Groupe.
Lagardere shares were down more than five percent at midday on investor worries about the backlash of the Thomson sale that risks clouding the outlook for future French privatisations.
French opposition parties, labour unions and most French people, according to polls, are unhappy with the government's plan to sell Thomson, the world's fourth biggest television set maker, to Lagardere and Daewoo for one franc.
Thomson Multimedia workers protested against the deal on Friday and plan a demonstration in November against what they have likened to an enforced "fire sale".
The mounting opposition, and the strongly nationalist tone, could augur badly for foreign buyer interest in future privatisations as the government prepares to sell insurer GAN, Credit Lyonnais and Air France.
The backlash also took the steam out of a rally in shares in Lagardere, which had risen as much as 32 percent after the government announced on October 16 that it had selected it over rival Alcatel Alsthom to buy Thomson Multimedia (TMM)- also a leader in the new digital technology.
"Lagardere is down because of the recent news articles that put in doubt the Thomson deal," a dealer said.
French Finance Minister Jean Arthuis said on Monday the procedure followed by the government was "sheltered from all politicial criticism".
Thomson owns 58 percent of defence firm Thomson-CSF and 100 percent of TMM.
The government tilted toward Lagardere's bid because of the defense connection. Lagardere plans to merge its Matra unit with Thomson-CSF and sell TMM to Daewoo -- also for one franc.
"The public authorities focused on the military aspect of the Thomson deal. They neglected the civilian (consumer electronics) aspect...it's now sticking in their throats," said the newsletter La Lettre de l'Expansion.
A survey of 1,004 voters published by the newspaper La Tribune found 72 percent disapproved of the sale price, saying it did not reflect TMM's value. Only 12 percent agreed with the government that the price was right given the group's debts.
TMM is saddled with the bulk of Thomson's debt, expected to reach 28 billion francs ($5.44 billion) by the end of the year.
Loser Alcatel broke its silence on Friday and said it would not have sold control of TMM to a foreign group but put together a 50-50 joint venture with an Asian partner.
"This new group would have formed the basis of a global industrial project in which French interests would have been solidly represented," Alcatel said in a statement.
The newspaper Les Echos said in an unsourced report on Monday that Alcatel had also pledged to transfer to the state any capital gain on the sale of part of TMM.
The deal hinges on the approvals of France's Privatisation Commission and the European Commission, and speculation is rising that the privatisation commission -- which had been expect to make only a procedural review -- may turn into a more serious stumbling block.
The commission, a body of seven independent experts chaired by Pierre Laurent, has the mandate to ensure that any deal reflects the value of the company.
"Of course they can disagree with the government," a Finance Ministry official said. "If they agree, the deal can go ahead. If they disagree, the privatisation procedure has to be started over again," he added.
($1=5.151 French Franc)
French Prime Minister Alain Juppe said on Tuesday he wanted a public debate on the planned privatisation of electronics group Thomson SA after an outcry over an earlier government decision.
"Once the (privatisation commission) has delivered its ruling, and whatever its content, I will ask for a public debate on all the issues of this case, financial, industrial and social, so that we can have all the cards on the table before the government decides and everybody takes their responsibilities," Juppe told parliament during question time.
The government said on October 16 it wanted to sell loss-making and indebted Thomson SA to books-to-missiles conglomerate Lagardere Groupe instead of to industrial and telecommunications group Alcatel Alsthom.
The government planned to sell Thomson for a symbolic franc after an 11 billion franc ($2 billion) capital increase.
Lagardere plans to merge Thomson's 58-percent owned Thomson-CSF defence electronics group with its own Matra Defence Espace into the world's second-biggest defence electronics group.
As part of its plan, it agreed to sell Thomson's wholly-owned consumer electronics group Thomson Multimedia to Daewoo Electronics of South Korea, also for a franc.
Juppe told parliament on Tuesday that he personally made the decision to favour Lagardere because it was in the best interests of the country's defence industry and job market.
The Privatisation Commission, a body of seven independent experts, is currently studying both offers and has to state whether the bids reflect the true value of Thomson and whether it agrees with the government's preference.
Its decision is expected in early December.
Normally, a privatisation can go ahead if the commission agrees with the government preference, but the sale procedure has to be restarted if the commission does not agree.
The government normally does not announce its preference but Finance Minister Jean Arthuis said he decided to do so to avoid any insider dealing in shares of Lagardere, Alcatel or Thomson-CSF.
"I don't see them turning back on their decision," a share trader said about the debate. "I think they're doing this to allow them to respond to criticism and explain their decision."
Thomson Multimedia's labour unions are upset by declarations by Juppe that their company was not worth one franc, but minus 14 billion francs, the level of its debts.
Thomson Multimedia chairman Alain Prestat told Le Monde on Tuesday the company would be automatically profitable from 1998 due to technology licensing rights.
The company made a 2.8 billion franc loss in the first half of 1996, Prestat said.
Another criticism also emerged about the way the government announced its preference before the Privatisation Commission had studied the offers.
Lionel Jospin, first secretary of the Socialist Party and rival to Jacques Chirac in last year's presidential elections, openly wondered whether the government had acted illegally.
"I was shocked by the method, which was despicable and perhaps even illegal," he told a television interviewer on October 20.
($1=5.113 French Franc)
South Korea's Daewoo Electronics on Thursday defended a proposed controversial deal to buy France's Thomson Multimedia by pledging to make investments in the company.
The head of Daewoo Electronics and the founder of its parent company tried to allay French fears through interviews in two leading French newspapers, promising hefty investment and a long term commitment to the country.
The chairman of Daewoo Electronics, Bae Soon-hoon, was trying to counter criticism about a South Korean company acquiring leading-edge French digital television technology cheaply. He said his company would spend at least 10 billion french francs ($1.9 billion) on TMM.
French Finance Minister Jean Arthuis meanwhile reaffirmed that the government was set on selling defence and consumer electronics group Thomson SA to Lagardere Groupe and Daewoo even if Prime Minister Juppe wanted a public debate on the sale of the state group.
Juppe told parliament on Tuesday he would call a debate on the sale, for one symbolic franc, after an 11 billion franc ($2.2 billion) capital injection, in reaction to a public outcry and criticism from opposition parties and also from within his own coalition.
Arthuis dismissed criticism on the government's decision to sell the company by way of a private placement instead of a public sale.
"This is a company that could not be privatised through a public offer," Arthuis told reporters at a press briefing on Thursday. "How could we ask several investors to bid on a company with a negative net value."
Thomson has debts of some 14 billion francs.
Lagardere wants to merge Thomson SA's 58-percent-owned and profitable defence group Thomson-CSF with its Matra unit and sell loss-making consumer electronics group Thomson Multimedia (TMM) to Daewoo Electronics.
The state's Privatisation Commission is currently studying both the preferred bid by Lagardere/Daewoo and one by Alcatel Alsthom and is expected to give its opinion in early December.
The chairman of Daewoo Electronics said his company would spend at least 10 billion francs on TMM in an effort to still the rising criticism about the deal.
"In total, the immediate cost of acquisition and recapitalisation of Thomson Multimedia for Daewoo is some 10 billion francs. But these 10 billion are only a first stage," Bae Soon-hoon told the La Tribune Desfosses newspaper, breaking his self-imposed silence on Daewoo's bid details.
He said South Korea and France had increasingly direct links, adding that French companies had sold the TGV high-speed train and nuclear power stations to his country and were planning to sell battle planes and other weapons.
France's trade minister Yves Galland is due to travel to South Korea on Monday to promote the country's economic interests during a trip lasting until Thursday.
France hopes to sell Dassault Rafale combat planes to South Korea to monitor its northern Communist neighbour.
Kim Woo-choong, chairman and founder of the Daewoo conglomerate, told France's Liberation newspaper in Seoul that big Japanese companies would want to see the Thomson deal fail.
"Certain big international electronics companies are against ths deal because they believe that the merger would make Daewoo too competitive," Woo-choong said, adding, "These big companies are perhaps busy lobbying the French government."
Liberation said he referred to Japanese companies.
"The French government cannot come back on its decision if there is not an important reason to do so," Woo-choong said.
($1=5.102 French Franc)
Storage Technology Corp on Tuesday said it had signed a deal with the Swedish patent office for the sale of a disc-based storage system and was in talks with the Chinese patent office about a similar deal.
The two events follow an earlier system sale to the European Patent Office, based in The Hague.
"It's too early to talk about the details of the Chinese deal, we are still in discussions. It can still take some time before we have a contract," Campbell McGarvie, vice-president Europe, Africa and Midle East, said in an interview.
He gave no financial details of the Swedish deal.
StorageTek, based in Louisville, Colorado, specialises in the storage and retrieval of digital information and increasingly is moving away from digital documents to bit-map images. Bit-map images are digital pictures. Bit-map images open up the possibility of storing medical scans or video images. Potential users of StorageTek's new products are members of the medical profession or broadcasters.
StorageTek has disc-based products as well as tape-based products. In tape, it makes products for such companies as Siemens and Cie des Machines Bull.
On August 19, the company signed a deal with AT&amp;T Corp's NCR unit under which NCR will market its Timberwolf tape system, a system for storing information.
But the NCR deal is less far reaching than a June 10 deal with International Business Machines Corp under which StorageTek will make IBM branded products.
The U.S. Justice Department is investigating the deal and in particular is looking at the possibility of anticompetitive practices in the direct-access storage devices industry. Pending completion of the probe, the deal cannot be finalised. Earlier this month, both StorageTek and IBM have said the inquiry was routine and expected.
Financial analysts say that, should the deal go through, it could add hundreds of millions of dollars to StorageTek's revenues.
"That was a major deal, it was big change for IBM. Never before had IBM allowed another company to build such major components as storage facilities," McGarvie said.
According to the IDC research buro, StorageTek had an 11 percent share of the disc-based storage market in the first quarter of 1996 while IBM had a 30 percent stake.
Should the deal go through, the two companies would hold just under half of the market, estimated for 1997 at 3,500 terrabytes (one thousand mega bytes), valued at $3.5 billion. The combined market share could grow to more than 50 percent in the next few years.
EMC Corp is currently market leader with 43 percent, and Japan's Hitachi Ltd Hitachi Data has a share of over 11 percent.
"The deal is mutually exclusive. IBM will also fund our research and while we begin with the Iceberg product it will also involve new products," McGarvie said. The Iceberg, a StorageTek product, is a storage system for discs.
StorageTek's Toulouse facility in France, opened in June 1995, will make IBM-branded products and the deal is expected to speed up the unit's expansion.
At Toulouse, some 100 people work on manufacturing and research and development. Storagetek is committed to increase this to 470 people within four years and McGarvie said that this would now easily be met, probably sooner than in four years.
In the medical imaging and video market, StorageTek sees a lot of opportunities but for the moment it has not yet signed big deals. "We are in discussions for some deals which could be concluded next year," French marketing manager Eric Debray said.
On a horizon of five to 10 years, McGarvie believes the company could reap benefits from the Internet and Intranet online network services, coupling its storage facilities to online retrieval systems.
StorageTek acquired the company Network Systems about a year ago. This company offers network solutions as well as security products such as Borderguard, which is a "firewall" products.
A firewall shields sensitive internal computer information from the public internet and aims to prevent hackers from breaking into commercially vital information data bases.
"It's one of the main worries at the moment. Many companies want to go on the net but they fear that they will open up their internal systems to possible intrusion," McGarvie said.
-- Paris newsroom +33 1 4221 5452
South Korea's Daewoo Electronics staged a charm campaign on Wednesday with newspaper advertisements after fierce criticism about its plans to buy France's state-owned loss-making Thomson Multimedia.
Under a banner "Do you know the dwarf Daewoo?", the 34th biggest world company" the group tried to counter growing resentment in France that a "tiny" South Korean company was set to buy a "leading" French group for one symbolic franc.
France's Privatisation Commission will state in early December whether it agrees with a government plan to sell defence and consumer electronics Thomson SA to Lagardere Groupe for one franc after an 11 billion franc ($2.1 billion) capital injection.
Lagardere will sell Thomson Multimedia, a maker of televisions and video recorders and a leader in digital video technology, to Daewoo.
Prime Minister Alain Juppe, giving in a little to opposition from the Socialist Party and some members of his majority, last week said there would be a parliamentary debate before the final government decision on the deal. But the debate will not be followed by a parliament vote on the proposal.
In full-page advertisements in most French newspapers on Wednesday, Daewoo said that its electronics arm had about the same sales figure as Thomson Multimedia, at some 40 billion francs, although with a profit which the French company lacks.
It said that its global sales network, especially in Asia, would allow better market access for Thomson's new products such as flat screen television sets and televisions that can be connected to the Internet computer network.
The company also said that "Daewoo believes in France" and said it had made investments in the country and had close ties with a number of French companies.
"Contrary to all other competitors who have based themselves in or moved to neighbouring countries, Daewoo has chosen France. Simply because it believes in France".
Parliamentarians of the Communist Party are organising a seminar on the privatisation of Thomson on November 13. They want the promised parliament debate to be televised and joined a call by the Socialist Party for an inquiry commission to study the way the government came to its decision.
The European Commission, meanwhile, is studying the Lagardere bid as well as a rival offer by Alcatel Alsthom and could make its findings on competition issues and the state cash injection known by December 4.
Lagardere finance dirtector Philippe Camus said on Wednesday that a change in the government's decision would be a "total catastrophe in the international financial community".
Speaking to a seminar organised by brokers Ferri, Camus said he did not understand the hostility toward Daewoo.
"Daewoo has made commitments on jobs and people say to them, Out! France is going to have a big credibility problem," he said.
Camus said Lagardere had had "37 contacts in the whole world. Everybody ran away from the deal, except the Korean group Daewoo," he said. ($1=5.143 French Franc)
South Korea's Daewoo Electronics staged a charm campaign on Wednesday with newspaper advertisements after fierce criticism about its plans to buy state-owned loss-making Thomson Multimedia.
Under a banner "Do you know the dwarf Daewoo?, the 34th biggest world company" the group tried to counter a growing resentment in France that a "tiny" South Korean company was set to buy a "leading" French group for one symbolic franc.
France's Privatisation Commission will state in early December whether its agrees with a government plan to sell defence and consumer electronics Thomson SA to Lagardere Groupe for one franc after an 11 billion franc capital injection.
Lagardere will sell Thomson Multimedia, a maker of televisions and video recorders and a leader in digital video technology, to Daewoo.
Prime Minister Alain Juppe, giving in a little to opposition from the Socialist Party and some members of his majority, last week said there would be a parliamentary debate before the final government decision on the deal. But the debate will not be followed by a parliament vote on the proposal.
In full-page advertisements in most French newspapers on Wednesday, Daewoo said that its electronics arm had about the same sales figure as Thomson Multimedia, at some 40 billion francs, although with a big profit which the French company lacks.
It said that its global sales network, especially in Asia, would allow better market access for Thomson's new products such as flat screen television sets and televisions that can be connected to the Internet computer network.
The company also said that "Daewoo believes in France" and said it had made investments in the country and had close ties with a number of French companies.
"Contrary to all other competitors who have based themselves or moved to neighbouring countries, Daewoo has chosen France. Simply because it believes in France".
Parliamentarians of the Communist Party are organising a seminar on the privatisation of Thomson on November 13. They want the promised parliament to be televised and join a call by the Socialist Party for an inquiry commission to study the way the government came to its decision.
The European Commission, meanwhile, is studying the Lagardere bid as well as a rival offer by Alcatel Alsthom and could make its findings on competition issues and the state cash injection known by December 4.
Dutch Philips Electronics has sounded out Commission officials about the posibility of lodging a complaint agaisnt the capital injection for its rival Thomson Multimedia but a spokesman in Eindhoven said the company was at the moment not planning such a complaint.
French media keep speculating that some minisiters, mainly Industry Minister Franck Borotra, are hoping for the Privatisation Commission to declare the bid void because of the size of the capital injection.
Le Nouvel Economiste, a two-weekly paper, said that Philips, Samsung and Toshiba had all turned down offers from Lagardere to acquire Thomson Multimedia.
In the case of Philips this was because of competition concerns, the paper said.
Shares in French sports equipment maker Groupe Salomon SA fell sharply for the second day in a row on Thursday after a long and steady rise which saw the share more than double in value this year.
Dealers said that the company, headed by Jean-Francois Gautier and based in the mountain region of Annecy in the east of France, had become the victim of a number of rumours which cast a pall over the dynamic picture of the company.
Salomon executives were in London on Thursday on the second day of an investors' road-show, discussing the recent first half sales figures.
"There are two rumours in the market. One is that a Japanese distributor has gone bankrupt, which could cost the company money, and the other is that the roadshow is going badly," a share dealer said.
Salomon was down 17 francs, or 3.83 percent, at 427 francs at 1141 GMT after having given in 26 francs on Wednesday.
"In fact one of our distributors in Japan, Olympic Sports Co has gone bankrupt. But that is already in the first half figures and it will not change anything on the group level," Salomon spokeswoman Linda Champtenois told Reuters.
Olympic Sports applied for court mediation with creditors on September 20 with debts of 34.83 billion yen and the Japan Securities Dealers Association (JSDA) cancelled the company's Over-the-Counter registration.
Salomon's Champtenois said that "everybody knows about the difficult market for winter sport equipment in Japan" and brushed off the effect on Salomon's results.
Meanwhile Salomon's Japanese subsidiary Salomon &amp; Taylor Made Co was trading in Tokyo at 810 yen, just above its life low of 790 yen and far below its year high of 1,790 yen. It was introduced on the OTC market in November 1995 at 1,800 yen.
On November 5, the Japanese unit reduced its parent six-months net results forecast to 288 million yen from 620 million yen and a comparable figure of 556 million.
Champtenois said that the roadshow in London had been long planned, followed on a September 30 visit to Edinburgh and was "going fine".
French dealers said that even if the rumours were unfounded and the Japan effect limited, they were a catalyst for profit-taking, especially now that the French market has hit a year high at a level not seen since in 1994.
Salomon has been a stock market darling. From a low of 171.50 francs on March 14 in 1995, Salomon rose to an all-time high of 494 francs on October 22 this year.
On October 30, it said its first half sales to end September, at constant currency rates, rose by 21.8 percent to 2.021 billion francs.
While hiking equipment -- walking boots and mountain gear -- was up by 68 percent and the Taylor Made golf equipment brand had a 77 percent increase in sales. Winter equipment, however, was down 16 percent. The Mavic cycle brand was up 4.1 percent.
Salomon had earlier forecast that its operating results for the 1996/97 year would be stable due to the cost of further diversification into snowboards with the aqcuisiion of Bonfire and the planned launch of new boards, shoes and fixtures in 1997 as well as new roller skates in 1998.
In the year to March 1996, Salomon made a net attributable profit of 308 million francs against 161 million last year.
-- Paris newsroom +33 1 4221 5452
French carmakers Renault SA and Peugeot PSA said on Wednesday that they were in talks with the government on a long-term plan to rejuvenate their workforce.
But the companies did not confirm a newspaper report they were seeking approval for a five-year plan to cut 40,000 jobs in an early retirement scheme in exchange for hiring 14,000 young people. Newspaper Les Echos said the cost of these operations could be 30 billion francs ($6 billion).
"Our chairman Louis Schweitzer and Peugeot chairman Jacques Calvet have written a letter to Prime Minister Alain Juppe in July with a proposal," a Renault spokeswoman said.
"There have been discussions since but the government has not yet replied," she added.
At Peugeot, officials declined to comment on the existence of the letter but a spokesman said that the French car industry needed to rejuvenate its work force.
"In France, the average age of a car worker is 42 to 43 years but our competitors, especially Asian, have an average age of below 30 years," the Peugeot spokesman said.
He said that this gave Peugeot and Renault a competitive handicap at a time when the markets are increasingly being opened up -- from 1999 a quota system limiting Japanese car imports in Europe will be lifted.
Younger workers are not only cheaper but also more flexible and open to new techniques such as "empowerment" - a management idea giving workers more responsibility for their own work, the Peugeot official said.
At Renault the average age is 45 years. "We have old factories, the oldest is at Flins which dates from the war, and therefore the average age is rather high," the Renault spokeswoman said.
Renault had a worldwide staff of 139,950 people at the end of 1995. Of them, 72,163 were involved in car production in France.
At PSA Peugeot Citroen, the group number is 139,900 of whom 122,600 are in car production in France.
French car makers are experiencing difficulties and a two-year government old-for-new car incentive scheme has not helped to overcome market problems.
The French auto industry is hit by increased competition from Asian rivals as well as by the strength of the franc.
Renault expects to end 1995 in the red after posting a net attributable profit of 2.1 billion francs in 1995 while Peugeot reported a drop in first half net attributable profits to 602 million francs against 1.22 billion last year.
Renault is cutting 1,650 jobs in 1996 through early retirement and partial early retirement schemes and will in January start negotiations with its labour unions about the 1997 restructuring plan.
At Peugeot, there is a reduction of 3,000 to 4,000 in the job numbers each year and there too, new negotiations are due to start early 1997.
"French carmakers have a record of trying to adapt to the market conditions without resorting to mass lay-offs, like for instance our German neighbours have done," the spokesman said.
($1=5.057 French Franc)
France's state-owned electricity utility Electricite de France (EDF) said on Wednesday it had made a 850 million franc asset gain selling its 10 percent stake in Sweden's Sydkraft AB to Norway's Statkraft SF.
"It allows us to realise a big asset gain and the deal is also the start of an alliance with Statkraft," EDF chairman Edmond Alphandery told a news conference.
EDF officials said the alliance with Statkraft, also a state-owned utility, would mainly be in the form of cooperation in hydroelectric projects in southeast Asia.
EDF is selling its 6.808 million class A and 12.395 million class C shares in Sydkraft AB to Statkraft for a sum of 2.130 billion francs. This allows the Norwegian firm to increase its stake in Sydkraft to 15 percent. The formal transfer of ownership will take place in November.
EDF took its stake in Sydkraft, Sweden's biggest power firm, two years ago but it changed its strategy in April when its Northelec unit obtained a 25 percent stake in Graningeverkens AB, Sweden's number six power group. It later raised the stake.
Northelec is a joint venture with Skanska.
"It's better to have a big stake in a small company than to have a small stake in a big company," Alphandery said.
"At Sydkraft we did not even have a seat on the board, at Graninge we have a shareholders' pact allowing us to effectively control the company," he added.
EDF has a shareholders pact with Sweden's industrial family Versteegh and jointly they own 54 percent of Graninge.
"We saw the strategic value of the Nordic market and we have been able to cash in on the asset gain because the value of Sydkraft shares has risen a lot," he said.
Alphandery, a former economics minister named to EDF in November to replace Gilles Menage who was an appointee of the former Socialist government and an aide to Francois Mitterand, said the sale was proof of EDF's willingness to "realise an asset gain when there is one."
He did not expect further sales from EDF's international portfolio. The French utility in 1996 alone has made commitments totalling 4.6 billion francs in foreign stakes and Alphandery said EDF would continue its expansion mainly in the Mercosur area in Latin America and in southeast Asia including China.
EDF obtained a stake in Brazil's Rio de Janeiro power utility Light and Edenor in Argentina. Last year, it obtained stakes in two Hungarian companies. It als has investments in Italy, Spain, Portugal, Ivory Coast and South Africa.
"We can use the asset gain on Sydkraft to finance our international expansion," Alphandery said.
"This refocusing of Northern European strategy shows EDF's desire to be a major international and industrial operator, actively managing its investment portfolio," EDF said.
EDF's decision to leave Sydkraft makes Germany's Preussen Elektra AG, a unit of Veba AG, the biggest shareholder with 17.6 percent of shares and 27.1 percent of votes. The city of Malmo is second biggest with 11.8 percent of shares and 18.9 percent of votes, followed by Statkraft and some pension funds.
Sydkraft has a 20 percent stake in Graninge and Veba's Preussenelektra 12.4 percent.
French carmakers Renault SA and Peugeot PSA said on Wednesday that they were in talks with the government on a long-term plan to rejuvenate their workforce.
But the companies did not confirm a newspaper report they were seeking approval for a five-year plan to cut 40,000 jobs in an early retirement scheme in exchange for hiring 14,000 young people. Newspaper Les Echos said the cost of these operations could be 30 billion francs ($6 billion).
"Our chairman Louis Schweitzer and Peugeot chairman Jacques Calvet have written a letter to Prime Minister Alain Juppe in July with a proposal," a Renault spokeswoman said.
"There have been discussions since but the government has not yet replied," she added.
At Peugeot, officials declined to comment on the existence of the letter but a spokesman said that the French car industry needed to rejuvenate its work force.
"In France, the average age of a car worker is 42 to 43 years but our competitors, especially Asian, have an average age of below 30 years," the Peugeot spokesman said.
He said that this gave Peugeot and Renault a competitive handicap at a time when the markets are increasingly being opened up -- from 1999 a quota system limiting Japanese car imports in Europe will be lifted.
Younger workers are not only cheaper but also more flexible and open to new techniques such as "empowerment" - a management idea giving workers more responsibility for their own work, the Peugeot official said.
At Renault the average age is 45 years. "We have old factories, the oldest is at Flins which dates from the war, and therefore the average age is rather high," the Renault spokeswoman said.
Renault had a worldwide staff of 139,950 people at the end of 1995. Of them, 72,163 were involved in car production in France.
At PSA Peugeot Citroen, the group number is 139,900 of whom 122,600 are in car production in France.
French car makers are experiencing difficulties and a two-year government old-for-new car incentive scheme has not helped to overcome market problems.
($1=5.057 French Franc)
The French government has started a wide consultation on one of the thorniest issues in the future liberalised telecommunications sector -- the costs of interconnection charged to operators by France Telecom.
With Germany's Deutsche Telekom starting share trading on Monday, France is taking a further step in preparing its own telecommunications operator for the share market.
Francois Fillon, minister for Post and Telecommunications, has written to the main current and future players in the field soliciting their comments before November 30.
In a statement, the ministry said it was preparing two decrees to be published at the start of 1997.
One will set up the general conditions and tarification principles for interconnection agreements and another will set the time limit for the litigation procedures. The ministry is proposing a period of three months, which could be extended to six months if the complaining party agrees.
Both decrees concern the new French telecommunications regulatory authority, which will be in place in early 1997 but has not yet been named.
Under the French plans for market liberalisation, France Telecom will keep running the national infrastructure and will be responsible for the public service of telephone access for all French people.
While other operators can use alternative networks, there needs to be agreement on the prices of interconnection for a call from a subscriber to one operator to the receiver who subscribes to another operator, or the price for carrying this call over a stretch of the territory.
This price for interconnection is very important for the business models of new rivals in fixed telecommunications such as the Cegetel venture of Generale des Eaux, Mannesmann, SBC and British Telecommunications and the grouping of Bouygues and Italy's STET.
At the moment, Generale des Eaux's SFR mobile telecommunications operator says it is the biggest client of France Telecom.
For France Telecom, currently France's most profitable company, the pricing decision is also of the biggest importance for its future profit streams and therefore for the market valuation for its pending partial privatisation in April.
The French government is expected to float a first tranche of 25 percent in France Telecom in April.
By deciding on the interconnection costs in early 1997, the ministry takes away a major uncertainty for financial analysts in calculating their cash flow models for France Telecom and, thus, its value.
Brokers Barclays de Zoete Wedd, in a June report on France Telecom, estimated that interconnection revenues for France Telecom could rise from an estimated 311 million francs ($61.1 million) in 1996 to 2.024 billion francs in 1998 and 4.598 billion francs in 2000.
-- Paris Newsroom +331 4221 5452 ($ = 5.086 French Francs)
Cie Generale des Eaux on Tuesday launched its bid to become the main rival to state-owned France Telecom with the start a fixed-line telephone network in a residential area in this southern city.
"Local telecommunications are for CEGETEL a major strategic axis," Philippe Glotin, managing director of Generale's telecoms unit CEGETEL, told a news conference.
He said the group aims to have a market share in 2003 yielding 40 billion francs ($7.9 billion) in annual sales, of which more than half would come from mobile communications.
In mobile telecommunications, Generale already competes with France Telecom with its SFR unit and it is allied to British Telecom Plc and MCI for business services.
SFR expects to have one million customers by March 1997, Glotin said, against some 725,000 at the moment.
The local residential market is expected to grow at a moderate pace but nevertheless represent 55 billion francs in annual sales by 2003.
Glotin said he aimed at gaining a 40 percent share in mobiles, 20 percent in long-distance and 10 percent for so-called local loops, or small networks.
CEGETEL, which counts BT, Mannesmann and SBC of the United States among its owners, has received permission from the French authorities for a telecoms experiment in Nice and from the start of 1997 it will offer residential telecoms services, using DECT technology.
The version of DECT, digitally-enhanced cordless telephone, applied in Nice uses radio waves to connect buildings to a telephone switch while the connections inside the building are of the classical type using a telephone socket.
DECT is also available in totally wireless versions.
The Nice experiment is small, with Glotin expecting 1,000 to 3,000 subscribers by the end of 1997, but it is a precursor of CEGETEL's assault on France Telecom and the company would invest three billion francs in local loops with radio links in the coming years to hone its skills ahead of market liberalisation in 1998.
A DECT service in Paris is expected to be ready in 1998 as the biggest part of an initial series of 30 towns which will add up to a population of some 10 million inhabitants.
In Nice, subscribers pay between 20 and 50 francs per month for a subscription, get a 10 percent discount on calls using the France Telecom network and pay about 0.22 francs per minute for local calls.
The CEGETEL shareholders will inject 6.8 billion francs at the start of 1997 to fund investments. Glotin said that the final make-up of CEGETEL's sharecapital would be known by year-end but he said it would be very close to the October agreement with BT taking 25 percent, SBC 15 percent and Mannesmann 10 percent.
"Changes are within the five percent limit," he said.
Glotin said that the success of CEGETEL, or any other rival to France Telecom in France, depended to a large extent on the interconnection costs and other payments telecom operators have to make to France Telecom to use its installations.
Telecommunications minister Francois Fillon has started a wide consultation, set to end on November 30, in order to establish in early 1997 a price list of the services France Telecom can provide to its rivals.
"The level of the interconnection costs for us means either the right to live of the right to die," Glotin said.
Another future rival to France Telecom is building and communications group Bouygues which has teamed up with Italy's STET.
Cie Generale des Eaux on Tuesday launched its bid to become the main rival to state-owned France Telecom with the start a fixed telephone network in a residential quarter in the southern city of Nice.
Philippe Glotin, managing director of Generale's telecoms unit Cegetel, said the group aims to have a market share in 2003 yielding 40 billion francs ($7.9 billion) in annual sales, of which more than half would come from mobile communications.
In mobile telecommunications, Generale already competes with France Telecom with its SFR unit and it is allied to British Telecom Plc and MCI for business services.
SFR expects to have one million customers by March 1997, Glotin said.
The local residential market is expected to grow at a moderate pace but nevertheless represent 55 billion francs in 2003.
Glotin said he aimed at gaining a 40 percent share in mobiles, 20 percent in long-distance and 10 percent for so-called local loops, or small networks.
Cegetel, which counts BT, Mannesmann and SBC of the United States among its owners, has received permission from the French authorities for a telecoms experiment in Nice and from the start of 1997 it will offer residential telecoms services, using the DECT technology.
DECT, digitally-enhanced cordless telephone, uses radio waves to connect buildings to a telephone switch, while the connections inside the building are of the classical type using a telephone socket.
DECT is also available in totally wireless versions but the Nice experiment will not use this. DECT can handle high capacities and is relatively secure as far as privacy of calls is concerned.
Glotin said that Nice was the precursor of Cegetel's assault on France Telecom and the company would invest three billion francs in Nice and Paris to hone its skills ahead of market liberalisation in 1998. The Paris service is expected to be ready in 1998.
Cegetel is aiming to start its business in some 30 towns which will add up to a population of some 10 million inhabitants.
To part finance this five-year plan, Cegetel shareholders will inject 6.8 billion francs into the company at the start of 1997.
In business services, Cegetel is considering putting a local loop in the La Defense office complex on the Paris outskirts -- where parent Generale des Eaux is the main building developer.
In that area, MFS Communications Ltd already offers business services with a local loop in competition to France Telecom.
Glotin said that the success of Cegetel, or any other rival to France Telecom in France, depended to a large extent on the interconnection costs and other payments telecom operators have to make to France Telecom to use its installations.
Telecommunications minister Francois Fillon has started a wide consultation, set to end on November 30, in order to establish in early 1997 a price list of the services France Telecom can provide to its rivals.
"The level of the interconnection costs for us means either the right to live of the right to die," Glotin said.
Other future rivals for France Telecom are building and communications group Bouygues which has teamed up with Italy's STET. Bouygues started France's third mobile telecommunications service earlier this year.
AT&amp;T has also expressed a desire to become a major force in the French market.
Cie Generale des Eaux on Tuesday launched its bid to become the main rival to state-owned France Telecom with the start a fixed telephone network in a residential quarter in the southern city of Nice.
Philippe Glotin, managing director of Generale's telecoms unit Cegetel, said the group aims to have a market share in 2003 yielding 40 billion francs ($7.9 billion) in annual sales, of which more than half would come from mobile communications.
In mobile telecommunications, Generale already competes with France Telecom with its SFR unit and it is allied to British Telecom Plc and MCI for business services.
The local residential market is expected to grow at a moderate pace but nevertheless represent 55 billion francs in 2003.
Glotin said he aimed at gaining a 40 percent share in mobiles, 20 percent in long-distance and 10 percent for so-called local loops, or small networks.
Cegetel, which counts BT, Mannesmann and SBC of the United States among its owners, has received permission from the French authorities for a telecoms experiment in Nice and from the start of 1997 it will offer residential telecoms services, using the DECT technology.
DECT, digitally-enhanced cordless telephone, uses radio waves to connect buildings to a telephone switch, while the connections inside the building are of the classical type using a telephone socket.
DECT is also available in totally wireless versions but the Nice experiment will not use this. DECT can handle high capacities and is relatively secure as far as privacy of calls is concerned.
Glotin said that Nice was the precursor of Cegetel's assault on France Telecom and the company would invest three billion francs in Nice and somewhere in central France to hone its skills ahead of the liberalisation of the market in 1998.
Cegetel is aiming to start its business in some 30 towns which will add up to a population of some 10 million inhabitants.
To part finance this five-year plan, Cegetel shareholders will inject 6.8 billion francs into the company at the start of 1997.
In business services, Cegetel is considering putting a local loop in the La Defense office complex on the Paris outskirts -- where parent Generale des Eaux is the main building developer.
In that area, MFS Communications Ltd already offers business services with a local loop in competition to France Telecom.
Glotin said that the success of Cegetel, or any other rival to France Telecom in France, depended to a large extent on the interconnection costs and other payments telecom operators have to make to France Telecom to use its installations.
Telecommunications minister Francois Fillon has started a wide consultation, set to end on November 30, in order to establish in early 1997 a price list of the services France Telecom can provide to its rivals.
"The level of the interconnection costs for us means either the right to live of the right to die," Glotin said.
Other future rivals for France Telecom are building and communications group Bouygues which has teamed up with Italy's STET. Bouygues started France's third mobile telecommunications service earlier this year.
AT&amp;T has also expressed a desire to become a major force in the France market. ($ = 5.080 French Francs)
Several thousand employees of French consumer electronics company Thomson Multimedia held protest marches in Paris and other towns on Wednesday against the planned sale of the group to South Korea's Daewoo.
Workers of the state-owned company came in busloads to Paris to demonstrate in front of the group's headquarters in the centre of the capital before heading to the parliament buildings. There were also protest marches in Rennes, Bordeaux, Nice and Grenoble.
Thomson staff are angry that they have not been involved in the decision and say they do not understand the economic logic behind it.
"The sale of Thomson Multimedia to the Korean group Daewoo is unacceptable," said a protesting Thomson worker in Rennes, the capital of the western Britanny region where police said 1,200 people marched.
"This company is running fine and makes top quality products, we do not want to make low quality products," he added.
In Grenoble in the east about a thousand people marched, some shouting "Daewoo, mechant loup" (Daewoo, big bad wolf).
Industry Minister Franck Borotra told parliament during question time that privatisation was the only way to secure the future of Thomson Multimedia.
"This company is in a situation of a serious financial disaster," he said about the loss-making and indebted French state-owned group.
Workers, however, maintain the company is fundamentally profitable.
"Thomson is sold for one franc and the buyers will hit a 20 billion franc jackpot," said a slogan carried in the Rennes march.
The French government said last month it planned the sell the Thomson SA group to Lagardere Groupe for one franc after an 11 billion franc ($2.17 billion) capital injection.
Lagardere will keep Thomson SA's 58 percent stake in defence electronics group Thomson-CSF and sell television set and video recorder maker Thomson Multimedia to Daewoo Electronics, also for one franc.
France's Privatisation Commission and the European Commission still have to approve the deal.
"What we want is a halt to the privatisation procedure and the start of serious discussions about the future of the electronics industry in this country," a labour union spokesman told France 2 television.
The Communist-led CGT wants to see a public sale of the Thomson Multimedia company on the market, with Lagardere taking a big stake.
Soon-hoon Bae, chairman of Daewoo Electronics, told a French parliamentary commission on Tuesday that the South Korean group could float part of Thomson Multimedia on the share market when it had returned to profit.
He said Daewoo planned to invest 13 billion francs in Thomson Multimedia, of which five billion would be invested in the next five years in France.
Market talk persists about a possible demerger of Rhone-Poulenc into a chemicals company and a pharmaceuticals group, with a leading French broker saying it would boost share value by a third.
"Intrinsically, Rhone-Poulenc is worth no more than 40 to 45 billion francs ($7.89 billion to $8.88 billion) due to the weight of underperforming chemical activities and their important debts," Jean Borjeix, chief analyst at Jean-Pierre Pinatton, wrote recently.
He said that if the pharmaceutical activities -- Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, Fisons, Merieux and Connaught -- were separated from the chemical activities, total group value could be 60 billion francs.
"An asset gain of such a size would allow (an investor) to wait until the (demerger) operation takes place," Borjeix said, adding that the 1996 and 1997 results forecasts limited the downside.
Pinatton expects Rhone-Poulenc to report a stable 1996 net attributable profit of 2.05 billion francs, rising to 2.5 billion in 1997. Rhone published a net attributable profit of 2.13 billion in 1995.
Demerger rumours were first fuelled by May 28 comments by managing director Igor Landau, during a luncheon at the Roland Garros tennis tournament, saying the company had studied the possibility but had, for the time being, decided against it.
Borjeix believes the company will decide to split because management has become concerned about share holder value and also because an asset disposal policy is coming to an end.
Other analysts are less sure.
"I don't think it will happen. They will concentrate on improving margins themselves for the time being," said an analyst at a U.S. brokerage in London.
He also dismissed a suggestion, aired in Business Week in June, of Rhone selling its 68 percent stake in Rhone-Poulenc Rorer. "There would be no immediate benefit to that."
Rhone shares have been rising recently, partly on the back of 9.2 percent higher first half profits and on recurring speculative rumours of a split or possible merger of the chemical activities with Atochem of Elf-Aquitaine.
Shares rose from 122.3 francs in May to 136 on June 18 on initial speculation and then fell back to 120.8 on July 24. They have resumed their rise to 131 francs, but this is still below the institutional privatisation price of 146 francs in November 1993 and a price for individuals of 135 francs.
Les Echos newspaper said on July 29 that the company's board meeting of July, where the first half profit figures were approved, had also discussed the group's vulnerability to a takeover bid.
The paper said chairman Jean-Rene Fourtou was worried the insufficent profitability of the chemical sector would make the group a cheap buy for a rival.
Fourtou has made the restructuring of the chemical sector a key part of his strategy, next to a pharmaceutical expansion drive and a 10-billion-franc two-year asset sale plan.
Board member Philippe Desmarescaux was recently given control of the chemicals sector in a move which was seen as signalling that restructuring of the division would accelerate.
Rhone-Poulenc took 223 million francs in provisions for the chemicals sector in the first half and expects total 1996 group provisions to be 500 million francs.
The rumours about a chemical link-up with Elf-Aquitaine are in line with many market stories about big French combinations to stave off competition in world markets -- the same reasoning caused rumours Elf would merge with Total SA.
At Elf, where chairman Philippe Jaffre is also trying to boost profitability with cost cuts and asset sales, the Atochem unit is doing fine, even though sales fell in the first half.
Jacques Puechal, the pipe-smoking chairman of the division, has embarked on a selective acquisition policy bolstered by a surge in 1995 net attributable profit of five billion francs, against 1.8 billion in the previous year.
On Wednesday, Paris broker Leven SA issued a "speculative buy" advice on Rhone Poulenc shares, after having been "neutral". Leven said the company's debt remained a worry but it appreciated developments in the drugs division and noted rumours of a demerger. ($1=5.068 French Franc)
Jet Multimedia aims to take on both Netscape Communications and Microsoft and have its France Explorer browser become the French standard instead of Netscape Navigator or Microsoft Explorer.
A spokeswoman for the small Lyon-based company said on Friday that France Explorer would be distributed for free at the start of 1997 and the programme would allow access to the Internet, to existing multimedia servers as well as to France's Minitel on-line database from a home personal computer.
She declined to give many details ahead of an official launch of the programme by Jet Multimedia's founding chairman Eric Peyre on December 12.
But the software programme, using a new France Telecom service for Internet access, could become a challenge to existing Internet Access Providers. It could also impact content providers in France such as AOL -- a joint-venture of America Online and Bertelsmann -- CompuServe and smaller Infonie by drawing away new customers.
France Telecom, which launched its own Wanadoo online service in association with Havas in May and which uses a French language version of the Microsoft Explorer, will in January open a service that it calls "The Internet Kiosk".
These are special telephone numbers which give access to the Internet using the France Telecom backbone telecommunications infrastructure. These numbers can obtained by companies such as Jet Multimedia and a caller will pay for use by duration.
France Telecom will charge the amount on the telephone bill and will pay the service company a part of the money.
"Jet Multimedia is not aiming to make money on the software. They want people to use their phonenumber and their existing servers," the spokeswoman said.
The system of paying for the use of Internet time, instead of paying a monthly subscription to an Internet Access Provider for a fixed number of hours of usage, could be attractive to people who are not great travellers in cyberspace.
These subscribers are currently served with subscriptions to AOL, the cheapest at 49 francs per month, CompuServe, Microsoft's MSN or Club Internet run by Hachette.
Jet Multimedia was founded under the name Jet Lag in 1989 and specialises in electronic publishing and multimedia technology. The company acquired telecommunication technology specialist Computer Answer Line (CAL) in September.
Jet Multimedia raised 43 million francs in April when it was listed on the small-cap market Second Marche at an issue price of 400 francs.
The company, 64 percent owned by management among which Peyre has 16 percent, had higher 1995 sales of 165 million francs but its net profit slipped to 7.2 million francs from 12.5 million francs due to acquisitions.
The group is France's third-biggest telematic services company -- offering database services via the Minitel -- after Axime and Assistance Genie Logiciel (AGL).
On Friday, Jet Multimedia shares were trading 17 francs or 2.34 percent lower at 710 francs at midday while the blue-chip CAC-40 index was down 1.9 percent. The number of regular users of Internet in France is currently estimated at between 300,000 and 500,000 people.
French computer maker Cie des Machines Bull now has the freedom to deal with any other computer group in Europe following the sale of some five percent of its shares held by the government.
Thierry Breton, managing director of Bull, told Reuters in a telephone interview that the company still planned to be part of a restructuring of the European computer industry.
"With the support of our private shareholders, we can do that either by a market operation, by a merger or acquisition or by both," he said.  
"Rather than to wait for when the opportunity presented itself before doing anything, the shareholders decided to put us in a position so that we can act as a private company when the time is ripe."
Breton said others involved in the restructuring of the European computer industry included Italy's Olivetti, Philips Electronics of the Netherlands and Siemens AG of Germany.
"There are also the European units of U.S. companies that may be interested in participating in the restructuring," he added.  
Jean-Marie Descarpentries, the former McKinsey consultant who became chairman in 1993, earlier this year said Bull wanted the state to sell 20 percent to a fourth industrial partner, preferably European, and to financial investors.
Bull returned to profit in 1995 after posting combined losses of 22 billion francs since 1990.
The French government has said it plans to privatise Bull before the end of 1997.
Breton said the state share sale would take place after a capital increase amounting to "several hundreds of millions of francs."  
The state will subscribe to its portion of the capital increase, but resell its shares to private investors.
Motorola of the U.S., NEC of Japan and France Telecom, which each have a 17 percent stake, are expected to subscribe to their part.
"They are on our strategic commission. They come here every three months for two days. I think I can say that we have the support of our shareholders," Breton said.
IBM, which has 1.6 percent, is not expected to join in the capital increase. It has passed up two previous opportunities.  
Japan's Dai Nippon Printing, with 3.3 percent, has been invited to join the capital increase.
Bull in February effectively withdrew from the personal computer market by merging its Zenith Data division with Packard Bell Electronics Inc.
Breton said the company was standing by its profit forecast of higher profits in 1996 compared with a 306 million profit in 1995, but he declined to confirm the group was aiming for more than 600 million.
"We keep our forecast, we are on line to deliver on our promise," Breton said.
-- Paris newsroom +33 1 4221 5452
The French government said on Tuesday it was to complete the privatisation of computer-maker Cie des Machines Bull by selling another stake of at least five percent.
The sale, after a capital increase of "several hundreds of millions of francs" will reduce the government's share in the company, both directly and through the national telecoms company France Telecom to below 50 percent.
The Paris Bourse said it had suspended Bull's shares, which last traded at 33 French francs ($6.36), at the company's request until after completion of the operation which will take several weeks.
Japan's NEC, Motorola of the U.S. and France Telecom have a 17 percent Bull stake each and are expected to subscribe to the capital increase.
The state, with a 36 percent stake, will first subscribe to the capital increase and then sell the shares to private investors.
IBM, which has 1.6 percent, is expected not to join in the capital increase. It had also passed at two previous occasions. Japan's Dai Nippon Printing, 3.3 percent, has been invited to join in the capital increase.
The Finance Ministry said in a statement it will decided on the issue price and the identity of the buyers after advice by the independent Privatisation Commission.
Interested parties have 15-days to express their interest in blocks of at least 1.4 million shares, or one percent of Bull.
Thierry Breton, managing director, told Reuters the operation would give Bull the freedom to decide on any mergers or acquisitions while it played its role in the restructuring of the European computer industry.
"With the support of our private shareholders, we can do that either by a market operation, by a merger or acquisition or by both," he said.
Jean-Marie Descarpentries, the former McKinsey consultant made chairman in 1993, said earlier this year that the company wanted the state to sell a 20 percent stake to a fourth industrial partner, preferably European, and financial investors.
"Rather than to wait for when the opportunity presented itself before doing anything, the shareholders have decided to put us in a position so that we could act as a private company when the time is ripe," Breton said when asked whether today's announcement meant the industrial plans had changed.
Breton said the other companies invloved in the restructuring of the European computer industry were Italy's Olivetti, Philips Electronics of the Netherlands and Siemens AG of Germany. "There are also the European units of U.S. companies that may be interested in participating in the restructuring," he said.
Bull came back to the black in 1995 after combined losses of 22 billion francs since 1990. Breton said the company kept its profit forecast of higher 1996 profits, after 306 million in 1995, but he declined to confirm the group aimed at more than 600 million.
"We keep our forecast, we are on line to deliver on our promise," Breton said.
Bull in February effectively withdrew from the troubled personal computer market by merging its Zenith Data division with Packard Bell Electronics Inc of the U.S. ($1=5.190 French Franc)
There is a discreet battle raging in France over whether future competitors of a privatised France Telecom will be able to make a living or whether the playing field will be tilted against them.
With billions of francs at stake, analysts are scutinising the abstruse technical details of interconnection charges and the cost of public service.
The government expects to dispose of about 20 percent of France Telecom next April and plans eventually to selloff 49 percent of the state-owned-company.
French telecommunications minister Francois Fillon said on Tuesday that French interconnection charges would have to be "comparable to other countries, in particular countries where there is already competition."
Interconnection charges are the payments telecom rivals have to pay to France Telecom for the use of its network.
France Telecom confirmed a leaked document showing it planned a charge of 0.16 francs per minute for local calls, 0.18 francs for regional calls and 0.26 francs for national calls.
France Telecom says these are among the lowest in Europe, with only Britain having cheaper local interconnection charges.
But its future rivals, however, say these prices are still too high and claim they are higher than what the state-owned company uses as internal charges.
On top of the interconnection charges comes the cost for the "public service" -- telecoms available to everyone, everywhere in France. By law, France Telecom will run this public service and its rivals will have to share the costs.
The newspaper Les Echos recently cited a study by the Analysis research bureau showing the the costs of such a service would be nine billion francs ($1.76 billion) per year.
France Telecom's rivals, using another research bureau, arrive at a figure of 4.5 billion francs at most.
"The total interconnection charges and public service payments for a local call would be some 0.21 to 0.22 francs per minute, or some 80 percent of the current price and nearly two to three times as high as in other countries where there is competition," a confidential document said.
The new French telecommunications regulator, ART, which will be in place in January 1997, is expected to decide on the charges in February.
And during the first three months of the year the future telecommunications operators will apply for their licences in order to be ready for competition in 1998.
Two groups have announced intentions to become national operators. One is CEGETEL, a joint venture of Generale des Eaux, British Telecom Plc, SBC Communications Inc, and Mannesmann of Germany. The other is headed by Bouygues in association with Italy's STET and Germany's VEBA.
AT&amp;T also wants to be active in the French market, with the help of a partner, but a spokesman for the U.S. group in France declined to comment whether it was in talks with Bouygues or preparing a fourth consortium.
AT&amp;T is in talks to combine it forces in Europe with Unisource -- a joint venture of the Dutch PTT, Telia of Sweden, Swiss Telecom PTT and Spain's Telefonica.
Unisource had previously teamed up with Generale des Eaux but the latter preferred BT.
Other companies will operate on a smaller scale, targetting either a region or a specific market. Eurotunnel's Trans Manche has received a licence for Paris to London lines. Fillon said he would sign in the next few days telecom operating licences for railroad company SNCF, Colt of Britain and MFS Ltd.
($1=5.118 French Franc)
The former long-time head of Britain's General Electric Plc said in a newspaper interview on Wednesday the group was ready to deal with whoever won ownership of state-owned Thomson SA.
The comments to the Les Echos newspaper by Lord Weinstock, GEC's chairman emeritus since September, followed a statement by Alcatel Alsthom chairman Serge Tchuruk that he was ready to make a new offer for the state electronics group if a December 31 validity deadline for current offers passes.
Tchuruk added he was willing to adjust his company's bid to recent developments and suggested the state might want to spread the privatisation of Thomson SA out over time.
In October, the French government decided to sell Thomson SA for one franc to Lagardere Groupe after a 11 billion franc ($2.1 billion) cash injection, instead of to Alcatel.
This decision awaits approval of the European Commission (EC) as well as France's Privatisation Commission.
While the EC decision could be due in the first half of December, the Privatisation Commission will not render its decision until after the Brussels' stance is known.
The French Finance Ministry has conceded that the entire operation may not be finished before December 31, a date after which theoretically both the Lagardere and Alcatel bids expire.
The announcement of a possible new Alcatel bid caused a slide in the company's shares, down 1.5 percent at 455.20 francs at midday, because investors did not like the new uncertainty.
Lagardere plans to merge Thomson's 58 percent-owned defence unit Thomson-CSF with its Matra Defence Espace unit while selling consumer electronics group Thomson Multimedia to Daewoo Electronics of South Korea for one franc.
The second sale has caused a public outcry and thousands of Thomson employees have protested in France's main cities, fearing for their jobs and severe Korean working conditions, despite job creation promises by Daewoo.
A group of Thomson workers in the western town of Angers are currently walking to Paris in a protest action, aiming to arrive in the capital in time for a December 6 shareholders meeting.
Part of Alcatel's plans were to combine the Thomson-CSF business with its own defence activities and then merge these with GEC's Marconi to create a defence electronics giant.
Weinstock said that neither Lagardere's plan to merge Matra with Thomson-CSF, nor Alcatel's defence activities with Thomson-CSF, would give spectacular effects.
"Only a merger between Thomson-CSF and Marconi would produce the necessary economies of scale and a good combination of products," he said, adding the combined company would have about $11 billion of annual sales.
Alcatel had said it intended to find a European industrial partner for Thomson-CSF. While the company has long standing links with GEC through GEC-Alsthom, Tchuruk did not want to exclude a link with Germany's Deutsche Aerospace.
In a statement, Foreign Affairs minister Herve de Charette formally denied his staff would have handed a report to President Jacques Chirac about an alleged dinner conversation between Weinstock and GEC chief executive George Simpson in which they allegedly planned to seize control of the new defence grouping.
Weinstock told Les Echos such a conversation had not taken place but said a report which contained a summary of the alleged conversation existed.
"Yes, that report exists and has been very damaging for the Alcatel position, people told us," Weinstock said.
The French Industry Minister on Wednesday angrily reminded the chairman of Britain's General Electric Co Plc of his conditions for an Anglo-French nuclear merger on the day the plan was set to go ahead.
Franck Borotra issued a statement saying French interests needed to keep a majority in a merged combination of the GEC Alsthom joint-venture and state-controlled Framatome in reaction to the publication of an interview with GEC chairman Lord Weinstock in which he said he wanted at least 50 percent.
In a supervisory board meeting on Wednesday, Framatome shareholders are set to appoint Dominique Vignon as chairman and chief executive, replacing Jean-Claude Leny who had openly criticised the plan.
"The Minister of Industry, Post and Telecommunications, Franck Borotra, would like to recall that the study of a merger of GEC-Alsthom and Framatome, undertaken at the behest of GEC and Alcatel, can only be completed if five conditions are respected," the Industry Ministry said in a statement.
The conditions are that the state keep control of strategic decisions concerning nuclear activities, the continuation of Franco-German cooperation on the future EPR power station, preservation of the identity of Framatome's nuclear activities, the predominance of French interests in the new combination and clear provisions for nuclear risks.
Framatome has a technical alliance with Siemens to develop the future European nuclear power station.
"These conditions are non-negotiable because they constitute French control over its nuclear activities. They (the conditions) should notably lead to a shareholders' pact between the French parties," the statement said.
Weinstock told French financial daily Les Echos the merger talks should not change the balance of power in the joint Anglo-French venture with Alcatel Alsthom.
"The operation concerns mainly the relations within GEC-Alsthom...the balance in the company should not be changed," he said. "We should have the same stake as Alcatel Alsthom. Not more and not less. Even if we have to pay a dowry for it."
Alcatel has a 44 percent stake in Framatome and its chairman Serge Tchuruk has said in the past that he expected French interests to have a majority in the new enlarged group.
In a second phase, Tchuruk wanted to float a part of GEC-Alsthom Framatome on the share market in order to focus the venture's management on financial performance.
The French state gave a green light to the planned merger in August after years of opposition to Alcatel taking a majority stake in Framatome.
"Framatome is an important operation because nuclear power will become an alternative again. There are going to be new nuclear construction programmes even though there are none at the moment. GEC Alsthom will have a good card to play with Framatome," Weinstock said.
Framatome is currently controlled by the government through state owned energy holding group CEA-Industrie, with 36 percent, electricity utility EdF with 11 percent and the Consortium de Realisation (CDR) with four percent.
Asked by Les Echos whether he accepted the French idea of a shareholders' pact, Weinstock said, "No. We want to maintain our partnership. We do not want to become a minority that can be manipulated."
European governments and industry on Thursday launched a high-technology programme aimed at staying among the leaders of the world technology race.
Microelectronic Developments for European Applications (MEDEA), a two billion ecu programme for the 1997-2000 period, takes over from the Joint European sub-micron semiconductor initiative (JESSI).
Horst Nasko, Austrian chairman of JESSI and now MEDEA, said that while Europe had closed the technology gap in the past eight years, the new programme was aimed at forging ahead.
"In terms of concrete results, the technology gap that had been growing at the end of the 80s at an alarming rate between Europe and the rest of the world has been substantially closed," Nasko said.
"The most important thing is that we can't be complacent. The race is getting faster and fiercer, new countries like Korea and Taiwan have joined and sitting still means falling behind," he told Reuters at the launch of MEDEA.
MEDEA, which will be based in Paris, will coordinate industry research programmes in six main areas. Three of them, getting half of the funds, are applications in the areas of multimedia, communications, and automobile and traffic systems.
The other three are more basic technologies, as covered by JESSI, in semiconductor design and manufacturing techniques. At stake is a frontline industry on which eight milllion jobs in Europe depend and in which the technology changes with a new generation of chips every three years and a doubling in processing power every 18 months.
"When we started in 1988, Europe was running two generations behind," said Jurgan Knorr of the Siemens AG semicondiuctor group. "We are now among the leaders."
Arthur van der Poel, chairman of Philips Semiconductors which is part of Philips Electronics, said that the three large European chip groups -- Seimens, Philips and SGS Thomson Microelectronics NV -- were among the most financially healthy in the world.
Asked whether Europe needed to continue to put money into an industry that has become strong, Nasko pointed out that the United States, Japan and other regional blocs spend "at least the same, and probably more" on the strategic semiconductor industry, be it through defence programmes or tax breaks.
With JESSI, Europe managed to become independent as far as its chip requirements was concerned. With MEDEA, Europe wants to go further, making even finer chips and bigger silicon wafers to cut costs per chip.
"There is one area where we lag, that is microprocessors. But that situaiton is the same for everybody whose name is not Intel," Nasko said.
Market talk persists about a possible demerger of Rhone-Poulenc into a chemicals company and a pharmaceuticals group, with a leading French broker saying it would boost share value by a third.
"Intrinsically, Rhone-Poulenc is worth no more than 40 to 45 billion francs ($7.89 billion to $8.88 billion) due to the weight of underperforming chemical activities and their important debts," Jean Borjeix, chief analyst at Jean-Pierre Pinatton, wrote recently.
He said that if the pharmaceutical activities -- Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, Fisons, Merieux and Connaught -- were separated from the chemical activities, total group value could be 60 billion francs.
"An asset gain of such a size would allow (an investor) to wait until the (demerger) operation takes place," Borjeix said, adding that the 1996 and 1997 results forecasts limited the downside.
Pinatton expects Rhone-Poulenc to report a stable 1996 net attributable profit of 2.05 billion francs, rising to 2.5 billion in 1997. Rhone published a net attributable profit of 2.13 billion in 1995.
Demerger rumours were first fuelled by May 28 comments by managing director Igor Landau, during a luncheon at the Roland Garros tennis tournament, saying the company had studied the possibility but had, for the time being, decided against it.
Borjeix believes the company will decide to split because management has become concerned about share holder value and also because an asset disposal policy is coming to an end.
Other analysts are less sure.
"I don't think it will happen. They will concentrate on improving margins themselves for the time being," said an analyst at a U.S. brokerage in London.
He also dismissed a suggestion, aired in Business Week in June, of Rhone selling its 68 percent stake in Rhone-Poulenc Rorer. "There would be no immediate benefit to that."
Rhone shares have been rising recently, partly on the back of 9.2 percent higher first half profits and on recurring speculative rumours of a split or possible merger of the chemical activities with Atochem of Elf-Aquitaine.
Shares rose from 122.3 francs in May to 136 on June 18 on initial speculation and then fell back to 120.8 on July 24. They have resumed their rise to 131 francs, but this is still below the institutional privatisation price of 146 francs in November 1993 and the price for individuals of 135 francs. (Corrects privatisation date to November 1993 from 1994 and makes clear 146 franc price was for institutional shareholders.)
Les Echos newspaper said on July 29 that the company's board meeting of July, where the first half profit figures were approved, had also discussed the group's vulnerability to a takeover bid.
The paper said chairman Jean-Rene Fourtou was worried the insufficent profitability of the chemical sector would make the group a cheap buy for a rival.
Fourtou has made the restructuring of the chemical sector a key part of his strategy, next to a pharmaceutical expansion drive and a 10-billion-franc two-year asset sale plan.
Board member Philippe Desmarescaux was recently given control of the chemicals sector in a move which was seen as signalling that restructuring of the division would accelerate.
Rhone-Poulenc took 223 million francs in provisions for the chemicals sector in the first half and expects total 1996 group provisions to be 500 million francs.
The rumours about a chemical link-up with Elf-Aquitaine are in line with many market stories about big French combinations to stave off competition in world markets -- the same reasoning caused rumours Elf would merge with Total SA.
At Elf, where chairman Philippe Jaffre is also trying to boost profitability with cost cuts and asset sales, the Atochem unit is doing fine, even though sales fell in the first half.
Jacques Puechal, the pipe-smoking chairman of the division, has embarked on a selective acquisition policy bolstered by a surge in 1995 net attributable profit of five billion francs, against 1.8 billion in the previous year.
On Wednesday, Paris broker Leven SA issued a "speculative buy" advice on Rhone Poulenc shares, after having been "neutral". Leven said the company's debt remained a worry but it appreciated developments in the drugs division and noted rumours of a demerger. ($1=5.068 French Franc)
French Telecommunications Minister Francois Fillon has granted a telecoms operating licence to state-owned railroads group Societe Nationale des Chemins de Fer (SNCF) as a further step towards the sector's liberalisation.
In a decree published in the Official Journal on Monday, Fillon said he was granting a 15-year licence to SNCF's Telecom Developpement unit to offer telecommunications services in an alternative to the France Telecom network.
SNCF still has to detail what assets it is going to put in the Telecom Development unit and also needs to get vetting for its tariffs. The operating licence sets technical standards, privacy issues and interconnection obligations.
The SNCF licence is the second such licence for a so-called "alternative infrastructure" in France. The first, for Eurotunnel unit TransManche to offer telecom links between London and Paris, was granted late last month.
A spokesman for the ministry said that "in the next few days" licences would be granted to MFS Communication Co of the U.S. and Colt Telecom Group of Britain, owned by financial group Fidelity Investments.
MFS and Colt will specialise on business networks in highly-populated areas but the SNCF licence covers the railroads' existing network of 8,000 kilometres of optic fibre all over the country, as well as radio links, which will be expanded to some 12,000 kilometres in the next six years, SNCF sources said.
The licence also allows Telecom Developpement to use other means beyond its own network.
SNCF aims to decide before the end of the year which company will operate the network. It has at least three offers from interested companies.
One is from CEGETEL, the Generale des Eaux unit in which British Telecommunications Plc and Mannesmann of Germany have a stake and which aims to become France's second biggest operator. It already runs the SFR mobile network.
Another is Bouygues which teamed up with Italy's STET for the SNCF offer and is also talking with Germany's VEBA.
A third offer is by the Unisource consortium of Dutch KPN, Telia AB of Sweden, Swiss Telecom PTT and Spain's Telefonica.
AT&amp;T of the U.S. is keeping silent about its intentions but the operator, aiming to play an important role in France, is rumoured to be playing several cards at the same time -- industry sources said it bid both with its usual European ally Unisource as well as on its own account and there are also rumours it is in talks with Bouygues.
Bouygues and AT&amp;T had no comment on the rumours.
SNCF declined to name the bidders and said it had recently asked them for more details on their bids before taking a decision.
The SNCF network could be a vital part in any operator's plans, cutting the time to set up a network in time for the 1998 start of competition as well as reducing investment needs.
Telecom Developpement, like any future rival to France Telecom, will have to contribute to the costs of running the public service of telecommunications which will remain assured by the national operator.
A first tranche of 20 percent in France Telecom is expected to be floated on the share market this spring.
