Australian life office National Mutual Holdings Ltd is tipped to make a strong, historic debut on the Australian and New Zealand bourses on Tuesday after its institutional offer closed six times oversubscribed last week.
The final price of A$1.60 per share was higher than the indicative bidding range initially set for institutions, and gives Australia's second biggest life office a market capitalisation of A$2.7 billion (US$2 billion) on listing.
"It was very significantly over-subscribed and at A$1.60 there's no doubt that we could have sold it a number of times over," National Mutual managing director Geoff Tomlinson told Reuters in an interview on Monday.
National Mutual is Australia's first listed life office and, at A$1.60 per share, will rank among the market's top 30 firms.
The shares could climb steeply on both the Australian and New Zealand exchanges on Tuesday, as institutional bidders which failed to secure enough shares in the offer step into the market to lift their stakes, share analysts told Reuters on Monday.
Institutions received on average only about 15 percent of the allotments sought, a market source told Reuters.
"There's certainly keen demand...," Morgan Stockbroking's director of equities, Bill Chatterton, said. The shares could reach a high of A$1.80, he added.
National Mutual's listing completes its 21-month transition from a mutual company owned by its policy-holders to a listed group free to pursue its strategic focus on Asia, unshackled by a mutual requirement to act solely in policy-holders' interests.
National Mutual will be owned 51 percent on listing by its French parent, the insurance and financial services giant Axa SA, which is prevented under the terms of the float from selling down its stake for six months after the listing.
Axa, which effectively bought into National Mutual last year at around A$1.25 per share, is sitting on an enormous paper profit. It cannot increase its stake in National Mutual unless given the Australian government's go-ahead.
Under the float, National Mutual's 1.2 million policy holders were offered either shares or a cash alternative. Shares not taken up were offered to retail investors and institutions.
Retail investors were offered the shares at A$1.50 each last month, before the final price was set at the close of institutional bidding last Friday, giving mums and dads a strong temptation to take a quick profit on Tuesday, analysts said.
"There's going to be a fair amount of underlying demand from institutions to get the stock, but there may be a little bit of stag profit-taking as well," a Melbourne-based analyst said.
National Mutual's Tomlinson said the listing, demutualisation and last year's capital injection of A$1.1 billion by Axa marked the end of a tough four years, especially for life subsidiary National Mutual Life.
"Tomorrow will mark the end of a four-year diffcult period and put us into a new area where we can...finalise the turnaround of National Mutual Life in Australia and New Zealand and try to take further advantage of our opportunities in Asia," he said.
A$1 = US$0.79
Australian life office National Mutual Holdings Ltd is expected to make a firm, historic debut on the Australian and New Zealand bourses on Tuesday after its institutional offer closed six times oversubscribed last week.
The final price of A$1.60 per share was higher than indicative bidding range of A$1.35 to A$1.55 initially set for institutions, and gives Australia's second biggest life office a market capitalisation of A$2.7 billion on listing.  
"It was very significantly over-subscribed and at A$1.60 there's no doubt that we could have sold it a number of times over," National Mutual managing director Geoff Tomlinson told Reuters on Monday. He described an oversubscription rate of six times as "not a bad figure".
Share analysts told Reuters on Monday the shares could climb steeply on Australian and New Zealand exchanges on Tuesday, as institutional bidders which failed to secure enough shares in the offer stepped into the market to lift their stakes.  
Institutions received on average only about 15 percent of the allotments sought in the price-setting institutional component of the offer, a market source said.
"There's certainly keen demand so I think that will certainly still be there (after listing)," Morgan Stockbroking's director of equities, Bill Chatterton, told Reuters on Monday.
The shares could reach a high of A$1.80, he added.
Australian publisher Pacific Magazines and Printing Ltd told its shareholders on Tuesday to expect a small rise in earnings as paper prices came back to earth and a recent cost-cutting drive started to pay dividends.
At an annual meeting which unanimously approved the group's name change to PMP Communications Ltd, chairman Ken Cowley said lower paper prices were boosting demand for printing work and that earnings from magazine publishing were also growing.  
"I think it is fair to say it (profit) will be marginally up on this current year we have just finished," Cowley told reporters after the meeting in Melbourne.
Cowley forecast a tough economic environment in Australia over the current business year, ending next June 30, but this would be partly offset by a continuing cost-cutting drive.
"We have got to find more efficient ways of operating and that work has started and it will be continuing," he said.
Optus Communications Ltd said on Tuesday its Optus Vision pay-television venture was considering whether to continue to support the Australian Rugby League (ARL) after its court defeat against News Corp last week.
"The decision we have to make is how long we continue to support that, and I think right now our people and Channel Nine people would be talking about those issues," Optus Communications chairman Russell Fynmore told Reuters.
Fynmore did not elaborate but said the ultimate fate of the ARL or its News-backed rival Superleague would be decided by the financial backing for the leagues.
"This is really for the ARL and Superleague to determine and in the end it will determined on how much financial support there is for both leagues," Fynmore said.
Optus Vision, five percent-owned by Australian magnate Kerry Packer's Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd (PBL), owns the pay-television broadcast rights to the ARL. PBL's Channel Nine has the free-to-air broadcast rights to ARL.
The ARL suffered a major reversal of fortunes last Friday before the full bench of the Federal Court, which unanimously upheld News' appeal against previous rulings banning Superleague till the turn of the century.
Superleague is preparing to kick off its competition next season, creating the prospect of two rival leagues fighting for TV audience share in 1997 unless a compromise is reached.
Earlier on Tuesday, News Ltd executive chairman Ken Cowley said the company's door was open to talks with the ARL.
"You have always got to keep your door open...," Cowley told reporters in Melbourne.
"We want to maximise the number of fans watching Superleague and so we will be doing the best we can for the fans and the clubs and the players," he added.
He dismissed suggestions, published on Tuesday in News Ltd's The Australian newspaper, that ARL chairman Ken Arthurson could step aside to facilitate a merger of the two leagues.
"The statement by Ken suggesting he might fall on his sword is rather a curious reaction," Cowley said.
"He has no authority in the ARL -- he hasn't had for a couple of years. He cannot make any decisions of any consequences regarding to the game, and particularly to Superleague, without the approval of Kerry Packer."
-- Melbourne bureau 613-9286-1421
Australia's Foster's Brewing Group Ltd. said Monday it was thirsty for expansion and eyeing possible joint ventures in India and Vietnam to add to its brewery holdings around the world.
Foster's executives said at the group's annual meeting in Melbourne that despite hiccups at its Canadian and Chinese operations, the company was well positioned to seize on growth opportunities both overseas and at home.
"The first priority after satisfying the cash needs of the current businesses is to seek out new direct investment opportunities with the right return profile," Chief Executive Officer Ted Kunkel told shareholders.
"Should that not fully utilize the available financial resources, then we would look at additional options," he said.
Foster's Chairman John Ralph said the group was considering joint venture breweries in Vietnam and India but said it was looking at a wide range of possible investments, including acquisitions. Asia was a major focus, he added.
He declined to give details but said the Vietnamese opportunity involved an existing plant.
"There's nothing immediate but we are looking across all the areas of our business in fact," Ralph told reporters.
"We are involved in looking at a couple of opportunities, but it's early days. Provided we can see it makes sense for us, and we can do it on a basis that's going to earn a satisfactory return, then we are likely to move," he said.
Foster's, which has breweries in Shanghai, Tianjin and Guangdong in China, said the Chinese operations would break even or turn a profit in the fiscal year ending in 1999. Foster's China posted a loss of A$17 million (US$13 million) before interest and tax in the latest year.
The group's 40-percent owned Canadian brewer, Molson Breweries, also performed poorly in its fiscal year that ended on April 1, but has undergone a major restructuring and is focusing on building market share at home, Foster's said.
Kunkel said Molson still delivered a high return on invested capital and forecast higher operating profits from the group's powerhouse Australian brewing unit, Carlton and United Breweries, over the medium term.
Foster's is also counting on higher returns from its British pub chain, the Inntrepreneur Pub Company Ltd., putting the group in a stong position to pursue growth, Kunkel said.
Kunkel identified Asia as the most attractive region for investment, noting beer volumes there surged 60 percent in the first half of the 1990s and were forecast to rise another 40 percent before the turn of the century.
"Access can be achieved at a sufficiently low cost and the return profile is sufficiently better therefore than in other growing markets such as South America," he said.
Foster's has allocated A$200 million ($153 million) for direct investments in Asian markets, deeming this "prudent exposure."
The group has spent four years shedding unwanted assets, lightening the burden of debt accumulated in the 1980s when it was part of the sprawling conglomerate known as Elders-IXL Ltd.
Australia's Foster's Brewing Group Ltd said on Monday it was thirsty for expansion and eyeing possible joint ventures in India and Vietnam to add to its international stable of breweries.
Foster's executives told shareholders at the group's annual meeting in Melbourne that despite hiccups at its Canadian and Chinese operations, the company was well positioned to seize on growth opportunities both offshore and at home.
"The first priority after satisfying the cash needs of the current businesses is to seek out new direct investment opportunities with the right return profile," Foster's chief executive Ted Kunkel told the meeting.
"Should that not fully utilise the available financial resources, then we would look at additional options," he said.
Later, Foster's chairman John Ralph confirmed the group was considering joint venture breweries in Vietnam and India but said it was looking at a wide range of possible investments, including acquisitions. Asia is a major focus, he added.
He declined to give details but said the Vietnamese opportunity involved an existing plant.
"There's nothing immediate but we are looking across all the areas of our business in fact," Ralph told reporters.
"We are involved in looking at a couple of opportunities, but it's early days. Provided we can see it makes sense for us, and we can do it on a basis that's going to earn a satisfactory return, then we are likely to move," he said.
Foster's, which has breweries in Shanghai, Tianjin and Guangdong in China, said the Chinese operations would break even or turn a profit in 1998/99. Foster's China posted a 1995/96 loss of A$17 million (US$13 million) before interest and tax.
The group's 40-percent owned Canadian brewer, Molson Breweries, also performed weakly in its business year ending April 1, but has undergone a major restructure and is focusing on building market share at home, Foster's said.
Foster's chief executive Kunkel said Molson still delivered a high return on invested capital and forecast higher operating profits from the group's powerhouse Australian brewing unit, Carlton and United Breweries, over the medium term.
Foster's also plans to free up about A$400 million in non-performing assets and is counting on higher returns from its British pub chain, the Inntrepreneur Pub Company Ltd, putting the group in a stong position to pursue growth, Kunkel said.
Kunkel identified Asia as the most attractive region for investment, noting beer volumes there surged 60 percent in the first half of the 1990s and were forecast to rise another 40 percent before the turn of the century.
"Access can be achieved at a sufficiently low cost and the return profile is sufficiently better therefore than in other growing markets such as South America," he said.
Foster's has allocated A$200 million for direct investments in Asian markets, deeming this amount a "prudent exposure".
The group has spent four years shedding unwanted assets, lightening the burden of debt accumulated in the 1980s when it was part of the sprawling conglomerate known as Elders-IXL Ltd.
Foster's sold its British brewing unit, Courage, last year as part of this asset-sale programme. It has since bought two Australian wine-makers, Mildara Blass and Rothbury Wines Ltd.
"The restructuring of the last four years is nearly over," he said. "Where there is more, it will present opportunities for profit."
Foster's is on track to better its 1995/96 net profit of A$293.3 million in 1996/97, despite higher interest charges and tax payments in the current year, chairman Ralph said.
Australia's Foster's Brewing Group Ltd signalled on Monday that it was thirsty for expansion and said it was eyeing possible joint ventures in India and Vietnam to add to its international stable of breweries.
Foster's executives told shareholders at the group's annual meeting in Melbourne that despite hiccups at its Canadian and Chinese operations, the company was well positioned to seize on any growth opportunities both offshore and at home.  
"The first priority after satisfying the cash needs of the current businesses is to seek out new direct investment opportunities with the right return profile," Foster's chief executive Ted Kunkel told the meeting.
"Should that not fully utilise the available financial resources, then we would look at additional options," he said.
Later, Foster's chairman John Ralph confirmed the group was considering joint venture breweries in Vietnam and India but said it was looking at a wide range of possible investments, including acquisitions. Asia is a major focus, he added.  
He declined to give details but said the Vietnamese opportunity involved an existing plant.
"There's nothing immediate but we are looking across all the areas of our business in fact," Ralph told reporters.
"We are involved in looking at a couple of opportunities, but it's early days. Provided we can see it makes sense for us, and we can do it on a basis that's going to earn a satisfactory return, then we are likely to move," he said.  
Foster's, which has breweries in Shanghai, Tianjin and Guangdong in China, said the Chinese operations would break even or turn a profit in 1998/99. Foster's China posted a 1995/96 loss of A$17 million before interest and tax.
The group's 40-percent owned Canadian brewer, Molson Breweries  MOL.TO, also performed weakly in its business year ending April 1, but has undergone a major restructure and is focusing on building market share at home, Foster's said.  
Foster's chief executive Kunkel said Molson still delivered a high return on invested capital and forecast higher operating profits from the group's powerhouse Australian brewing unit, Carlton and United Breweries, over the medium term.
Foster's also plans to free up about A$400 million in non-performing assets and is counting on higher returns from its British pub chain, the Inntrepreneur Pub Company Ltd, putting the group in a stong position to pursue growth, Kunkel said.
The computer software and instruction kit for the death machine used in the world's first legal mercy killing will soon be available on the Internet, the Australian doctor who developed it said on Tuesday.
Dr Philip Nitschke, who last month connected cancer sufferer Bob Dent to the machine in Australia's outback Northern Territory, said Internet users would be able to copy the software and instructions from a home page now being developed.
"We see no reason in restricting it in any way," Nitschke told Reuters in Melbourne, where he is due to demonstrate the machine at an euthanasia conference this week.
The death machine used in the Northern Territory, which has the world's only voluntary euthanasia law, enables people to give themslves lethal injections with the tap of computer keys.
On September 22, Nitschke hooked Dent up to the machine with an intravenous tube. Dent, a 66-year-old former carpenter and one-time Christian missionary, started the flow of lethal drugs by entering three simple computer commands.
"Once the intravenous line is put into the patient...then it's simple a matter of the patient pressing the response to the questions on the screen," Nitschke said. The computer programme asks three times if the patient wishes to go ahead.
Dubbed Australia's "Dr Death" by opponents of assisted suicide, Nitschke said the idea of an euthanasia home page was a response to strong interest in Dent's death and the new law, atlhough he said he was having some logistical problems getting the page up and running.
An estimated 50 million people use the worldwide Internet computer network.
"It's to let people know and give them some idea of the way this is being done in a responsible fashion in the Northern Territory," he said, adding he had already sent how-to-do-it kits overseas and around Australia using electronic mail.
A doctor cannot lawfully hook a patient up to the machine anywhere outside the Northern Territory, whether overseas or in Australia's six states and other territory, Nitschke said.
But he dismissed suggestions he could face criminal charges if a machine built from material supplied on the Internet was used in mercy killings outside the remote outback jurisdiction.
"I feel very safe as far as giving the details of the equipment and as far as providing the software and the like," he said. The software is a "trivial" part of the device, he added.
The software and equipment needed to build the machine are very simple and can be bought for around A$200 (US$160), though the lethal drugs are extremely difficult to obtain, he said.
He said he was now developing another death machine which used carbon monoxide and an oxygen mask, enabling people to end their lives without needing someone to insert intravenous tubes.
"When people get too old and frail it can be very difficult to get access to veins and gas is a much easier way to go, and carbon monoxide is a painless and acceptable way...," he said.
Nitschke described his machine as a "slicker" version of the suicide device designed by U.S. euthanasia advocate Dr Jack Kevorkian, who has publicly acknowledged attending more than 40 deaths since he began his assisted-suicide crusade in 1990.
(A$1 = $0.80)
Australia's most profitable casino operator, Crown Ltd, said on Wednesday its long-term ambition lay in Asia where it planned to continue its winning streak with the region's high-rollers.
Crown chairman Lloyd Williams told shareholders in Melbourne, where the company's new casino and hotel complex is nearing completion, that the new A$1.6 billion premises would be a show-case development for Asia.  
"If we are successful in Melbourne, Australia, I think we can be successful in Asia," Williams told Crown's annual meeting at the casino's temporary home beside the city's Yarra River, near the new Crown complex due to open in early March.
"I think what we are doing with this project is that we are probably show-casing it to Asia and that's basically what our ambition is as far as that is concerned," Williams said.
Crown plans to open another three Asian marketing offices in China, Taiwan and Malaysia. It already has offices in Bangkok, Singapore, Jakarta and Hong Kong, enticing big gamblers there to take their chances at the Melbourne casino.  
Crown derived about 30 percent of its gaming revenue of A$490 million in the year to June 30, which underpinned a 76 percent rise in net profit after abnormals to A$58 million.
Williams told reporters later he hoped to build this up to 40 percent or higher.
"I find it remarkable the wealth creation in Asia. Their principal leisure activity is gaming," he said.
"In Asia, comparatively speaking, they (high rollers) treat A$100,000 like A$10," he added.  
Crown wants to bed down its new casino and hotel complex before launching a foray into Asia, Williams said, adding he was not interested in small casino licences such as one recently awarded in the Cambodian capital, Phnom Penh.
"There are all sorts of licences available in Asia at the moment....I'm not interested in those licences, not those little licences," he said.
"I was talking about a major licence where a government decided to legalise gaming in a genuine way and the only place (in Asia where) that's done that...at the moment is Malaysia."  
Malaysia's Resorts World Bhd, a subsidiary of Genting Bhd owns and operates that country's only casino in the mountain resort of Genting Highlands.
Williams said that if Thailand, one of Crown's biggest source of high rollers, ever followed suit and awarded an exclusive casino licence, Crown would be a bidder.
"There are gaming jurisdictions that are opening up in Asia, but I don't think they will open up in the short term; I think it's more like the medium term."  
Crown has been operating for only two years but, partly due to relatively low state-government tax on revenue from international gamblers, it has emerged as the most popular of Australia's listed casino operators.
Williams told shareholders the company's first quarter performance for the three months to September 30 was stronger than the same quarter a year ago, adding that the second quarter was normally stronger again.
But he warned that dividends might not be paid until after the new complex's first year of operation.  
"I would think it would be probably prudent to have 12 months of operation at Southbank (site) before we considered that," he told the meeting.
Crown shares were two cents lower at A$2.86 at 2.55 p.m. (0455 GMT).
-- Melbourne bureau 61-3 9286-1421
Australian steelmaker, The Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd, on Thursday raised the prospect of the world's steel giants forging alliances and together building huge steel mills in Asia to meet the region's increasing demand.
BHP Steel, Australia's biggest producer of raw steel, said companies might be tempted to jointly build major, traditional steel mills in the rapidly growing region instead of going ahead as expected with a rash of smaller new-technology plants.  
"We may see some of the major steel players in the world seriously considering international alliances where they come together to build steel facilities in the developing economies of the world," BHP Steel chief executive Ron McNeilly said.
Big traditional steel mills are in some ways better suited to Asia than the new-technology electric steel-making furnaces, which use large amounts of steel scrap as a feedstock, he told Reuters in an interview.
"The realities are there is not enough scrap in Asia," McNeilly said. But big traditional steel plants required billions of dollars of investment, he added.  
"The funds required ... would just be too large for me to be willing to take that on independently or separately as a single project, totally exposed to all of the risks," he said.
"But as a project in company with other people, it's something that we most certainly would consider," he added.
McNeilly, who is overseeing more than A$500 million of investment in new value-added steel production in Asia, also described plans by BHP's international rivals for major new steel capacity as "talk".  
Asian steel consumption is forecast by the steel industry to underpin strong world demand growth of almost two percent a year for the metal over the next fours year.
BHP's rivals in the Asian region have meanwhile announced plans for major new steel-making capacity, including plans by South Korea's Hyundai Group  for a six million tonnes a year traditional steel mill.
"There's certainly a lot of talk ... but there is not a lot of evidence of that (major new capacity) happening," McNeilly said.  
But he predicted competition in world markets for steel products to remain intense as the north Asian steel-makers of Japan, Taiwan and South Korea vied with European and U.S. steel giants for the growth markets of Asia and Latin America.
"The large successful players in the steel industry are looking for growth ...," McNeilly said.
"They're the people who are going to be looking for investment opportunities, for partners, for alliances with governments and for project opportunities in the region.
"And I think are also going to be looking more and more for other big players to be part of a project with them."  
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
The Broken Hill Proprietary Co Ltd's steel division expects to increase its earnings in the current 1996/97 year due to lower costs and improved operations, BHP Steel chief executive Ron McNeilly told Reuters on Thursday.
But BHP Steel sees no major improvement in its home Australian market until possibly the second quarter of calendar 1997, and expects the world steel market to pick up towards the end of the first half of next year, McNeilly said.  
Asked if BHP Steels profit for the the current year ending May 31 would be higher than the division's 1995/96 profit, he said: "Oh yeah, yeah, but as I said we don't make any forecasts."
McNeilly declined to give a forecast for 1996/97 profits but said improvements would be driven by lower costs.
"If there's going to be an improvement in our results -- and I am confident there will be -- it will be an improvement that's driven I think in the near term by better operations and lower costs rather than a market-driven improvement in the short term," he added.  
BHP Steel reported a 44 percent slump in profit to A$375 million before abnormals in 1995/96. Its bottom line sunk 76 percent to A$153 million after a A$222 million write-down of the value of its Newcastle raw steel-making plant in Australia.
McNeilly said he expected steel markets in Australia and abroad to pick around mid 1997, as the domestic economy improved and world steel demand, especially in Asia, fed through into a recovery in depressed world steel prices.
"I don't really see any significant improvement in the Australian scene until sort of maybe the second quarter of next year -- so quite flat," he said.  
McNeilly described domestic demand as very patchy.
"There are some signs of improved demand in the resource and infrastructure areas but no sign of any improvement whatsoever in domestic housing, in most of the rural sector and in general demand, so it really is quite flat," he said.
BHP's export despatches of steel have been increasing, but an intensely competitive steel market has weighed on prices.
McNeilly quoted International Iron and Steel Institute (IISI) forecasts for strong world steel consumption over the next four years and said prices should strengthen between the first half of 1997 and the second quarter of 1998.  
"I think we will see towards the end of the first half of next calendar year, towards the end of the second quarter of 1998, an improvement in demand and prices in Asia and likewise Australia," he said.
"But I do think that from now until then, what we see now will be generally the situation."
The IISI forecasts world steel consumption to grow at close to two percent annually to 714 million tonnes in year 2000, with most of this growth coming from Asia.  
"We are not seeing any improvement that's market derived and I don't think there'll be any improvement that's market derived over the next six months," he said.
BHP Steel's major new projects around the world are still being built and will not boost the division's profit until after 1996/97, he said.
"We won't see any major inflow of profitability from new projects, really until the second half of (calendar 1997), which is the first half of next financial year," McNeilly said.  
He declined to comment on speculation BHP is considering closing its old, integrated raw steel-making plant at Newcastle, rather than investing in a new electric-arc furnace there.
McNeilly said BHP's Glenbrook steel mill in New Zealand, also now under the spotlight, must slash A$50 million from its cost base. "It absolutely has to happen," he said.
He said was encouraged by the resolve "of all those involved" at the 700,000-tonnes-per-year plant to cut costs.
"But if we have sites that don't and won't and can't, and tired assets that can't be rejuvenated, we have to bite the bullet and do the obvious."  -- Melbourne bureau 613-9286-1421
Base-metals producer Pasminco Ltd forecast on Tuesday another tough year of cost-cutting, warning that a weak zinc market and a strong Australian dollar would make its last annual profit hard to beat.
"We are going to have a difficult year," chief executive David Stewart told reporters after delivering a subdued earnings outlook to shareholders at the group's annual meeting here.
Pasminco surprised financial markets markets in August by reporting a tripling of net profit to A$41 million for the year to June 30, despite weak prices for its major product, zinc.  
World zinc prices have not moved dramatically since then, but a stronger Australian dollar has made a major impact, dragging first quarter profit for 1996/97 lower, Stewart said.
"In the first quarter, our result...is below last year because of the impact of the (Australian) dollar," he said.
For every one-cent rise in the value of the Australian dollar against the greenback, Pasminco suffers a A$7.5 million fall in after-tax profit, Stewart said.
The local dollar on average was five cents stronger in the first quarter than its average throughout 1995/96, he added.
Australian gambling group Tabcorp Holdings Ltd is praying for Melbourne Cup fever to grip the betting public next Tuesday and give the company a chance of winning back some lost turnover from its wagering division.
Tabcorp managing director Ross Wilson told the firm's annual meeting here on Tuesday that total turnover rose 17 percent in its first quarter ended September, due entirely to a 27 percent surge in turnover on its 12,000 slot machines around the state.
In contrast, its wagering division suffered an "abysmal" start to the current fiscal year ending June 30, 1997, he said.
Chemicals and plastics group ICI Australia Ltd posted on Wednesday a steep fall in annual net profit, blaming it in part on sharply lower plastics prices, but said the company was poised for major new expansion in Asia.
Managing director Warren Haynes said the group's net profit after abnormals of A$197 million reflected a difficult year to September 30, but the "pain" of restructuring and efficiency drives over the period would start to pay off in 1996/97.  
"We have in place a sounder base going into (1996-)'97 in terms of lower fixed costs, better volume in terms of upgrades of plants and lower variable costs...," he told reporters here.
Trading profit from the plastic division almost disappeared in 1995/96, plummeting to A$2 million from a record result of A$73 million in 1994/95 and mirroring a similarly sharp drop in world plastics prices from mid-1995, he said.
Plastic prices have fallen on average by US$400 per tonne since their peak of A$1,250 per tonne in June 1995, he said.  
ICI Australia, owned 62.4 percent by British chemicals giant Imperial Chemical Industries Plc, makes about 300 tonnes of plastics each year.
The company's paints, vinyls and chemicals businesses also reported weak results in 195/96, due to sluggish building activity in Australia, but its Incitec Ltd fertiliser subsidiary put in a strong performance in the year.
"That's offset the two very severe effects of the building industry and downturn in plastics prices to some extent," Haynes said.  
ICI Australia is not banking on a rise in plastics prices in 1996/97, but believes it is now in a stronger competitive position due to the recent conversion of its Sydney plastics plant to more efficient ethane feedstock.
The switch to ethane from a mixed feedstock of liquified petroleum gas and naphtha has fundamentally changed "the whole economics for the plastics business for ICI Australia", he said.
The company also shed 500 jobs in 1995/96, or six percent of its workforce, including about 100 jobs lost due to the closure of vinyl production in Sydney, Haynes said.  
"Whilst we have got ourselves in good shape in terms of costs and capacity, I can't predict what the outcome will be (for 1996/97)," he said, adding that world prices and domestic demand would determine the direction of profits.
ICI Australia would continue in 1996/97 to run capital expenditure at about A$350 million, but the portion spent in Asia will at least double to about A$50 million, Haynes said.
The group spent around A$20 million in 1995/96 in Asia, where it invested in polyethylene manufactuere in Malaysia, a resin plant in China and explosives production in Indonesia.  
New investments in the region could be much larger, and investments ranging anywhere from A$20 million to A$100 million would be considered, Haynes said.
"We have started to move into Asia in (1995-)'96 and we have plans to move further into Asia in (1996-)'97," he said.
"We would expect to step that up in '97 and possibly with investments on a larger scale than in '96, but we also see investment opportunities in Australia," he added.
-- Melbourne bureau 613-9286-1421
Institutional investor National Mutual Holdings Ltd has arranged to meet St George Bank Ltd to discuss its merger with Advance Bank Australia Ltd in a sign of growing disquiet over the deal.
National Mutual's funds management arm, a top-20 shareholder in St George, wants to discuss the bank's decision not to put the merger proposal to a shareholders' vote.  
"We are coming close to having a position on that and we are meeting shortly with St George and we will make some decision at the end of the meeting," said National Mutual Funds Management Ltd's domestic equity investments manager, Paul Jennings.
He declined to comment further but market sources said on Monday that National Mutual and at least one other institution were lobbying St George to reverse it decision not to seek shareholder approval for the A$2.65 billion merger.
"Three institutions ... are a little bit up in arms about it and would like to see a meeting," a broker said.  
National Australia Bank Ltd, itself seen as a predator in Australia's rapidly consolidating banking sector, has already said it is disappointed at St George's decision, which has been approved by the Australian Stock Exchange.
"We are disappointed there would not be a shareholders' meeting and we were concerned about the level of information out there about a merger proposal," NAB spokesman David Upton said.
"Given there hasn't been any details of the merger released as yet, we thought it would be important to have a meeting to give shareholders an opportunity to discuss it and find out more," Upton said.  
He declined to comment when asked about a newspaper comment that NAB might have few legal options to oppose the bid.
"We simply wanted to make known that we were disappointed that there wouldn't be a meeting," he said.
St George's scrip and cash offer valued each Advance Bank share at A$7.30 -- or nearly three times net asset backing.
The Australian Shareholders' Association, representing small shareholders, said it had met St George last Friday over the question of a shareholders' meeting.
"We are not at all happy," association executive officer Tony McLean told Reuters.  
"The principle is that it's a very significant deal for the bank and we believe that shareholders should be involved in approving it," he added.
He declined to comment on his talks with St George but said: "There will be an exchange of information between ourselves and the bank." McLean declined to elaborate.
Asked if an extraordinary general meeting could be called to pressure St George into reversing its decision, he said: "I guess that's a possibility."
-- Melbourne Bureau 61-3 9286-1421
Australian-based industrial group Pacific Dunlop Ltd painted on Friday a dour outlook of intense competition and low margins, and said it would look to cost cutting and acquisitions to help reignite its share price.
Faced with shareholder anger at the group's weak share price, chairman John Gough fended off suggestions at the group's annual meeting that Pacific Dunlop was vulnerable to a takeover and forecast a profit recovery in the year ending June 30, 1997.  
"We are forecasting an improvement in results for this financial year, although the first six months will be well below the comparative period of last year," Gough said.
Gough defended the board against persistent criticism of its aborted forays into the food and cardiac-implant businesses.
Pacific Dunlop still faces litigation related to its former pacemaker subsidiary, U.S.-based Telectronics Pacing Systems Inc, which was forced to halt production for 13 months until last June due to a pacemaker component defect.  
Telectronics was sold last month for A$170 million to medical equipment firm St Jude Medical Inc. Before the sale, Pacific Dunlop booked gross abnormal losses from Telectronics totalling A$340 million in its 1995/96 accounts.
"It was really developing quite visionary things that got us into trouble," Gough said as shareholders lined up at microphones to criticise the group's performance.
One pensioner told the meeting the group's share price had roughly halved since hitting a high of A$5.87 in March 1994, describing it as "not exactly a blue chip performance".
Australian paper and packaging group Amcor Ltd is expected on Monday to post a heavy slump in annual profit, due to lower paper prices and weak demand in its home market, but analysts feel the worst may soon be over.
The group, which recently warned the stock market its 1995/96 (July/June) results would be down on its 1994/95 record net profit, is tipped to announce a fall of around eight percent in pre-abnormal net earnings.  
Stock analysts are forecasting on average a result of A$372 million pre-abnormal profit in 1995/96, according to BZW Investment Management's BARCEPS forecasting service.
But Amcor, which is highly sensitive to both world paper prices and the Australian economic cycle, is coming off a record year in 1994/95, when a surge in paper prices and a strong local economy lifted the bottom line by 40 percent to A$359.7 million.
In the first half of 1995/96, prices turned against the group, which relies for 45 percent of its turnover on white paper sales, and the domestic economy has remained flat.  
Prices have fallen in the order of about 30 percent since their peak in late calendar 1995, one paper market source said.
In a sign of the times, Amcor's 46-percent-owned paper merchant Spicers Paper Ltd reported last Monday a 35 percent slide in annual net profit to A$16.02 million.
"There's been some pretty tough markets there and I think the Australian economy is flat and the paper cycle has gone against them a bit," said Brisbane-based analyst John Clifford, of Morgan Stockbroking Ltd.  
Sales are expected to exceed last year's A$6.6 billion, but margins have been squeezed and are likely to remain tight through at least the first half of 1996/97, the analysts said.
But Clifford and a Melbourne-based analyst told Reuters they saw pre-abnormal net profit stabilising at around A$400 million in 1996/97 and recovering the next year.
"As soon as there is some sort of pick-up in economic growth, you will see it start to improve," the Melbourne-based analyst told Reuters on Thursday.
"I am positive in the longer term," she added.  
Amcor, one of the world's top ten paper and packaging groups, has paper packaging operations in Europe, the United States, Asia and New Zealand. It has maintained double-digit growth in net profit for all but four of the past five years.
Despite the current downturn, it has continued to expand its offshore operations, buying 51 percent of Belgian UCB SA's flexible packing unit in May for about A$200 million.
It has also allocated A$380 million to expand paper production in Australia, where it commands about 40 percent of the market for fine papers.  
Morgan's Clifford said he believed these and other capital investments -- totalling A$1.5 billion over the past two and a half years -- would begin to bolster the bottom line in 1997/98.
"These sorts of programmes will certainly come through with increased profits through 1998 (1997/98) and especially through 1999 (1998/99)," Clifford said.
"The four to five-year outlook is pretty strong," he added.
-- Melbourne bureau 613-9286-1421
Resources and steel group The Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd is expected to report a fall in half year net profit on Friday, but share analysts say Australia's biggest company is likely to be spared another stock market mauling.
BHP, still licking its wounds with sellers having wiped around A$5 billion off its market value since May, is tipped to post a first-half net profit of around A$760 million, down from A$811 million a year ago, according to analysts' forecasts.  
The result, for the six months to November 30, is expected to include roughly A$100 million in net proceeds from asset sales, but slight improvements in the battered copper and steel divisions are also likely to emerge, the analysts said.
BHP's share price, which hit a year high of A$20.05 in early May, has been on a mostly downward roller-coaster ride for the past six months as copper and steel prices turned sour, and analysts revised down their near-term profit forecasts.  
But the copper price has firmed in recent months, steel markets are thought to have bottomed, and brokerages are again reworking their outlooks. BHP shares have also rebounded, closing on Monday at A$17.31 after hitting A$15.58 in September.
"It's one of the few companies where analysts are revising the results upwards," said a fund manager's share analyst.
The five analysts contacted by Reuters on Monday gave widely varying forecasts for interim profit, ranging from A$715 million to a high of A$804 million. The analyst tipping A$715 million said he believed others had forecast even lower numbers.  
But the analysts agreed the interim result would show signs of improved performance in copper and steel, though they would fine tune their estimates after seeing the group's November production data, expected to be released on Tuesday.
"They have definitely had a good two quarters in petroleum and I guess they're struggling in minerals and copper and steel," a Melbourne-based analyst said.
"They are doing a good job given the environment."
Most analysts said they expected a modest profit recovery for full year 1996/97. BHP reported a 20 percent drop in pre-abnormal net profit of A$1.29 billion in 1995/96.  
BHP Petroleum, which in the first half of 1995/96 ranked behind the minerals and steel divisions in terms of profit, will be BHP's biggest earner in the interim result to be released on Friday, said JB Were and Son analyst Neil Goodwill.
"The asset sales are in there though," he said.
The analysts expect BHP to book between A$80 million and A$117 million in asset sales as operating profit, due in effect to gains on the sale of BHP's stake in the Mungo/Monan oil and gas fields in the North Sea and of its interest in the Sierra Chata gas field and Chihuidos block in Argentina.  
BHP also made a A$45 million profit from the sale of its 20 percent stake in an undeveloped gold prospect, Sun Prospecting and Mining Co Ltd, in South Africa. But this was offset by the A$45 million loss booked on the sale of its Mali gold assets.
BHP will not book any of these asset sales as abnormal items, deeming them too small to be taken below the line, one analyst said. But another analyst confessed he initially felt they were being taken above the line to mask the core result.  
"I thought that was the case and then the oil price shot up and copper is a bit better, so without that number (for asset sales) they would have had a reasonably good profit number anyway," he said.
BHP's Magma Copper operation should creep back into profit in the second quarter after posting a loss on a full-cost basis in the first quarter results, he said.
BHP bought Magma last January for US$2.4 billion, making it the world's second biggest copper producer. But the price tag has come under heavy criticism.  
BHP is expected to book a net abnormal gain of around A$100 million from the settlement of its dispute with the Victoria state government over a federal tax on Bass Strait gas revenues.
-- Melbourne Bureau 61-3 9286-1435
Australian resources and steel group The Broken Hill Pty Co. (BHP) posted a 9.8-percent fall in first-half profits Friday, disappointing the share market but avoiding another mauling by investors.
BHP, whose shares have been hammered since its key markets in steel and copper turned sour six months ago, posted a A$790 million ($628 million) net profit for the six months to Nov. 30, down from A$867 ($689.3 million) for the year-ago period.
But Australia's largest-quoted company had its bottom line boosted by an abnormal gain of A$107 million ($85 million) and investors were initially not impressed.
"It's pretty lousy," said one fund manager's stock analyst. Another analyst disappointed with the result said the resources giant was still on track for a modest profit recovery for the full year to May 31, 1997.
Though BHP's battered copper division showed improvement, with the North American copper operations swinging back into profit, analysts had expected a first-half group operating profits of around A$760 million ($604.2 million).
Instead, BHP's operating profits fell 15.8 percent from the year-ago period to A$683 million ($543.0 million).
But managing director John Prescott said the second-quarter figures showed faster improvement in performance and that, despite weak copper and steel prices, the group was still investing in future growth.
Citing a sharp jump in exploration expenditure in the half year, he told reporters: "That's an important part of sustaining our growth."
Including abnormals, BHP's minerals, copper and steel divisions all contributed higher earnings in the latest three months against the August quarter. The steel division's earnings were flat.
Petroleum was the biggest earner with A$253 million ($201.1 million), but this included an abnormal gain of A$107 million ($85 million) from the settlement of a dispute over a gas resource tax.
BHP Petroleum's operating profits also included a A$82 million ($65.2 million) windfall from asset sales and a larger than expected exploration expense.
BHP's minerals division, a major world producer of iron ore and coal, doubled its contribution to profit in the second quarter to A$154 million ($122.4 million), due largely to higher world prices.
BHP Copper benefitted from a recent firming in the copper price and a cut of 7 U.S. cents per pound in its North American operating costs to post a second-quarter profit of A$132 million ($104.9 million), up from A$85 million ($67.6 million) in the first quarter.
The U.S. copper operations, acquired last January with the US$2.4 billion ($1.9 billion) purchase of Magma Copper, made a loss on a full-cost basis in the first quarter. Prescott said Friday Magma had swung back into profit in the second quarter.
BHP Steel's second-quarter profit was flat at A$90 million ($71.6 million).
Australian resources and steel group The Broken Hill Pty Co (BHP) posted a 9.8-percent fall in first-half profits on Friday, disappointing the share market but avoiding another mauling by investors.
BHP, whose shares have been hammered since its key markets in steel and copper turned sour six months ago, posted a A$790 million (US$628 million) net profit for the six months to November 30, down from A$867 for the same period last year.
But Australia's largest quoted company had its bottom line boosted by an abnormal gain of A$107 million and investors were initially not impressed.
The share price were up 54 cents to a high of A$17.59 just after the result then took a tumble and settled at around A$17.20 in early afternoon trading.
But late buying across the board helped BHP, the market bellwether stock, recover ground and the stock closed at A$17.48, 43 three cents higher than Thursday's close.
"It's pretty lousy," one fund manager's stock analyst told Reuters soon after the release. Another analyst disappointed with the result said the resources giant was still on track for a modest profit recovery for the full year to May 31, 1997.
Though forecast signs of improvement emerged in BHP's battered copper division, with the North American copper operations swinging back into profit, analysts had been tipping a first-half group pre-abnormal result of around A$760 million.
BHP's pre-abnormal net profit of A$683 million was 15.8 percent down on the corresponding 1995/96 period.
But managing director John Prescott said the second quarter figures showed an accelerating improvement in performance and that, despite weak copper and steel prices, the group was still investing in future growth.
Citing a sharp jump in exploration expenditure in the half year, he told reporters: "That's an important part of sustaining our growth."
"I think we are moving ahead," he added. "We have a lot of work to do and we're going to build the company around its high-quality assets and we are starting to see the results of our work."
Including abnormals, BHP's minerals, copper and steel divisions all contributed higher earnings in the latest three months against the August quarter. The steel division was flat.
Petroleum was the biggest earner with A$253 million for the quarter, but this included an abnormal gain of A$107 million from the settlement of a dispute over a gas resource tax.
BHP Petroleum's pre-abormal result also included a A$82 million windfall from asset sales and a larger than expected exploration expense.
BHP's minerals division, a major world producer of iron ore and coal, doubled its contribution to profit in the second quarter to A$154 million, due largely to higher world prices.
BHP Copper benefitted from a recent firming in the copper price and a cut of seven U.S. cents per pound in its North American operating costs to post a second quarter profit of A$132 million, up from A$85 million in the first quarter.
The U.S. copper operations, acquired last January with the US$2.4 billion purchase of Magma Copper, made a loss on a full-cost basis in the first quarter. Prescott said on Friday Magma had swung back into profit in the second quarter.
BHP Steel's second-quarter profit was flat at A$90 million.
Australian resources and steel group The Broken Hill Pty Co (BHP) posted a 9.8-percent fall in first-half profits on Friday, further disappointing the share market after a difficult year.
BHP, whose shares have been hammered since its key markets in steel and copper turned sour six months ago, posted a A$790 million (US$628 million) net profit for the six months to November 30, down from A$867 for the same period last year.
But Australia's largest quoted company had its bottom line boosted by an abnormal gain of A$107 million and investors were not impressed.
The share price climbed 54 cents to a high of A$17.59 just after the result but took a tumble and settled at around A$17.20, still 15 cents higher than Thursday's close.
"It's pretty lousy," one fund manager's stock analyst told Reuters.
Though forecast signs of improvement emerged in BHP's battered copper division, with the North American copper operations swinging back into profit, analysts had been tipping a first-half group pre-abnormal result of around A$760 million.
BHP's pre-abnormal net profit of A$683 million was 15.8 percent down on the corresponding 1995/96 period.
But managing director John Prescott said the second quarter figures showed an accelerating improvement in performance.
"We are seeing an improvement in our operations quarter on quarter on quarter and the trend to improvement is accelerating," he said in a taped interview released to the media after the result.
"I think we are moving ahead. We have a lot of work to do and we're going to build the company around its high-quality assets and we are starting to see the results of our work."
Including abnormals, BHP's minerals, copper and steel divisions all contributed increased earnings in the latest three months compared with the August quarter. The steel division was flat.
Petroleum was the biggest earner with A$253 million for the quarter, but this included an abnormal gain of A$107 million from the settlement of a dispute over a gas resource tax.
BHP Petroleum's pre-abormal result also included a A$82 million windfall from asset sales and a larger than expected exploration expense.
"The initial reaction (to the result) was positive but this has been followed by disappointment," said Phillip Toop, a dealer at Brisbane broker Lance Jones.
BHP's minerals division, a major world producer of iron ore and coal, doubled its contribution to profit in the second quarter to A$154 million, due largely to higher world prices.
BHP Copper benefitted from a recent firming in the copper price and a cut of seven U.S. cents per pound in its North American operating costs to post a second quarter profit of A$132 million, up from A$85 million in the first quarter.
The U.S. copper operations, acquired last January with the US$2.4 billion purchase of Magma Copper, made a loss on a full-cost basis in the first quarter. Prescott said on Friday Magma had swung back into profit in the second quarter.
BHP Steel's second-quarter profit was flat at A$90 million.
Australian resources and steel group The Broken Hill Pty Co (BHP) disappointed the share market on Friday with a weaker than expected second-quarter profit to post first-half net earnings of A$683 million before abnormals.
BHP, whose shares have been hammered since its key markets in steel and copper turned sour six months ago, booked an abnormal gain of A$107 million to boost the bottom line for the six months to November 30, but investors were not impressed.
Global paper and packaging group Amcor Ltd announced on Monday a rare slide in annual profit, blaming weak world paper prices and flat economic growth at home, but its shares held firm on the promise of recovery.
The result, which was Amcor's first fall in pre-abnormal profit in over a decade, failed to rock the blue-chip's battered share price, which had already fallen heavily in the past six months in anticipation of a weak outcome.  
"Potentially, the worst is over and you are looking forward to increased earnings here on in," a Sydney-based broker told Reuters after Amcor reported a six percent drop in net profit to A$338.8 million in the year to June 30.
Amcor's paper division was hit by a roughly 20 percent fall in world paper prices since late calendar 1995, and weak economic activity in Australia and Germany impacted heavily on its packaging operations, the company said.
But Amcor suggested that paper prices had bottomed out and said it hoped to see signs of an upturn in 1997.  
"Paper prices ... appear to have bottomed, all Amcor businesses have restructuring and cost-reduction programmes underway and there are new business opportunities in all regions," Amcor managing director Don Macfarlane told reporters.
The stock market, which shaved over A$2.00 off Amcor's year-high share price this year, initially pushed the shares higher on Monday before late selling pulled them to a close of A$7.62, down 12 cents on Friday's close, in a falling market.
"I don't think sentiment towards the stock is going to change in the near term," said one Melbourne-based analyst.  
"Profit will be flat towards the end of the (current 1996/97) year and then start to pick up into the new year," she added, predicting that a recovery in Australian economic growth will begin to spur Amcor's earnings in 1997/98.
Amcor, one of the world's top-10 paper and packaging companies and for many years a favourite of the local bourse, signalled a major cost-cutting drive and a reduction in capital expenditure to restore margins, especially in packaging.  
The packaging business, which makes products ranging from plastic beverage bottles and breakfast-cereal boxes to carboard boxes, suffered squeezed profit margins in Australia and New Zealand, and poor results in Germany.
Its Holfeder box-making business in Germany posted another undisclosed loss in 1996/97. "The level of confidence in the German economy is abysmal," Amcor's Macfarlane said.
The group's U.S. operations also "dragged its feet" but its British packaging business posted excellent results, he said.  
Amcor's Asian packaging operations posted higher profit, despite paper prices in the region "sinking like a stone" this year and dragging carboard-box prices with them, he said.
"It's been a rollar-coaster ride on paper prices in Asia," he added.
Amcor has long had a target of achieving 15 percent growth in earnings per share, but Macfarlane announced this annual goal had been scrapped, given the difficult trading environment and Australia's new low-inflation environment.
"I think we simply have to for a period pull them (rapid-growth ambitions) down a peg or two...," he said.  
"Clearly we have to make sure that the businesses we have already got are earning reasonable returns."
-- Melbourne Bureau 61-3 9286-1421
Australia's biggest company, The Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd (BHP), has agreed to pay its local steel workers a 10-percent pay rise over two years in a wage deal which could set the tone for other labour negotiations.
The deal, which covers over 13,000 workers at BHP steel plants around the country, falls short of pay rises being sought in some other areas of Australian manufacturing and provoked sharp words among rival trade unions.
The Australian Workers Union (AWU), which claims to represent about 80 percent of BHP steel workers, confirmed the deal on Friday, saying it was struck before Christmas and was well below its initial demand of 15 percent over two years.
But AWU organiser Mick Eagles told Reuters that historically low inflation in Australia was putting intense pressure on unions to modify their wage expectations.
"I think in this environment, with the way the CPI (inflation) is, I think the trend in the next 12 months and two years is going to put enormous pressure on wages to be kept low," he said.
"So a 10-percent outcome over two years is going to be seen as quite an achievement."
The Australian Manufacturing Workers Union (AMWU), which wants to make an annual wage rise of over five percent as the benchmark in the metal trades industry, said the BHP deal would weaken unions' position in other wage negotiations underway.
"Obviously when that happens, it always weakens other unions' positions, but that's typical of the AWU," Vince Theuma, Victoria state organiser for the AMWU, told Reuters.
"They run in there and reach deals that we're not trying to chase."
BHP, which has been working to slash costs to compensate for weak international steel prices and sluggish demand at home, described the wages agreement as satisfactory.
"Part of the agreement involves union agreement to introduce new types of employment arrangements which eliminate traditional demarcation lines and have novel concepts in terms of employment which provide us with a business benefit," a BHP spokesman said.
"We think this is a satisfactory resolution, bearing in mind the benefits of those innovative agreements," he told Reuters.
BHP initially offered eight percent over two years.
The agreement comes as wages growth continues to be cited by Australia's central bank as a major concern for inflation, now sitting well within the Reserve Bank's target range of between two and three percent.
Australia's biggest company, resources and steel group The Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd (BHP), said on Friday it has agreed to pay its domestic steel workers a 10 percent pay rise over two years.
The Australian Workers Union (AWU), which claims to represent about 80 percent of BHP Steel's 15,000 unionised steel workers, also confirmed the deal, saying it was struck and endorsed by the workforce just before Christmas.  
BHP and the AWU said the annual wage rises, effective from New Year's Day, were for five percent in calendar 1997 and five percent in 1998, paid as three percent instalments in January and two percent in July.
The wage rises include site-specific productivity offsets at steel mills around the country, but also included an adjustment for inflation and took into account other steel industry wage agreements, AWU spokesmen told Reuters.  
"These increases are to take place in the context of the agreement on the specific initiatives for improved performance through the introduction of incentive workplace agreements," BHP said in a short statement.
AWU negotiator Mick Eagles said the wage deal did not affect existing performance-related payments, under which workers can earn quarterly bonuses of up to about five percent of salary.
Eagles described the deal as a good outcome given the prospects for continued low inflation and predicted the wages of all Australian blue-collar workers would come under pressure.  
"I think in this environment, with the way the CPI is, I think the trend in the next 12 months and two years is going to put enormous pressure on wages to be kept low," he said.
"So a 10 percent outcome over two years is going to be seen as quite an achievement."  
A BHP spokesman told Reuters the deal was satisfactory.
"Part of the agreement involves union agreement to introduce new types of employment arrangements which eliminate traditional demarcation lines and have novel concepts in terms of employment which provide us with a business benefit," the spokesman said.
"We think this is a satisfactory resolution, bearing in mind the benefits of those innovative agreements," he added.
The deal was in line with a recommendation made to the company and union last month by Australia's labour tribunal, the Industrial Relations Commission.  
BHP initially offered eight percent over two years, while the AWU entered negotiations seeking 15 percent over two years.
The agreement comes as wages growth continues to be cited by Australia's central bank as a major concern for inflation, now at historically low levels and well within the Reserve Bank's target range of between two and three percent.
The deal averted the threat of strikes at BHP's steel plants around the country, but the group's minerals division continues to feel the effects of industrial strife.  
About 700 workers downed tools on Thursday over wage and benefits disputes, halting construction of a A$1.5 billion iron ore processing plant being built for BHP at Port Hedland in Western Australia.
The striking workers are engaged to independent contractors hired by BHP.
In November, BHP coal miners in New South Wales state called a strike over cuts in accident compensation payouts.
-- Melbourne newsroom 613-9286-1421
Australia's century-old steel maker, The Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd (BHP), has been warned it risks falling behind global rivals unless it restructures its big, ageing plants and maps out a clear offshore strategy.
BHP Steel's long-term strategy came under the spotlight on Monday after credit rating agency Standard and Poor's wrote in a steel industry review that BHP faced its toughest test yet as it positioned itself to tackle rapidly developing Asian markets.
S&amp;P's comments, made in the latest edition of its journal CreditFocus, comes as Taiwan's An Feng Steel Co Ltd plans to build a A$1.4 billion steel mill in Australia in what has been termed a "wake-up call" for BHP.
"A wake-up call is not a bad way of looking at it," a corporate analyst told Reuters, describing the competition to supply steel into Asian economies as intense.
"It's not that they (BHP) have been flat-footed; it's just that there are (bigger) global players out there with billions of dollars to set these things up," he added.
An Feng and its little known minority Australian partner, Kingstream Resources NL, launched last Friday a plan to build a new-technology steel mill expected to produce annually 2.4 million tonnes of steel slab for mainly Asian consumption.
The move has been seen as a direct challenge to BHP, which dominates the Australian market with steel products made from old-technology plants on the country's east and south coasts. The youngest of its three big steel mills opened 56 years ago. These old mills also supply raw steel for BHP's more modern offshore operations, which have so far focused on downstream steel mills in Asia making higher-value products tailored for such industries as car-making and construction.
BHP produces 636 tonnes of steel per worker per year using predominantly coal-fired blast furnaces, but by the year 2000 new-technology mills using electric arc furnaces will enable steel operators to reach 1,000 tonnes per worker, S&amp;P said.
"In many respects, BHP Steel's future earnings quality will depend on the successful implementation of this international growth strategy and the critical selection of steel-making technology for future domestic expansion," S&amp;P analyst Brad Scott wrote in the January edition of CreditFocus.
BHP is expected by May to announce the results of a year-long review of the steel division's long-term strategy, begun last year after the group reported a dive in steel profits and a big writedown of its Newcastle mill near Sydney.
BHP has since indicated it is prepared to close the 81-year-old Newcastle mill if need be.
Speculation about the closure of Newcastle, and with it the loss of thousands of jobs, has prompted a parliamentary inquiry into the future of Australia's steel industry -- virtually a synonym for BHP, which supplies 75 percent of the local market.
BHP's local dominance and its production costs, still low in global terms, will give it some comfort over the next few years, but the so-called "Big Australian" must rationalise its assets at home to realise its long-term goals in Asia, analysts said.
"BHP will need to define its domestic investment vision over that period or risk falling behind the competitiveness of its global competitors," S&amp;P's Scott said.
A stock analyst suggested BHP may even resolve to abandon raw-steel making capacity and begin buying it instead from cheaper producers, but a BHP Steel spokesman doubted this.
"I would not see that," spokesman John Devers told Reuters. "We have got the benefits of relatively low-cost raw materials on our doorstep and good transport arrangements and energy."
-- Melbourne bureau 61-3 9286-1421
Australian retailers are heading for a grim round of sharply lower profit results as one by one the major chains announce they have fallen casualty to a sluggish economy and tight-fisted consumers.
Homeware retailer Harvey Norman Ltd added its voice on Wednesday to the chorus of woe, revealing it was trailing its goal of 15 percent annual sales growth amid the worst retail environment in the company's 15-year history.  
The comments, made to Reuters in an interview, follow formal warnings to the stock exchange that big upmarket department store chain David Jones Ltd, and two large clothing retailers, expect steep profit slides.
David Jones and fashion houses Country Road Ltd and Just Jeans Ltd have all warned of 50 percent drops in interim profit for the half-year ending January, confirming that Christmas failed to boost retailers' bottom lines.  
"We are used to posting massive increases (in sales turnover) year after year after year. This is the first year we've ever been caught up in a general market malaise," said Harvey Norman managing director Michael Harvey.
"It's basically an indication to us that the market is having its worst year since Harvey Norman began (in 1982)."
Harvey Norman, which is aiming for turnover of A$1.2 billion in the year ending June 30, has enjoyed annual sales growth of up to 58 percent over the past four years.  
It, along with other retailers, had been hoping for a strong December but found Australian wallets were not as easy to prise open as they once were, especially for clothes.
Australia's biggest retailer, Coles Myer Ltd, which accounts for almost 18 cents in every retail dollar spent, declined on Wednesday to give figures for December sales.
But corporate affairs director Peter Morgan said he was "comfortable" with Coles' performance. Coles has recently been among the most poorly performed listed retailers and is embarking on a major refocusing of its sprawling businesses.  
Official data released on Tuesday showed that all areas of retailing except for food weakened in the three months to November and that overall retail sales continued to trend down despite two interest rate cuts since July.
The Reserve Bank eased rates again last month, but it was too late to rescue a second dismal Christmas for retailers.
"A shocker" was how one stock analyst summed up the festive season for the clothing retailers, but she said supermarket chain Woolworths Ltd and other food retailers should have come through the Christmas period relatively unscathed.  
Asked about the outlook for full-year profits in 1996/97, the analyst said: "Pretty grim." But she and another analyst said they saw a pick-up in earnings in coming months.
"I think the outlook is reasonable, but not spectacular," the second analyst said.
-- Melbourne Bureau 61-3 9286-1421
Australian furniture, whitegoods and computer retailer Harvey Norman said on Wednesday it was trailing behind its target for 15 percent annual sales growth and that cool summer weather had impacted on December sales.
Managing director Michael Harvey told Reuters that December sales again grew by "double digit figures" on the same month a year ago, but was not matching the robust growth the expanding company traditionally enjoyed.
Excluding sales from new stores, turnover in December, a peak month, rose only about five percent, Harvey said.  
"We are looking for a 15 percent increase (in 1996/97), which will take us from A$1.043 billion, which we posted last financial year, up to A$1.2 billion and at the moment we are falling short of that target," Harvey said in an interview.
He described the retail trading environment as the worst in the company's 15-year history, but stuck to his earlier hope that the second half of the current year ending June 30 would compensate for a slow first half.  
Harvey declined to give a profit forecast but said the company was "definitely not" heading down the same path as retailers David Jones Ltd, Country Road Ltd and Just Jeans Ltd, all of which have announced steep interim profit downgrades.
"If we have a flat result or if we were indeed between flat and 10 percent down, we are going to be disappointed," he said.
"But I can assure you it's our belief that it won't be less than a 10 percent decrease on last year and it's certainly our hope that it will be an increase on last yeaer's profit result.
"But, again, because of the nature of our business, it's just too early to tell," he said.  
Harvey Norman reported a dip in net profit after abnormals of A$30.41 million in 1995/96, but told shareholders at its annual meeting in November it looked forward to strong summer months from November to February.
But managing director Harvey said summer had so far been unseasonally cool in its east-coast markets, dampening sales of goods like air conditioners, refrigerators, fans, outdoor furniture and barbecues.
"That's really let us down more than anything else," he said. December and January are usually the firm's peak months.  
Harvey Norman is still hoping for a heatwave, but hot weather has its biggest impact on sales before Christmas when a lot of discretionary household expenditure is spent, he added.
The company is also pinning its hopes on a turnaround in consumer spending in the first half of calendar 1997 to enable Harvey Norman to reach its 15 percent sales target, but Harvey said there appeared to be little joy on the immediate horizon.
"Through last year we were basically saying it's got to turn in the second quarter of '97 calendar year, but at moment there's nothing to indicate that's going to happen...," he said.  
"My view is that next financial year starting July it will be a better year than this year and last year, but in terms of when it will actually start to turn, we are hoping...it will be the second quarter," Harvey said.
"I don't think we are going to see much joy in January, February, but it's our hope that things will turn come March, April, May, June," he said.
-- Melbourne Bureau 613-9286-1421
Diversified manufacturer Pacific BBA Ltd said on Tuesday trading conditions in the second half of calendar 1996 had been softer than expected and it now expected 1996 profits to be around the same level as 1995.
"I've only seen July's results and verbal figures for August, but it will depend on how the rest of the year unfolds," Pacific BBA managing director Barry Jackson told Reuters.
"It's looking a bit softer than we would like. We were really budgetting for an economy that was stretching a touch but it doesn't look like it's going to do it," Jackson said.  
Jackson said in an interview the 1996 profit would be similar to calendar 1995's net profit of A$15.9 million.
"I think it's going to be much the same figure," he said.
Jackson cited the flat Australian economy, relatively weak automotive sales world-wide and the cost of developing new projects as the major constraints on short-term profit growth.
But he said the domestic economy should pick up in 1997 and put the group on track to achieving its goal of 15 to 20 percent annual growth in sales and earnings before interest and tax.  
But Jackson, speaking after the announcement of a A$200 million, five-year contract to supply brake parts to a North American vehicle manufacturer, seemed to be more concerned about coping with rapid growth than with a sluggish local economy.
Pacific BBA, which makes car parts, plastic packaging and construction products, has budgeted to spend around A$60 million in 1996 in capital expenditure, Jackson said.
"I think it (capital expenditure) will be two to three times depreciation (charges) for the next year or so," he said, adding that this was around twice the average for manufacturers.  
The group is examining a range of expansion opportunities in Asia and North America, requiring annual capital investments of between as little as A$5 million and A$200 million.
"We have people looking full time at these opportunities," he said. But the group must expand cautiously, he added.
"We've just got to be careful we don't over-stretch ourselves," he said. "Growth holds back your short-term earnings," he added.
Jackson rued the failure of Pacific BBA's recent bid for fellow Australian manufacturer Azon Ltd, which was acquired instead by U.S.-based Illinois Tool Works Inc.  
Pacific BBA needs to become bigger or find a big partner to seize major new opportunities, especially in the automotive industry where the group wants to become a global niche player, he said.
Asked if its small size in world terms could become a brake on Pacific BBA's growth, Jackson said: "It's not been yet, but it could become one and we were trying to say to the market when we were trying to buy Azon that this could give us the ability to do anything we want to."
-- Melbourne bureau 613-9286-1421
Australian life office National Mutual Holdings Ltd will finally put an indicative value on its own shares on Wednesday, removing much of the guesswork that has surrounded the pricing of the group's A$2 billion-plus float.
The group's net tangible asset backing of A$2.36 billion or A$1.39 per share is expected to serve as the pricing yardstick for the offer, with retail investors receiving a discount on the final price paid by institutions, insurance analysts said.  
"I would have thought somewhere around A$1.30 and A$1.35 (per share for retail investors)," a stock analyst said on Tuesday, noting the demand for shares from National Mutual policy-holders would largely determine the retail price.
Policy-holders own 49 percent of National Mutual Holdings, and French parent Axa the rest.
"Obviously if the demand from policy-holders has been as strong as they say, there's going to be less shares available to institutional investors, so that will push the price up a little."  
National Mutual, which gave its 1.2 million policy-holders until August 23 to choose between taking shares or cashing out, has so far declined to comment on policy-holder demand for scrip, except to say the phones rang hot with inquiries.
It has also declined to specify the retail and institutional portions of the offer, leaving its "embedded value" or net asset backing (NTA) of A$1.39 per share as the only guide to a price.
National Mutual chief executive Geoff Tomlinson has said the group's NTA is an indicator of the final offer price, suggesting the group's earnings are too volatile to use the conventional appraisal valuation method, which accounts for future earnings.  
Under the offer process, Tomlinson will also announce the indicative price range for institutional investors on Wednesday as well as the total number of shares for sale by public offer.
The lack of any hard information on the policy-holders' response has led to some widely varying views on price.
One Sydney-based analyst said the retail price could exceed the group's NTA, suggesting policy-holders who elected to take cash would not want to see the price of the shares they forfeited leap in the secondary market.  
"At the end of the day, the people who took the cash alternative don't want to see the price at 40 or 50 percent above where they took the cash," he told Reuters.
At an issue price of A$1.39, National Mutual would list on the Australian Stock Exchange at a price-earnings ratio of 11.8 times, against the average across industrial stocks of 13.4.
"That's at the upper end of where we would expect these guys to trade, but there's some earnings growth to come through in (years ending September 30) 1997 and 1998," the stock analyst told Reuters.  
He said the A$1.39 NTA quoted by National Mutual undervalued its real NTA by five to six cents per share, and this implied a maximum offer price of A$1.45 for institutional investors.
"I don't think they (the institutions) are really going to want to pay much of a premium over embedded value," he said.
Another Sydney-based analyst said the institutional offer price could reach as high at A$1.60, based on a retail offer price of around the A$1.39 NTA.  
"I think there's going to be a lot of interest, particularly in overseas institutions," he said. "I think there's a lot of value there...," he added, citing an improving Australian life insurance market and good growth potential in Asia.
The group's 69 percent-owned National Mututal Asia Ltd, based in Hong Kong, and National Mututal Life in Australia account for the bulk of the group's earnings.
-- Melbourne bureau 613-9286-1421
Over half a million people insured with Australian life office National Mutual Holdings Ltd have rushed to buy shares in the group in what the insurer said on Wednesday was a "fabulous" start to its stock market debut.
National Mutual, which plans to list on the Australian and New Zealand exchanges next month, announced on Wednesday that half of its 1.2 million policy-holders had elected to take up their entitlement to shares in the multi-billion-dollar float.
"National Mutual Holdings will have the largest shareholder base of any company in Australia and New Zealand ... it's a fabulous result," National Mutual managing director Geoff Tomlinson told reporters and insurance analysts in Melbourne.
Tomlinson also set an offer price of A$1.50 (US$1.18) per share for retail investors and indicated a price range of between A$1.35 and A$1.55 for institutional investors, which will bid for at least 60 percent of the shares on public sale.
Once listed on the Australian bourse, National Mututal will figure in the top 50 companies by market capitalisation.
The retail price of A$1.50 a share translates to a market capitalisation of about A$2.5 billion ($1.98 billion).
"This excellent response to the offer by our policy-holders has demonstrated a vote of confidence in National Mutual and our strategy for the future," Tomlinson said.
National Mutual, the first big Australian life insurer to demutualise and destined also to be the first major life office to list on the Australian market, is floating its shares partly in a bid to become a global player focused on Asia.
National Mututal Asia Ltd is already the second-biggest life office in Hong Kong and is lobbying for a licence to operate in China, the group has said.
National Mutual Holdings will be owned 51 percent on listing by French insurance giant Axa. The float will help National Mutual become "a member of a truly global financial services group", Tomlinson said on Wednesday.
Joint lead manager for the issue, brokerage J.B. Were &amp; Son, said the strong demand for shares by policy-holders should ensure good demand from institutional investors.
"I think there will be pretty keen competition for it," said J.B. Were group managing director Terrence Campbell.
"There's plenty of Asian interest but as far as we can tell, there's plenty of interest in the (United) States and Europe as well," he told reporters in Melbourne.
Tomlinson and other National Mutual executives will leave Australia next week for a two-week roadshow of Asia, Europe and the United States to sell the offer to institutions.
Under the float, retail investors will be offered a refund if the final institutional price is below A$1.50, but they will pay no more if the final price exceeds A$1.50.
"Given the high policy-holder take-up (of shares), it then gives us more confidence ... that at the price of A$1.50, we were pitching at the right level," said John Magowan, head of stockbroking at joint lead manager McIntosh Corp Ltd.
Insurance analysts predicted on Wednesday the demand from policy-holders would help to ensure the final price determined by institutional bidding would fall in the upper end of the group's indicative price range.
"That will boost the price just because of the supply and demand situation," a Sydney-based analyst told Reuters.
"I think it (the institutional price range) is a realistic price," insurance analyst Nick Selvaratnam of brokerage BZW Australia, told Reuters.
The offer prices compare with a net tangible asset backing for the group of A$1.39 per share and an appraisal value, accounting for future profits, of A$1.60 per share.
(A$=US$0.79)
Over half a million people insured with Australian life office National Mutual Holdings Ltd have rushed to buy shares in the group, in what the insurer said on Wednesday was a "fabulous" start to its stock market float.
National Mutual, which plans to list on the Australian and New Zealand exchanges next month, announced on Wednesday that half of its 1.2 million policy-holders had elected to take up their entitlement to shares in the multi-billion-dollar float.  
"National Mutual Holdings will have the largest shareholder base of any company in Australia and New Zealand ... It's a fabulous result," National Mutual managing director Geoff Tomlinson told reporters and insurance analysts in Melbourne.
Tomlinson also set an offer price of A$1.50 (US$1.18) per share for retail investors and indicated a price range of between A$1.35 and A$1.55 for institutional investors, which will bid for at least 60 percent of the shares on public sale.
Once listed on the Australian bourse, National Mututal will figure in the top 50 companies by market capitalisation.  
The retail price of A$1.50 a share translates to a market capitalisation of about A$2.5 billion ($1.98 billion).
"This excellent response to the offer by our policy-holders has demonstrated a vote of confidence in National Mutual and our strategy for the future," Tomlinson said.
National Mutual, the first big Australian life insurer to demutualise and destined also to be the first major life office to list on the Australian market, is floating its shares partly in a bid to become a global player focused on Asia.  
National Mututal Asia Ltd is already the second-biggest life office in Hong Kong and is lobbying for a licence to operate in China, the group has said.
National Mutual Holdings will be owned 51 percent on listing by French insurance giant Axa. The float will help National Mutual become "a member of a truly global financial services group", Tomlinson said on Wednesday.
Joint lead manager for the issue, brokerage J. B. Were and Son, said the strong demand for shares by policy-holders should ensure good demand from institutional investors.  
"I think there will be pretty keen competition for it," said J. B. Were group managing director Terrence Campbell.
"There's plenty of Asian interest but as far as we can tell, there's plenty of interest in the (United) States and Europe as well," he told reporters in Melbourne.
Tomlinson and other National Mutual executives will leave Australia next week for a two-week roadshow of Asia, Europe and the United States to sell the offer to institutions.
Under the float, retail investors will be offered a refund if the final institutional price is below A$1.50, but they will pay no more if the final price exceeds A$1.50.  
"Given the high policy-holder take-up (of shares), it then gives us more confidence ... that the price of A$1.50, we were pitching at the right level," said John Magowan, of joint lead manager McIntosh Corp Ltd.
Insurance analysts predicted on Wednesday the demand from policy-holders would help to ensure the final price determined by institutional bidding would fall in the upper end of the group's indicative price range.
"That will boost the price just because of the supply and demand situation," a Sydney-based analyst told Reuters.  
"I think it (the institutional price range) is a realistic price," insurance analyst Nick Selvaratnam, of brokerage BZW Australia, told Reuters.
The offer prices compare with a net tangible asset backing for the group of A$1.39 per share and an appriasal value, accounting for future profits, of A$1.60 per share.
-- Melbourne bureau 613-9286-1421
Australia's biggest retailer, Coles Myer Ltd, reported on Wednesday a firm rise in sales revenue, signalling the worst may be over for the country's long-suffering merchants.
Coles announced a 5.4 percent rise in sales revenue to A$9.9 billion (US$7.5 billion) for the six months to January 26, sounding a rare note of optimism in an industry that has been hit hard by a downturn in consumer spending.
Coles, which pockets almost 18 cents in every retail dollar spent in Australia, attributed the result to good management rather than any pick-up in the economy.
"A lot of people have done a lot of work to get where we needed to get," Coles chief executive Dennis Eck told Reuters.
But Coles' announcement came a day after another retailer, David Jones Ltd, reassessed its profit outlook, painting a slighter brighter picture than the bleak dive in earnings it forecast just after Christmas.
David Jones, an upmarket department store chain, had told the Australian Stock Exchange early last month it feared a 50 percent fall in interim profit, but changed its mind this week.
"It will not be as bad as that," David Jones chief executive Chris Tideman told Reuters on Tuesday.
He did not elaborate but stock analysts said on Wednesday post-Christmas clearance sales helped lift the company's overall sales result to A$783 million for the first half year ending January 25 -- just one percent lower than a year ago.
"I think we have probably gone through the worst in spending, but I would not expect a dramatically big turnaround," said retail analyst Simon Shakesheff, of Macquarie Bank.
"The sentiment is still a bit fragile, but at the end of the day, until there's a bit more job creation out there, people are not going to be spending more," he told Reuters.
Another Sydney-based analyst agreed that consumers' wallets would be slow to open.
"I think we will (see a recovery) but I don't think we saw it in January," the analyst said.
Australian retail sales are at their lowest ebb since the nation's official statistician began counting them 35 years ago. They have fallen in trend terms in each of the past five months.
Employment has also been weak with Australia's jobless rate hovering at 8.6 percent.
Coles confirmed on Wednesday that trading conditions were still tough, especially in clothing and fashion. The group's only specialist apparel chain, Katies, reported a 4.7 percent drop in turnover in the latest sales figures.
But Coles' Eck said profit margins in its underperforming department store chains were improving, as store managers improved the quality of merchandise sold and pared back costs.
In sharp contrast to the group's 33.8 percent fall in net profit in 1995/96, Eck said he expected an increase in bottom-line earnings for the current year ending July 27.
"Our earnings are in line with our plan," he said.
Coles reported net profit of A$280 million in 1995/96, and stock analysts are forecasting a modest profit rise in 1996/97.
(A$1 = US$0.76)
Australia's biggest retailer, Coles Myer Ltd, reported on Wednesday a firm rise in sales revenue, signalling the worst may be over for the country's struggling merchants.
Coles announced a 5.4 percent rise in sales revenue to A$9.9 billion for the six months to January 26, sounding a rare note of optimism in an industry that has been hit hard by a downturn in consumer spending.  
Coles, which pockets almost 18 cents in every retail dollar spent in Australia, attributed the result to good management rather than any pick-up in the economy.
"A lot of people have done a lot of work to get where we needed to get," Coles chief executive Dennis Eck told Reuters.
But Coles' sale announcement came after another retailer, David Jones Ltd, reassessed its profit outlook, painting a slighter brighter picture than the bleak dive in earnings it forecast just after Christmas.  
David Jones, an upmarket department store chain, had told the Australian Stock Exchange early last month it feared a 50 percent fall in interim profit, but changed its mind this week.
"It will not be as bad as that," David Jones chief executive Chris Tideman told Reuters on Tuesday.
He did not elaborate but stock analysts said on Wednesday post-Christmas clearance sales helped lift the company's overall sales result for the first half year to January 25 to A$783 million, only one percent lower than a year ago.  
"I think we have probably gone through the worst in spending, but I would not expect a dramatically big turnaround," said retail analyst Simon Shakesheff, of Macquarie Bank.
"The sentiment is still a bit fragile, but at the end of the day, until there's a bit more job creation out there, people are not going to be spending more," he added.
Another Sydney-based analyst agreed that consumers' wallets would be slow to open.
"I think we will (see a recovery) but I don't think we saw it in January," the analyst said.  
Australian retail sales are at their lowest ebb since the nation's official statistician began counting them 35 years ago. They have fallen in trend terms in each of the past five months.
Employment has also been weak with Australia's jobless rate hovering at 8.6 percent.
Coles confirmed on Wednesday that trading conditions were still tough, especially in the areas of clothing and fashion where its only specialist apparel chain, Katies, reported a 4.7 percent drop in retail sales for the second quarter.  
But Coles' Eck said profit margins in its underperforming department store chains were improving, as store managers improved the quality of merchandise sold and pared back costs.
In sharp contrast to the group's 33.8 percent fall in net profit in 1995/96, Eck said he expected an increase in bottom-line earnings for the current year ending July 27.
"Our earnings are in line with our plan," he said.
Coles reported net profit of A$280 million in 1995/96, and stock analysts are forecasting a modest profit rise in 1996/97.
-- Melbourne bureau 61-3 9286-1421
Australia has been warned it risks losing face in Asia if it takes its overseas radio and television services off air, as mooted in an official report.
The report's recommendation that the government close its state-owned short-wave service, Radio Australia, and sell off its fledgling satellite broadcaster, Australia Television, have been condemned as near sighted and harmful to Australia's image.
"The recommendation that was made was one of the most stupid I have ever come across in my life," Mark Dodgson, an expert on Australian business ties with the region, said on Friday.
"They are absolutely critical for Australian foreign policy and for business and to cut them off for the sake of such a small amount of money is ridiculously short sighted."
Dodgson, of the Australian National University, is not alone in warning Australia risks losing face with its near neighbours.
Already, Papua New Guinea has offered to take a cut in Australian aid if this money could be used to ensure Radio Australia's future. The service is often the only source of regional news in the mountainous and isolated Pacific country.
A former chairman of Australia's national broadcaster and the opposition have also attacked the recommendations, designed to help the government slash its budget deficit.
The report, prepared after a government-ordered review of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC), called on Canberra to drop its requirement that the ABC provide overseas broadcasts in favour of better funded local services.
Australia Television, set up four years ago by then Labor prime minister Paul Keating as part of his government's Asian embrace, has so far accumulated losses of about A$7.0 million, an industry source told Reuters.
Radio Australia, set up decades ago under the control of the foreign ministry, airs mainly around the Asia-Pacific in seven Asian languages and English. It costs taxpayers about A$25 million per year, the source said.
Both are operated by the ABC and place heavy emphasis on news and current affairs. They aim to present an "Australian face" to the region and to raise Australia's profile in Asia.
No decision has been made on Radio Australia's future until the ABC and the government discuss the recommendations, but Canberra has begun the process of selling Australia Television.
A merchant bank, Turnbull and Partners Ltd, said it had received 50 expressions on interest in taking over Australia Television's assets. These include the remaining four years of a five-year lease on the Indonesian owned Palapa C2 satellite.
Australia Television, which is received in 33 countries across the region, has an option for another five-year lease.
If the station cannot be sold, the government has been urged to shut it down. But Communications Minister Richard Alston has said he personally believes this is unlikely.
In the event of a sale, it is unclear whether Australia Television will remain a window on the nation, offering such obscure programming as Australian Rules Football coverage. One media analyst says it is a commercial dud in its current form.
"Australians will all suffer if the ABC deserts international broadcasting," former ABC chairman Mark Armstrong wrote in a newspaper column this week.
"We will be less known and less respected by our neighbours...Our country will lose face in Asia."
Former industry minister Peter Cook, an opposition senator, said the demise of Radio Australia or Australia Television would be another setback for Australia in the region, especially so soon after a flare-up of anti-Asian sentiment here.
"Our public face has suffered terribly and a cut or a change of this sort will be misunderstood in that context," Cook said.
-- Sydney Newsroom 612-9373-1800
Australia's Foster's Brewing Group Ltd toasted local beer drinkers on Monday for a strong rise in pre-tax earnings, but losses in Canada and China took some fizz out of the half-year result.
Foster's announced a 13 percent rise in pre-tax earnings to A$185 million (US$140.6 million) for the six months to December 31, due largely to what it called a sparkling performance by its home brews.
Carlton and United Breweries (CUB), the group's domestic brewer and earnings powerhouse, recorded an 11.5 percent surge in profit before interest and tax.
"CUB's performance was, again, an absolutely outstanding feature of the result -- a sparkling performance, if you will excuse the pun," Foster's chief executive Ted Kunkel said.
CUB, which brews Australia's best-selling beer, Victoria Bitter, now commands 55 percent of the local beer market, up from 53 percent a year ago, Kunkel told reporters.
But CUB's performance was partly overshadowed by Foster's 40-percent-owned Molson Breweries, which was responsible for lowering the group's bottom line to A$169.4 million, just 2.4 percent up on the first half of 1995/96.  
"The result was mixed," Kunkel said of the Canadian brewer's performance.
Foster's booked a A$20 million abnormal loss for restructuring costs at Molson, which Kunkel said was beginning to arrest a slide in its share of the Canadian beer market.
The loss, partly offset by smaller profit windfalls in the period, may not be the last from Molson. Foster's is braced for more abnormal losses after Molson late last year lost an arbitrated dispute with Coors Brewing Co.
A Canadian arbitration panel ruled that Molson had breached an agreement to brew and sell the U.S. brewer's brands.
The financial fallout is uncertain, but Kunkel said on Monday it was unlikely to be severe.
"The arbitration panel did not set what the likely level of damages will be, so it's just impossible to tell what they may be," he said. A new licensing deal is being negotiated.
Also, Foster's Chinese operation continued to trade in the red, racking up A$10.2 million in losses in the first half from its joint-venture breweries in Guangdong, Shanghai and Tianjin.
But it said Chinese revenue and sales volumes rose in the first half and that the operations in China were on track to break even in around 1999/2000.  
Foster's plans to further expand in Asia and will enter other markets in the region in 1997.
"In Asia, we are close to establishing production in one or two markets, and we will be aiming to do so as quickly as possible as part of or broader Asian strategy," Kunkel said.
Kunkel gave no details, but he has said in the past that Foster's is eyeing India and Vietnam.
Foster's first-half result was roughly in line with stock market expectations, but the China losses raised some eyebrows.
"China is eating their profits elsewhere. The other (units) have to make a pretty good performance to offset that all the time," said Macquarie Equities analyst Raewyn Ellis-Doff.
Foster's share price ended 11 cents lower at A$2.54 on Monday, falling with the market as it tumbled in late trade.
(A$1 = US$0.76)
Australian-based Foster's Brewing Group Ltd reported on Monday a small rise in interim net profit, but the bottom line result hid a strong performance from the group's home brews.
Foster's posted a 2.4 percent increase in net earnings to A$169.4 million, after booking a A$5.6 million abnormal loss.
The loss was due mainly to ongoing restructuring costs of the group's 40 percent owned Canadian brewer, Molson Breweries, and concealed a 10 percent rise in pre-abnormal net earnings to A$168 million.  
Foster's chief executive Ted Kunkel largely attributed the rise in pre-abnormal earnings to a "sparkling" performance from the group's domestic powerhouse, Carlton and United Breweries (CUB), in the six months to December 31.
"CUB had a four percent increase in the volume of beer sold, a remarkable result in a beer market which rose only 0.6 percent," he said in a statement.
CUB, which has taken a commanding market lead in Australia over chief rival Lion Nathan, contributed A$187.4 million in earnings before interest and tax, a rise of 11.5 percent over the first half of 1995/96 (July/June).  
The group result came in at slightly below the average forecast for first-half profit of around A$170 million.
The share price dipped a few cents after the announcement, but a Sydney broker said the stock was also moving to the tune of speculation Foster's may buy back the 37 percent stake held by resources giant The Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd.
BHP indicated on Sunday it was in no hurry to sell its Foster's investment. Foster's shares were trading at A$2.60 at 0325 GMT (14.20 p.m.), down five cents on Friday's close.  
Foster's said it expected earnings before interest and tax (EBIT) to be higher in the year to June 30 than the A$371 million reported in 1995/96, but that interest costs and the re-emergence of tax liability on Australian income would have an impact on the overall earnings for the 1996/97 year.
But Foster's said losses at its brewing operation in China widened in the six months ended December 31, 1996.
Foster's said its China operations recorded a loss before interest and tax of A$10.2 million in the first half compared with a loss of A$6.8 million in the 1995/96 first half.  
It said revenues in China for the half rose to A$20.9 million up from A$15.9 million a year earlier, with volumes sold rising to 539,000 hectolitres compared with 392,000 hectolitres.
Foster's wine unit, Mildara Blass, contributed A$33.4 million in earnings before interest and tax (EBIT) on sales of A$115.5 million, while its Rothbury Wines acquisition, completed in July 1996, was on track to achieved targeted first year earnings growth.
-- Melbourne bureau 61-2 9286-1421
Australian insurance group National Mutual Holdings Ltd targeted China and Thailand as key markets on Tuesday as it fleshed out its role as the Asian arm of one of the industry's global heavyweights.
National Mutual, owned 51 percent by the recently expanded French insurance giant Axa SA, unveiled plans to double its representation this year in mainland China by opening three more local offices.
National Mutual is sweating over its application for an operating licence in China, along with other insurers eager for exposure to the most populous nation's emerging middle class.
"It is a key objective for the group and every effort is being made to obtain this licence," chairman Athol Lapthorne told National Mutual's annual meeting in Melbourne.
The group has applied to open offices in Wuhan, Dalian and Chengdu, initially to conduct market research. It already has offices in Shanghai, Guangdong and Beijing.  
National Mutual has been try to enter China for more than three years, during which it has signed a cooperation pact with Chinese insurer China Everbright-IHD Pacific Ltd and has donated HK$10 million (US$1.3 million) to set up a China education fund.
National Mutual and Axa, which recently merged with rival Union des Assurances de Paris (UAP), launched a US$500 million China investment fund in September.
National Mutual has also applied to operate in Thailand, and is eyeing market entry in India, Vietnam and the Philippines.
Thailand and India are both reopening their insurance markets to foreign competition for the first time in many years, National Mutual managing director Geoff Tomlinson said.
The company is considering taking a stake in an existing insurer in the Philippines, and is taking a long-term view on Vietnam, which now has "no real market to speak of", he said. He gave no details on any likely investment in the Philippines.
"We are focusing our attention clearly today on China and Thailand," Tomlinson told reporters after the meeting.
"The work we're doing in relation to India, the Philippines and Vietnam is getting acquainted with people and seeing how business is done (there)...," he said. National Mutual has aligned itself in Thailand with a local joint venture partner, the General Finance group, but its application for an operating licence has yet to be decided.
National Mutual said it was not fazed by the new Thai government's decision to review the criteria for awarding insurance licences, and expected a decision within six months.
"It's a fertile market," Tomlinson said.
National Mutual, which is still powered mainly by its Australia and New Zealand life office National Mutual Life, suggested it could become an overnight force in Asian funds management if it inherits the regional assets of Axa and UAP.
National Mutual's funds management arm has A$2.0 billion (US$1.5 billion) in assets under management in Asia and stands to boost this to A$7.0 billion (corrects from A$7.0 million) if the parent decides to make National Mutual its Asian funds management operation, the company said.
"We will wait till they finalise their merger over there and talks will begin progressively," said Sam Kavourakis, National Mutual Funds Management managing director.
(A$1=US$0.75, HK$1=US$7.74)
Australian industrial conglomerate Pacific Dunlop Ltd is set to announce a steep drop in first half earnings on Friday, due to plant problems and tough trading conditions, share analysts said on Wednesday.
The analysts are forecasting the group to report a net profit before abnormals of around A$85 million for the six months to December 31, a 28 percent fall on a year ago.
The full range of forecasts are thought to be between A$80 million and A$95 million before abnormals, two of the analysts contacted by Reuters said.  
Pacific Dunlop reported pre-abnormal net earnings of A$118 million for the first half of 1995/96 (July/June), and went on to post a 35 percent fall in pre-abnormal profit for the year.
Brokerages have been steadily winding back their 1996/97 profit forecasts for Pacific Dunlop since the company first warned of a weak start to the current year, the analysts said.
Pacific Dunlop warned last September it expected first half profit to be down on a year ago, but predicted an improved annual result despite extreme competition in key markets.  
The company -- which has businesses spanning tyres, car parts, batteries, clothing, industrial cables and latex goods -- reported pre-abnormal net earnings of A$162 million for 1995/96.
"The market concern at the moment is that the (first half) result might come out worse than what people were expecting or hoping," a Melbourne-based analyst told Reuters.
"There's not an expectation of surprise on the upside."
Pacific Dunlop's batteries division is the biggest concern, due largely to commissioning problems at its U.S. lead smelter in Georgia, the analysts said.  
Pacific Dunlop said in November the smelter was operating at well below capacity. It was shut down earlier for redesign and modification work.
"The smelter is going to affect them substantially," another Melbourne-based analyst said. The batteries division is expected to earn about half what it did in the first half of 1995/96.
Tough trading conditions are likely to weigh on most of the other divisions, especially the tyres business.
"Obviously the consumer economy is difficult. The building environment is difficult -- that will affect cables -- so it will be pretty tough across the board," the analyst said.  
"They may get there. They may be a little bit short, but it will be tough," a Sydney-based analyst said.
Only Pacific Dunlop's rubber-glove maker, Ansell International, is confidently expected to report an improved performance, but the local dollar could steal some of its glory.
Ansell earns much of its revenue in Europe and the United States, one analyst said. "The currency has gone against that division a little bit," he said.
"The Australian dollar for the half was a little bit higher. That's going to make it tough to report an increase in $A terms."
Analysts were not confident Pacific Dunlop could fulfill its forecast for a higher full-year profit in 1996/97.  
-- Melbourne bureau 613-9286-1421
Australian industrial conglomerate Pacific Dunlop Ltd reported a heavy fall in net profit on Friday but said the group was now ready to "take off".
Pacific Dunlop posted a 28 percent drop in net profit to A$84 million for the six months to December 31, within stock market forecasts, and its bullish outlook encouraged investors.
"It's right in the middle of expectations but I think the comments that came with the result about the second half were upbeat enough to ensure the stock will go higher," a stockbroker told Reuters.
A former chief executive of Australian retail giant Coles Myer Ltd spent millions of dollars of the company's money to renovate his home in a case of 1980s greed and excess, a court heard on Monday.
Brian Quinn, 60, who rose from a junior store assistant to run the country's biggest retailer, went on trial on Monday in the Victoria Supreme Court on a charge of conspiracy to defraud.
Quinn has pleaded not guilty and suggests he was set up.  
The prosecution said on Monday that Quinn conspired to spend around A$4 million of the group's money on renovations to his Melbourne home from 1982 to 1988, expanding and renovating it and building a tennis court, spa and pergola.
Prosecutor Paul Coghlan accused Quinn of excess, saying one room was painted 10 times, the house was extended by 70 square metres and the land was levelled using a rock crusher and surrounded by a double-brick fence.
"This is a case ... about excess in money wasting, excess as to how much work was down, excess as to the materials used, excess as to the hours spent," Coghlan told the jury.
A former chief executive of Australian retail giant Coles Myer Ltd spent millions of dollars of the company's money to renovate his home in a case of 1980s greed and excess, a court heard on Monday.
Brian Quinn, 60, who rose from a junior store assistant to run the country's biggest retailer, went on trial on Monday in the Victoria Supreme Court on a charge of conspiracy to defraud.
Quinn has pleaded not guilty and suggests he was set up.
The prosecution said on Monday that Quinn conspired to spend around A$4.0 million (US$3.0 million) of the group's money on renovations to his Melbourne home from 1982 to 1988, expanding and renovating it and building a tennis court, spa and pergola.
Prosecutor Paul Coghlan accused Quinn of excess, saying one room was painted 10 times, the house was extended by 70 square metres (80 square yards) and the land was levelled using a rock crusher and surrounded by a double-brick fence.
"This is a case...about excess in money wasting, excess as to how much work was down, excess as to the materials used, excess as to the hours spent," Coghlan told the jury.
"But most of all it's a case about greed. It's a case about having your employer paying for your excesses," he added.
The prosecution said Quinn and another former Coles manager, Graham Lanyon, conspired to ensure Coles paid the bills by pretending the work was being done on stores owned by Coles.
"The expenses were largely concealed from his employer, who was meeting the cost," Coghlan said.
Lanyon, as chief of the company's maintenance department, falsified invoices to conceal the fraud but "he did so in collusion with, or on the orders of, the accused man", he added.
But defence lawyer Philip Dunn said Quinn was the victim of a corrupt maintenance department headed by Lanyon and corrupt works contractors. Both concealed costs from Quinn who agreed in 1988 to partly reimburse the company, he told the jury.
"He is as much a victim as the company is," Dunn said.
Quinn's home belonged to Coles until 1985, when he bought it for what prosecutors estimate was about half market value. Prosecutors said that even while Coles owned the house, the work was done without board approval.
"Brian Quinn is charged with stealing from his employer whilst he was living in a company house, which indicates how much of a nonsense and a load of rubbish we believe this case is," Dunn told the jury.
The trial is expected to last eight weeks.
Australian aluminium producer Comalco Ltd is expected to report a nose-dive in net profit for calendar 1996 after prices and exchange rates turned against it.
Comalco, owned 67 percent by RTZ Corp Plc-CRA Ltd, is predicted on average to post a pre-abnormal net profit of A$33 million, a fraction of the A$264.8 million it earned in 1995, according to the Barceps forecasting service.
The bottom line may even dip itself in red ink after a net abnormal loss of A$40 million stemming from Comalco's November decision to end kaolin production, two analysts told Reuters.  
Comalco, which posted a net profit after abnormals of A$232.3 million in 1995, was Asia's biggest supplier of kaolin clay, used in paper manufacturing.
The company has already warned of a dismal second six months of 1996.
In December it forecast a second-half loss and admitted prices and exchange rates were not entirely to blame.
Higher smelting costs also figured in Comalco's warning to the stock market, particularly at its New Zealand plant, which is being upgraded to expand annual production at the Tiwai Point plant by 40,000 tonnes to about 313,000 tonnes.  
"They have seriously screwed up their costs," one Melbourne-based analyst told Reuters.
The analyst compared Comalco's performance with a relative minnow, Capral Ltd, which he said earned a profit before interest and tax from a smelting base a third the size.
"And they (Capral) don't have the upstream businesses which Comalco do, which are profitable," the analyst said, referring to Comalco's bauxite mining and alumina refining businesses.
But analysts agreed weak aluminium prices and a strong Australian dollar did the overwhelming majority of the damage to Comalco's bottom line in 1996.  
The average LME three-month aluminium price fell 16 percent, or 21 percent in Australian-dollar terms, in 1996. It was 83 U.S. cents per pound over 1995, but slipped to 73 cents for the first half of 1996. It was around 66 cents in the second half.
The market was unkind in other ways.
Comalco's price premiums in Asia also came under pressure as weak demand in Europe prompted European and Middle East smelters to dump aluminium on the company's traditional market, said analyst Umit Safak, of HSBC James Capel.
An appreciating Australian dollar also inflicted pain.  
But analysts are forecasting a strong return to profit in 1997, with the Australia dollar already sitting well below its peak of over 80 U.S. cents in December and the aluminium price back up to around 76 cents per pound.
"The outlook is positive and I am optimistic," one Sydney-based analyst told Reuters, citing earnings growth from Comalco's half-owned Boyne Island smelter in Queensland state.
A third pot line is being added to the smelter, adding over 217,000 tonnes to its annual output from mid 1997. Comalco's share of production was 130,157 tonnes in 1996.
Comalco is due to report its results on Monday.  
-- Melbourne bureau 613-9286-1421
Major Australian banks have blown the dust off their Asian strategies and are moving quickly into the region as life gets tough at home.
Three of Australia's biggest banks have publicly renewed their Asian ambitions in the past few months as competition hots up for the local market and earnings begin to suffer. "It's now you are starting to see them push a bit harder into Asia," said Melbourne-based banking analyst Ken McLay, of credit rating agency Standard and Poor's Group.
All of Australia's four big banks are now pursuing opportunities for interest and fee income in the rapidly growing markets of Asia, quietly urged on by the nation's central bank.
Their uniform embrace of Asia comes as two of Australia's biggest life insurers, National Mutual Holdings Ltd and Colonial Mutual, also boost their Asian profiles. Last week, Colonial bought out its Asian joint venture for US$163 million.
But Asia has not always commanded such uniform priority among Australia's financial institutions.
CENTRAL BANK UNHAPPY
Only six months ago, the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) expressed disappointment that local banks were not seizing more opportunities to expand into Asia. At that time, the Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd (ANZ) was the only exception.
ANZ has long been Australia's most Asia-focused bank, with a retail network throughout India and operations in 40 other countries, most of them within the region.
In contrast, the most profitable bank, National Australia Bank Ltd (NAB), has focused in recent years on the United States and Europe. Westpac Banking Group virtually withdrew from Asia three and a half years ago to focus on home markets.
For years after the free-wheeling 1980s hit a wall of bad debts in Australia, banks had put expansion plans on hold and Asian strategies gathered dust as they repaired balance sheets.
But since late last year, talk of Asia is again on bankers' lips as interest margins contract in a tight local market where banks and non-bank institutions encroach on each other's turf. ALL EYES ON ASIA
Westpac bounced back into Asia last November, announcing an alliance with British-based Standard Chartered Bank Plc to provide select Asian banking services to Westpac clients.
The venture will focus primarily on Singapore, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Thailand and Malaysia, before expanding into Vietnam and China, said Westpac.
NAB, which owns regional banks in the United States, Britain and Ireland, is also now looking for a partner in Asia.
"We've looked at a few (alliances) with banks and other institutions...It takes time to pull these things off," NAB managing director Don Argus told reporters last month.
Australia's fourth big bank, the Commonwealth Bank of Australia Ltd (CBA), also chimed in last week. It said it too would expand its Asian activities and was looking for joint-venture partners in Indo-China.
"Certainly the competition in the domestic market is extremely tough," S&amp;P's McLay told Reuters, adding he expected Australian banks' local asset quality and earnings to deteriorate.
"One of the ways to offset this is diversifaction...One way they are trying to diversify is to go offshore and I think that's a prudent strategy, but it has its risks," he added.
SMALL FISH, BIG POND
Australian banks, minnows compared with the regional might of banks like Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corp Ltd, are likely to use geography and trade links to make their mark in Asia.
"They are small in size but the Australian banks do bring a lot of expertise. They are headquartered in the region, so they benefit from that and Australia is a major trading partner with a lot of these countries," McLay said.
"Australian banks are pretty well placed to piggy-back on the back of that. I think they will do quite well."
Australia's central bank cleary hopes so, declaring that "momentum for involvement in Asia has now clearly re-emerged".
"The banks' focus has tended to be on the provision of trade finance and treasury services to corporates, although their retail activities in Asia are increasing," the RBA said in a written response to a parliamentary committee recently.
Australian banks' largest operations are in Hong Kong, Singapore and Japan, but they are fanning out, it said.
They are now eyeing opportunities in China, Indonesia, Vietnam, Thailand, Burma and Cambodia as these nations open up their banking sectors to foreign entrants, the RBA said.
Australia's biggest aluminium producer, Comalco Ltd, plunged into the red on Monday, blaming weak prices, a strong local dollar and higher smelting costs.
Comalco announced a loss of A$16.8 million (US$12.9 million) in calendar 1996, compared with a net profit after abnormals of A$232.3 million in 1995.
Before abnormals, 1996 earnings were in line with market expectations at A$32.9 million, a fraction of the 1995 result.
The result made only a brief dent in Comalco's share price, which was battered in recent months in anticipation of a slide in earnings. The shares fell eight cents on the news, but rebounded to end at A$6.88, up six cents from Friday's close.
Comalco is owned 67 percent by global mining group RTZ-CRA, due to report its annual profit on Thursday.
"The market has pretty much factored in the loss and is now focusing on future earnings prospects," one share trader said.
As expected, Comalco's smelting division played a part in the earnings nose-dive. It made a loss for the year, but this paled in comparison with the damage done to Comalco's earnings by the slump in aluminium prices and a strong local currency.
"The 1996 result was severely impacted by lower prices," chief executive Terry Palmer told reporters in Melbourne.
The London Metal Exchange (LME) aluminium price averaged 70 U.S. cents a pound in 1996, compared with an average of 83 cents in 1995, the company said. The Australian dollar averaged 78 U.S. cents in 1996, four cents stronger than in 1995, it added.
Comalco's premiums over the LME price also suffered. Together, the aluminium market and the local dollar pared a total of about A$201 from operating profit, overwhelming a rise in total production volumes, the company said.
But Palmer painted a much brighter outlook, assuring investors that Comalco's aluminium production is set to climb and predicting a stronger aluminium price over 1997.
Comalco saw firming global demand for the metal this year, fuelled by economic recovery in Europe and continued growth in the United States. "Consumption in Asia is not expected to grow in 1997," the company said.
Comalco also denied market speculation it might sell off its smelters and abandon its plan to build a A$1 billion alumina refinery in either Queensland state or Sarawak, Malaysia. Alumina, produced from bauxite, is the raw material for making aluminium.
"The current talk about that (withdrawing from smelting) is one hell of a way wide of the mark," Palmer said.
"The position with the alumina project remains unchanged," he added.
Comalco hopes to start building the refinery, with annual capacity of one million to 1.5 million tonnes, in 1998. Site selection will depend heavily on the kind of power contracts Queensland and Malaysia can offer, Palmer said.
(A$1 = US$0.77)
Australia's biggest aluminium producer, Comalco Ltd, plunged heavily into the red on Monday, blaming its loss for calendar 1996 on weak aluminium prices, an adverse exchange rate and higher smelting costs.
Comalco's net profit before abnormals slid to A$32.9 million in 1996 from A$264.8 million in 1995, in line with expectations, but abnormals dragged the bottom line to a A$16.8 million loss.
The result made a small dent in the stock's share price, which dropped eight cents on the news but recovered by 0125 GMT (12.25 p.m.) to A$6.80, down only two cents from Friday's close.  
Comalco is owned 67 percent by global mining group RTZ-CRA.
"The market has pretty much factored in the loss and is now focusing on future earnings prospects," a Brisbane dealer said.
As expected, Comalco's smelting division played a part in the earnings nose-dive.
Higher operating costs at its three smelters shaved A$32 million from group operating profit, Comalco said. It blamed this on higher prices for raw materials like fuel, power and coke, and on costs associated with smelter upgrades and expansions.
Australia's biggest aluminium producer, Comalco Ltd, plunged into the red on Monday, blaming weak prices, a strong local dollar and higher smelting costs.
Comalco announced a loss of A$16.8 million (US$12.9 million) in calendar 1996, compared with a net profit after abnormals of A$232.3 million in 1995.
Before abnormals, 1996 earnings were in line with market expectations at A$32.9 million, a fraction of the 1995 result.
The result made only a brief dent in Comalco's share price, which was battered in recent months in anticipation of a slide in earnings. The shares fell eight cents on the news, but rebounded to end at A$6.88, up six cents from Friday's close.
Comalco is owned 67 percent by global mining group RTZ-CRA , due to report its annual profit on Thursday.
"The market has pretty much factored in the loss and is now focusing on future earnings prospects," one share trader said.
As expected, Comalco's smelting division played a part in the earnings nose-dive. It made a loss for the year, but this paled in comparison with the damage done to Comalco's earnings by the slump in aluminium prices and a strong local currency.
"The 1996 result was severely impacted by lower prices," chief executive Terry Palmer told reporters in Melbourne.
The London Metal Exchange (LME) aluminium price averaged 70 U.S. cents a pound in 1996, compared with an average of 83 cents in 1995, the company said. The Australian dollar averaged 78 U.S. cents in 1996, four cents stronger than in 1995, it added.
Comalco's premiums over the LME price also suffered. Together, the aluminium market and the local dollar pared a total of about A$201 from operating profit, overwhelming a rise in total production volumes, the company said.
But Palmer painted a much brighter outlook, assuring investors that Comalco's aluminium production is set to climb and predicting a stronger aluminium price over 1997.
Comalco saw firming global demand for the metal this year, fuelled by economic recovery in Europe and continued growth in the United States. "Consumption in Asia is not expected to grow in 1997," the company said.
Comalco also denied market speculation it might sell off its smelters and abandon its plan to build a A$1 billion alumina refinery in either Queensland state or Sarawak, Malaysia. Alumina, produced from bauxite, is the raw material for making aluminium.
(A$1 = US$0.77)
The world's biggest mining house, RTZ Corp Plc-CRA Ltd, is set to report a sharp fall in annual profit this week after shouldering a slide in metal prices during the year and battling problems with its U.S. copper smelter, mining analysts said.
The group, which has operations spanning the globe, is on average expected to post a 26 percent fall in net profit before exceptional items to US$1.067 billion for calendar 1996, a Reuter survey of six Australian brokerages revealed.
The Anglo-Australian miner made US$1.441 billion in 1995.  
The analysts' forecasts range between US$1.04 billion and US$1.097 billion, although private forecasting service Barceps quoted much lower numbers in a survey last month.
The culprits behind RTZ-CRA's profit slump are seen as the copper price, which dipped below 90 U.S. cents a pound after the Sumitomo Corp trading scandal erupted in June, a sick aluminium price, down 16 percent in 1996, and problems with the flagship Bingham Canyon copper smelter in Utah.
Together, copper and aluminium earned almost 41 percent of RTZ-CRA's total revenue in 1995, and metal prices were promising enough early in 1996 for the group to talk of higher earnings.  
But metal prices caught cold and the prospects of improved profits also began to look sick mid-year, when the Sumitomo trading scandal involving trader Yasuo Hamanaka sent international copper prices crashing.
"Everything peaked ahead of this Hamanaka copper thing," said Peter O'Connor of Macquarie Bank.
"Most commodities slid from June on through to about September, October and there's been a bit of recovery in most metal prices since that time."  
RTZ-CRA's iron ore business was also a disappointment, one analyst said, noting that sales for the year dropped six percent despite a lift in annual output.
Adding salt to the wound, the gold price also languished. Gold is a sensitive area for the mining giant, since it is fundamentally opposed to selling its production forward at a fixed price to lock in revenue.
RTZ-CRA's coal mines are also not expected to have relieved some of the pain inflicted on the group by weak prices.
One analyst expects coal earnings to fall 10 percent in 1996.  
RTZ-CRA's troubled Bingham Canyon smelter has stirred the deepest concerns among analysts, who have been waiting for the new plant to get it right after 18 months of hobbled operation.
"That's going to knock it (the result) around a bit," a Sydney-based analyst said.
The smelter is still not operating at full capacity and now faces a six-week shut-down soon for major modifications.
Copper division earnings are forecast to plunge by some 40 percent, according to HSBC James Capel's forecast.
Still, the brokerage likes the group's long-term prospects.  
"They have a very, very strong organic growth profile," said HSBC James Capel analyst Umit Safak. "They have very substantial expansions coming up," he added.
These include expansions of the Escondida copper mine in Chile and the Grasberg copper and gold mine in Indonesia, as well as a stake in new gold mine on Papua New Guinea's Lihir island. Lihir is 22.8 percent owned by Southern Gold, which owned 75 percent owned by RTZ-CRA
"They have a very substantial exploration areas and a lot of very, very profitable projects in the pipeline," Safak said.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
The world's biggest mining house, RTZ Corp Plc-CRA Ltd, is set to report a sharp fall in annual profit this week after shouldering a slide in metal prices during the year and battling problems with its U.S. copper smelter, mining analysts said.
The group, which has operations spanning the globe, is on average expected to post a 26-percent fall in net profit before exceptional items to US$1.067 billion for calendar 1996, a Reuter survey of six Australian brokerages revealed.
RTZ-CRA, a dual-listed merger of British-based RTZ Plc and Australian-based CRA Ltd, is due to announce its earnings on Thursday. It made US$1.441 billion in 1995.
Australian analysts' forecasts range between US$1.04 billion and US$1.097 billion, although private forecasting service Barceps quoted much lower numbers in a survey last month.
The culprits behind RTZ-CRA's profit slump are seen as the copper price, which dipped below 90 U.S. cents a pound after the Sumitomo trading scandal erupted in June, a weak aluminium price and problems with the flagship Bingham Canyon copper smelter.
Together, copper and aluminium earned almost 41 percent of RTZ-CRA's total revenue in 1995, and metal prices were promising enough early in 1996 for the group to talk of higher earnings.
But metal prices caught a cold and the prospects of improved profits also began to look sick mid-year, when the Sumitomo Corp trading scandal sent international copper prices crashing.
Yasuo Hamanaka, a star trader who once dominated the copper market, has admitted charges of fraud and forgery and accepted blame for a scandal that cost Sumitomo $2.6 billion and devalued the copper inventories of metals companies around the world.
"Everything peaked ahead of this Hamanaka copper thing," said Peter O'Connor of Macquarie Bank.
"Most commodities slid from June on through to about September, October and there's been a bit of recovery in most metal prices since that time."
RTZ-CRA's iron ore business was also a disappointment, one analyst said, noting that sales for the year dropped six percent despite a lift in annual output.
Adding salt to the wound, the gold price also languished. Gold is a sensitive area for the mining giant, since it is fundamentally opposed to selling its production forward at a fixed price to lock in revenue.
RTZ-CRA's coal mines are also not expected to have relieved some of the pain inflicted on the group by weak prices. One analyst expects coal earnings to fall 10 percent in 1996.
RTZ-CRA's troubled Bingham Canyon smelter in Utah has stirred the deepest concerns among analysts, who have been waiting for the new plant to get it right after 18 months of hobbled operation. The smelter is still not operating at full capacity and soon faces a six-week shut-down soon for major modifications.
Copper division earnings are forecast to plunge by some 40 percent, according to HSBC James Capel's forecast.
Still, the brokerage likes the group's long-term prospects, which include a copper mine in Chile and a copper and gold mine in Indonesia.
"They have a very, very strong organic growth profile," said HSBC James Capel analyst Umit Safak. "They have very substantial expansions coming up," he added.
Australian casino company Crown Ltd said on Tuesday its earnings were likely to suffer due to lost time at its new casino complex in Melbourne.
Crown, which has seen its share price fall as doubts emerge over its profit outlook, confirmed that a recent heatwave forced workers at the site to down tools for a number of days.
"I don't think we have made a calculation yet on what effect it will have on the bottom line, but it's something you don't need in this part of the project," Crown spokesman Gary O'Neill said. "I think it will (impact profit)," he added.  
Crown had planned to open its new A$1.6 billion casino, hotel and shopping complex in Melbourne in March. It is now aiming for late April and maybe even May, O'Neill told Reuters.
"We are still hoping to open towards the end of April...but things like this don't help obviously and it could have a small effect on the bottom line. It could put the open date back to May," he said.
O'Neill was commenting on a newspaper report which said members of the Electrical Trades Union (ETU) stopped work 10 times this month as the temperature topped 35 degrees Celcius.  
"There were 10 days when the temperature was over 35 degrees, but I don't think we lost all of that time," O'Neill said. "I think we lost a number of working days."
Crown also rejected a bearish earnings forecast made by accountants Ernst and Young.
The forecast was cited in an  independent report sent to Crown shareholders recently.
It quotes Ernst and Young as forecasting basic earnings per share of 3.76 cents in 1997/98 (July-June), compared with brokers' average forecast of 14.8 cents for the same year.  
The brokers' forecast was based on a mean pre-abnormal net profit of A$87.5 million for 1997/98, according to Barceps forecasting service. Crown reported net profit after abnormals of A$58.38 million in 1995/96.
"We obviously don't agree with it (the Ernst and Young forecast)," O'Neill said.
"Right at the moment, it's a very highly speculative period of time. It's just prior to our opening and people are tending to jump at shadows a little bit," he added.  
Crown's share price has fallen steeply over the past month. It stood at A$2.45 at 0300 GMT (2.00 p.m.) on Tuesday, down from its closing high so far this year of A$2.76 on January 22 and its 12 month high at A$3.06.
Crown is owned 30.9 percent by Hudson Conway Ltd, the operator of Crown casino at its existing premises. Hudson Conway also has options to buy 74.5 million new shares in Crown.
Crown is currently negotiating to buy back the casino management rights from Hudson Conway.
-- Melbourne bureau 613-9286-1421
