Louisiana-Pacific Corp. said Monday it will close its Ketchikan pulp mill in southeastern Alaska next year after the failure of negotiations with the Clinton administration over timber supply.
The company said it planned to take a $350 million charge against third-quarter pre-tax earnings -- $215 million or $2 per share after taxes -- to reflect shutdown of the pulp mill and nine smaller plants nationwide as well as settlement of a shareholder lawsuit.
The closing of the controversial 48-year-old pulp plant, which had been expected, will idle about 500 workers in Ketchikan, a city of 15,000 in the heart of the sprawling Tongass National Forest where the mill has long been the biggest employer.
Company executives said the mill would close March 24, 1997, after the existing supply of timber is processed.
Under an agreement worked out by the White House and Alaska Sen. Frank Murkowski, Louisiana-Pacific said it expected to get enough timber to continue operating two sawmills in the region for two more years, employing 400 to 500 workers.
Portland, Ore.-based Louisiana-Pacific blamed the closure of the pulp mill, which lost an estimated $40 million in the first nine months of the year, on "the Clinton administration's opposition to any compromise that would allow the pulp mill to operate profitably."
In a conference call with reporters, Louisiana-Pacific Chairman Mark Suwyn spoke of forces outside Alaska who wanted to reverse years of development in the state.
"There clearly is a push by many people who have a significant amount of power to shut down all of Alaska, and I am assuming they're going to turn it into some great big national park whereby only tourists can visit," he said.
Environmentalists called Suwyn's charge an exaggeration and said they were satisfied by the closure of a mill they claim has benefited from "sweetheart" federal timber contracts while causing significant air and water pollution.
Buck Lindekugel of the Southeast Alaska Conservation Council called the mill closure a "business decision to jettison a money-losing mill that can't compete in world pulp markets."
But Suwyn blamed changes imposed by the U.S. Forest Service after passage of the 1990 Tongass Reform Act, aimed at protecting the 17-million-acre reserve of old-growth rainforest that sprawls over islands, mountains and glaciers.
Louisiana-Pacific has filed lawsuits in the U.S. Court of Federal Claims, seeking $200 million for breach of contract, and will be filing "significant additional claims in the very near future," Suwyn said.
He acknowledged what he called "stupid" environmental mistakes that resulted in Ketchikan Pulp Co.'s agreement last year to pay $6 million in civil and criminal penalties.
Louisiana-Pacific also said it planned to close or sell several plants that are no longer competitive or essential to its operations, including several structural panel plants being hurt by market overcapacity.
The company also said it has agreed to pay $65 million to settle shareholder lawsuits stemming from a drop in the company's stock price last year after revelations of civil and criminal actions.
Among them were class-action lawsuits over allegedly defective home siding developed by the company. Louisiana-Pacific agreed last year to pay up to $375 million to settle claims by homeowners in Florida, Oregon and Washington, among other states.
Suwyn said the shareholder lawsuits were the last major cloud over a company the he joined this year after the ouster of its longtime Chairman and Chief Executive Harry Merlo.
"We're simply trying to clean up all the things that are not going to contribute to moving this company forward," he said.
A startup Seattle software company Tuesday launched a product aimed at solving one of the Internet's most vexing problems: information overload.
Intermind Corp., formed a little more than a year ago by a software consultant and a former Microsoft Corp. executive, said its Intermind Communicator allowed users to seek customized information from World Wide Web sites that use the program.
For example, a music fan visiting the popular "Addicted to Noise" Web site could seek to be notified by a message similar to electronic mail every time new CD reviews were available. A mouse click on the notification message would take the user directly to the information.
Intermind President David Arnold said the software aims to go beyond news dissemination systems from Pointcast Corp. and others to allow more sophisticated "dialogue" between consumers and publishers, technology companies and retailers.
Customers who frequent Spiegel Corp.'s web site could choose to be notified of any sales in selected categories and then easily could link up to the site and place an order. High-tech companies like Apple Computer Inc. and Visio Corp. will use the system to send customers technical bulletins or information about new products.
"This is the ultimate in custom publishing and narrowcasting," said David Strom, an industry constultant and newsletter publisher.
Company officials said they hoped to distribute 2 million copies of the software, which is free to non-commercial users, by the end of the year. Commercial users will pay a fee based on revenue generated or subscribers reached, Arnold said.
Arnold said the company, with 72 employees in several offices, was "strong financially." He declined to identify the investors but confirmed published reports that cellular telephone pioneer Craig McCaw is among the minority holders.
The software, which works from within either of the two major Internet browsers, is available for Microsoft's Windows 95 and Windows NT platforms and will be available within one week for Windows 3.1. Apple Macintosh and Unix versions are expected by year-end.
So far more than 35 Internet and Intranet sites provide Intermind "Hyperconnectors" that can be personally customized. Company executives said the software takes only five minutes to set up for customers or 15 minutes for publishers, who do not need separate server software.
Declaring their belief that the Internet will be the "next mass medium," Microsoft Corp. executives Thursday unveiled the new version of the company's MSN online service, with a heavy emphasis on entertainment programming.
Despite technical limitations that make true video impractical, many of the new MSN programs resemble daily and weekly television shows, with the service organized into six core "channels" aimed at specific demographic groups.
In little more than a year, MSN has become the No. 3 online service, with 1.6 million subscribers.
Company executives told a news briefing they expected to double that figure by mid-1997 and take market share from leader America Online Inc., relying in large part on a $100 million marketing campaign.
But the executives, conceding that the older America Online had a deeper and broader selection of content, said they planned to compete for new online customers, especially those under 30, rather than trying to persuade existing AOL customers to switch.
They were eager to heap criticism on the existing MSN service, launched along with the Windows 95 operating system in August 1995 but almost immediately overtaken by the rapid growth of the Internet.
"MSN was probably the worst of the bunch in terms of ease of use," said Laura Jennings, Microsoft vice president for the online service.
She also noted that the service had been gaining 100,000 subscribers a month despite virtually no advertising and problems, including a computer problem that has delayed bills to most customers for three months or more.
The new ad campaign will begin almost immediately with billboards and print advertisements followed by television commercials beginning in early November, when the service officially launches.
Microsoft also announced a new pricing scheme with an offer of unlimited access for $19.95 a month, instead of 20 hours for the same price under the current service. The minimum monthly fee will rise to $6.95 for five hours, in line with rival services and up from $4.95 for three hours under the current service.
Industry analysts said the new pricing probably would force America Online to follow suit and offer a package with unlimited service. Currently AOL offers heavy users 20 hours a month for $19.95.
David Readerman of Montgomery Securities pointed out that Microsoft has the advantage of a hugely profitable business in desktop software and operating systems, while rivals AOL and CompuServe Inc. are dependent on the online business.
"Microsoft has $8 billion in cash," he said. "That gives them the financial strength to make a long-term investment, and that's what they're doing."
Microsft stock ended down 75 cents at $133.75 and Compuserve lost 25 cents to $12, both on Nasdaq. America Online fell $1 to $25.75 on the New York Stock Exchange.
The heart of the relaunched MSN is an uncluttered browser interface dominated by a promotional "billboard" in the center of the screen and the six "channels" at the bottom corresponding to categories such as news, entertainment, education and children.
Clicking on the channels leads into programming developed by Microsoft and partners that ranges from the MSNBC news service to new interactive serial programs.
Among the programs demonstrated were quiz shows, a humorous daily news audiocast and magazine-type presentations such as "Underwire," produced by and for women.
The service also includes electronic mail, "chat" and a more traditional menu of online categories that leads users to areas within MSN or on the Internet.
Most content in the service will be restricted to subscribers using the company's Windows 95 computer operating system and Internet Explorer browser, and executives would not say whether they have plans to produce a version for the older Windows 3.1 system still used by tens of millions of computer owners.
Some features of MSN, including MSNBC news, electronic shopping and the planned Expedia consumer travel service, will be available at no cost to anyone with access to the Internet.
Patty Stonesifer, Microsoft senior vice president for interactive media, said the company's broad involvement in online consumer services was driven by "our belief that the Internet is the next mass medium."
By some estimates, only 10 million of the nation's 99 million households are currently online, though others say even that figure is high.
Declaring their belief that the Internet will be the "next mass medium," Microsoft Corp. executives Thursday unveiled the new version of the company's MSN online service, with a heavy emphasis on entertainment programming.
Despite bandwidth limitations and other technical obstacles that make full-motion video impractical, many of the new MSN programmes resemble daily and weekly television shows, with the service organised into six core "channels" aimed at specific demographic groups.
In little more than a year, MSN has become the No. 3 online service, with 1.6 million subscribers. Company executives told a news briefing they expected to double that figure by mid-1997 and take market share from leader America Online Inc., relying in large part on a $100 million marketing campaign.
But the executives, conceding that the older America Online had a deeper and broader selection of content, said they planned to compete for new online customers, especially those under 30, rather than trying to persuade existing AOL customers to switch.
They were eager to heap criticism on the existing MSN service, launched along with the Windows 95 operating system in August 1995 but almost immediately overtaken by the rapid growth of the Internet.
"MSN was probably the worst of the bunch in terms of ease of use," said Laura Jennings, Microsoft vice president for the online service.
But she also noted that the service had been gaining 100,000 subscribers a month despite virtually no advertising and problems, including a computer snafu that has delayed bills to most customers for three months or more.
The new ad campaign will begin almost immediately with billboards and print advertisements followed by television commercials beginning in early November, when the service officially launches.
Microsoft also announced a new pricing scheme with an offer of unlimited access for $19.95 a month, instead of 20 hours for the same price under the current service. The minimum monthly fee will rise to $6.95 for five hours, in line with rival services and up from $4.95 for three hours under the current service.
The heart of the relaunched MSN is an uncluttered browser interface dominated by a promotional "billboard" in the centre of the screen and the six "channels" at the bottom corresponding to broad categories such as news, entertainment, education and children.
Clicking on the channels leads into programming developed by Microsoft and its partners that ranges from the MSNBC news service to new interactive serial programmes. Among the programmes demonstrated were quiz shows, a humorous daily news audiocast and magazine-type presentations such as "Underwire," produced by and for women.
The service also includes electronic mail, "chat" and a more traditional menu of online categories that leads users to areas within MSN or out on the Internet.
Most content in the service will be restricted to subscribers using the company's Windows 95 computer operating system and Internet Explorer browser, and executives would not say whether they have plans to produce a version for the older Windows 3.1 system still used by tens of millions of computer owners.
Some features of MSN, including MSNBC news, electronic shopping and the planned Expedia consumer travel service, will be available at no cost to anyone with access to the Internet.
Patty Stonesifer, Microsoft senior vice president for interactive media, said the company's broad involvement in online consumer services was driven by "our belief that the Internet is the next mass medium.
"We need to provide compelling reasons to go online and stay online," she said. "There aren't enough compelling reasons to do that today."
By some estimates, only 10 million of the nation's 99 million households are currently online, though others say even that figure is high.
A year after its massively publicized introduction, Microsoft Corp.'s Windows 95 computer operating system has fallen short of the most optimistic expectations for the software giant and the industry.
Even though more than 40 million copies of Windows 95 have been sold, making it the fastest-selling new software ever, it would have been impossible for any product to live up to the unprecedented hype of the Aug. 24, 1995 launch, when stores around the world opened at midnight to greet long lines of customers.
The Redmond, Wash.-based company spent tens of millions of dollars promoting the product with stunts that included buying the entire print run of the Times of London and lighting New York's Empire State building in a Windows color scheme.
But the product, delivered eight months late, has fallen short of its sales potential in part because Microsoft delivered a mixed message to business customers, analysts said.
"It didn't do as well as it could have," said Rob Enderle, an analyst with Giga Information Group.
Scores of software and hardware companies that had hoped for a big boost in sales were disappointed when only a brief spike materialized.
"People who were expecting major coat-tails were somewhat disappointed," said Scott Winkler, an analyst with Gartner Group.
"It's not as though it hasn't had an impact," he said. "It just hasn't had the huge earth-shattering impact some people were looking for."
Symantec Corp., which had been among the most bullish of software companies at the time of the Windows 95 launch, ended up posting disappointing financial results when retail sales of the operating system fell short of its projections.
Touchstone Software Corp. had to pay $1.3 million in cash and stock to settle a shareholders lawsuit brought after the company's sales failed to meet expectations tied to the Windows 95 launch.
Many software developers apparently saw their crucial holiday season sales suffer last year because store shelves were jammed with blue-and-white boxes of Windows 95, resulting in a shortage of space for seasonal products, said Ann Stephens, president of PC Data Inc.
To be sure, sales of Windows 95 and the accompanying Office 95 upgrade drove Microsoft sales up 46 percent last year to a record $8.67 billion and cemented the company's status as the industry's dominant company.
Microsoft executives say they are thrilled with the sales figures, and industry analysts estimate that by sometime next year, the installed base of Windows 95 will surpass that of the older version of Windows, now used on about 100 million computers worldwide.
But Enderle said the figure could have been even higher if Microsoft had done a better job of handling the huge demand for technical support from customers who were frustrated trying to install the system.
He and other analysts said corporate America adopted a go-slow approach because Microsoft already was promoting the new version of its high-end Windows NT operating system, expected to be available in stores in the next several weeks.
"Microsoft sent a lot of signals that NT was going to be the answer," Winkler said. "Many people began to believe that Windows 95 was being downplayed."
But now that Windows NT 4.0 has been launched, Winkler and others believe only a relatively small proportion of corporate users will elect to pay the added software and hardware costs needed to use it instead of Windows 95.
"Windows 95 is going to do great," he said. "The mistake people made was in thinking it was going to be a fast, sweeping change rather than a slow, building change."
Microsoft Corp. is expected to report a sharp slowdown in earnings growth Monday due largely to a sales surge last year when the software giant launched its Windows 95 operating system.
On average, industry analysts expect the company to post earnings of 90 cents a share for its fiscal first quarter, up 15 percent from last year's 78 cents, according to First Call, which tracks earnings predictions. In last year's fiscal first quarter Microsoft reported net income of $499 million.
Analysts generally said the Redmond, Wash.-based company would post revenues in the $2.3 billion range for the period that ended Sept. 30, up from $2.02 billion.
While Microsoft's growth rate is still healthy, and results are expected to be slightly higher than in the quarter ended in June, the company is facing difficult comparisons after last year, when revenues and earnings grew more than 46 percent.
"It's a tough comparison because in the September quarter last year was the initial release of Windows 95 and all the sell-in associated with that, so it was a great quarter," said Chris Galvin of Hambrecht and Quist.
But he and other analysts said Microsoft's business was continuing to expand steadily, benefiting from rising sales of personal computers and the increasing penetration of Windows 95 and the more lucrative Windows NT system.
Microsoft's already-high profit margins also are rising as the company sells a growing proportion of its software by preloading it onto new computers or selling licenses to large customers rather than shrink-wrapped boxes at retail stores.
Microsoft's business is expected to gain momentum through the fiscal year as the recently updated Windows NT wins more acceptance and the company rolls out a major new version of its Office software package beginning in December.
For the full fiscal year, analysts see earnings and sales up about 20 percent over last year.
"I think NT will really start ramping in the December quarter and in the first part of '97," said Scott McAdams of Ragen MacKenzie. "It's going to be a very powerful driver of earnings."
One cloud on Microsoft's horizon is the imminent arrival of a wave of "thin client" products such as the Network Computer championed by Oracle Corp. Chairman Larry Ellison.
Late this month, Sun Microsystems Inc. is expected to launch a line of products code-named "Mr. Coffee" based on the increasingly popular Java language, which is being positioned as an alternative to the "Wintel" combination of Microsoft Windows operating systems on Intel Corp. processors.
While corporate users are not rushing to desert their personal computer networks, the increasing publicity about alternatives could hurt Microsoft's stock price, which was off $1.25 Friday at $134.25 in afteroon trading on Nasdaq but still up more than 50 percent so far this year.
Microsoft Corp is expected to report a sharp slowdown in earnings growth Monday due largely to a sales surge last year when the software giant launched its Windows 95 operating system.
On average, industry analysts expect the company to post earnings of $0.90 a share for its fiscal first quarter, up 15 percent from last year's $0.78, according to First Call.  
"It's a tough comparison because in the September quarter last year was the initial release of Windows 95 and all the sell-in associated with that, so it was a great quarter," said Chris Galvin of Hambrecht and Quist.
But he and other analysts said Microsoft's business was continuing to expand steadily, benefiting from rising sales of personal computers and the increasing penetration of Windows 95 and the more lucrative Windows NT system.  
Microsoft's already-high profit margins also are rising as the company sells a growing proportion of its software by preloading it onto new computers or selling licenses to large customers rather than shrink-wrapped boxes at retail stores.
Microsoft's business is expected to gain momentum through the fiscal year as the recently updated Windows NT wins more acceptance and the company rolls out a major new version of its Office application suite beginning in December.
For the fiscal year ending June 30, 1997, analysts on average see earnings of $4.07 a share, up 19 percent from last year's $3.43, First Call said.  
"I think NT will really start ramping in the December quarter and in the first part of '97," said analyst Scott McAdams of Ragen MacKenzie. "It's going to be a very powerful driver of earnings," he said.
One cloud on Microsoft's horizon is the imminent arrival of a wave of "thin client" products such as the Network Computer championed by Oracle Corp Chairman Larry Ellison.  
Late this month Sun Microsystems Inc is expected to launch a line of products code-named "Mr. Coffee" based on the increasingly popular Java language, which is being positioned as an alternative to the "Wintel" combination of Microsoft operating systems on Intel Corp processors.
While corporate users are not rushing to desert their personal computer networks, the increasing publicity about alternatives could hurt Microsoft's stock price, which is at near-record levels and up more than 50 percent since its 1995 closing price of $87.75.  
"It's been a bit of a back burner issue, ... but it will move to the front burner," said Rick Sherlund of Goldman Sachs.
Microsoft's earnings picture also is becoming blurred by revenue that the company defers to account for delayed costs such as service updates and technical support for its operating systems and business applications.
Microsoft had "unearned revenue" of $545 million on its balance sheet as of June 30, a figure that could rise to $1 billion by the end of the current fiscal year, McAdams said.
Microsoft Corp. reported better-than-expected profits for the latest quarter Monday as strong demand for its Windows operating systems and applications helped fuel record sales.
The computer software giant said earnings rose 23 percent to a record $614 million, or 95 cents a share, in its fiscal first quarter ended Sept. 30, from $499 million, or 78 cents a share, in the 1995 quarter. Revenues jumped 14 percent to $2.30 billion from $2.02 billion.
The profits, announced after the market closed, exceeded the Wall Street consensus expectation of 90 cents a share, and Microsoft shares rose to $136.375 in after-hours trading from the earlier close of $134 on Nasdaq.
Treasurer Greg Maffei said the 14 percent revenue increase was the smallest ever posted in the company's 21-year history, reflecting a surge in sales last year when Microsoft launched its Windows 95 operating system.
But with the high sales, marketing and manufacturing costs of Windows 95 also behind it, the company's operating profit margin surged to a record 39.3 percent of revenues, compared with about 35.1 percent a year earlier, said analyst Scott McAdams of Ragen MacKenzie.
"It looks like it was just a great quarter, and there's more to come," he said.
Microsoft executives said in a conference call with analysts that business would continue to be boosted by an expected holiday surge in sales of personal computers and the December release of Office 97, an update to the company's business applications product.
Microsoft Chief Financial Officer Mike Brown said he expected revenues to rise sequentially over the next two quarters and indicated revenue for the current quarter could be in the range of $2.4 billion, about 12 percent over last year's levels.
But he said the company's cost of goods sold should remain at about 11 percent of sales, compared with 15 percent in last year's second quarter.
"I'm very happy with the general revenue trend, and I was very pleased with the pattern of costs in the quarter," Brown said in an interview.
Microsoft also cited strong acceptance of the company's high end Windows NT operating system.
Maffei said sales of the NT workstation were up 400 percent over year-ago levels, while revenues from the BackOffice suite of server products doubled. Officials declined to give figures, but the BackOffice line currently generates about $1 billion in annual revenue.
Microsoft's overall revenues are about evenly divided between operating systems -- most of which are shipped loaded on new computers -- and applications.
Excluding sales directly to manufacturers, European revenues were flat in the quarter compared with the year-earlier period, and revenues in the United States and Europe rose 9 percent, reflecting the tough comparison.
But revenues from other markets such as Japan, where Windows 95 was not released until later, were up 32 percent, Microsoft said.
Overall last year Microsoft revenues and profits grew 46 percent, driven largely by the Windows 95 launch.
Brown also said the company was on track to spend $2.1 billion on research and development in the current fiscal year, including such ventures as its MSNBC cable and Internet news venture with NBC.
And the "unearned revenue" in the company's balance sheet from cyclical products such as Windows grew to $651 million as of Sept. 30 from $560 million three months earlier.
The company's cash hoard grew slightly to $7.1 billion from $6.94 billion.
Microsoft Corp. reported better-than-expected profits for the latest quarter Monday as strong demand for its Windows 95 and Windows NT computer operating systems helped fuel record sales.
The world's largest software maker said earnings rose 23 percent to a record $614 million, or 95 cents a share, in its fiscal first quarter ended in September, from $499 million, or 78 cents a share, in the 1995 quarter. Revenues jumped 14 percent to $2.30 billion from $2.02 billion.
The profits exceeded Wall Street's expectations of 90 cents a share, and shares of the software giant rose to $136.375 in after-hours trading from the earlier close of $134 on Nasdaq.
Microsoft cited strong acceptance of the company's high end Windows NT operating system.
"We shipped version 4.0 of Windows NT this quarter, and the momentum behind the product is outstanding," said Jeff Raikes, Group Vice President, Sales and Marketing.
"Corporate customers made the decision to adopt Windows NT servers and workstations in record numbers, driving 19 percent revenue growth over last quarter in the U.S. and Canada. Sales of Windows NT server grew at nearly double the rate of other operating system environments."
Microsoft's results were considered a crucial measure of its progress since the year-ago period included the launch of the company's much-hyped Windows 95 operating system.
Industry analysts have said Microsoft's sales and earnings growth would slow from last year's blistering pace of more than 46 percent but noted it should continue to benefit from higher sales of personal computers and the growing use of Windows 95 and Windows NT.
Microsoft Chief Financial Officer Mike Brown said he expected revenues to rise sequentially over the next two quarters from the $2.3 billion reported for the quarter ended on Sept. 30.
In an interview, Brown also said he thought the company's cost of goods sold could decline "a little bit" in the long term from the 10.9 percent of revenues just reported, already down from 16 percent a year ago.
"We'll grow a little bit in December and then a little bit more in March, I think," Brown said. "I'm very happy with the general revenue trend, and I was very pleased with the pattern of costs in the quarter."
Brown said revenues in the December quarter would be driven in part by holiday season sales, while the next quarter would get a boost from the release of the company's Office 97 business applications upgrade to one of its core products.
Microsoft Corp Chief Financial Officer Mike Brown Monday said he expected the company's revenues to rise sequentially in the next two quarters from the $2.3 billion reported for the three months ended September 30.
In an interview, Brown also said he thought the company's cost of goods sold could decline "a little bit" in the long term from the 10.9 percent of revenue just reported, already down from 16 percent a year ago.  
"We'll grow a little bit in December and then a little bit more in March, I think," Brown said. "I'm very happy with the general revenue trend, and I was very pleased with the pattern of costs in the quarter."
Brown said revenue in the December quarter would be driven in part by holiday season cyclicality, while the March quarter would get a boost from the release of the company's Office 97 suite of business applications, an upgrade to one of the software company's core products.  
Brown said cost ratios were falling because of increased use of CD-ROMs for distributing software, rather than more costly diskettes, and because of the growing popularity of enterprise software licenses over sales through the retail and reseller channels.
Brown also said the company's spending on research and development was "right on target," with its announced plans to spend $2.1 billion in the current fiscal year ending June 30.
In addition, he said unearned revenue on the company's balance sheet -- up to $651 million as of September 30 from $560 million three months earlier -- would rise further as a result of growth in the "subscription" model of sales, such as licenses and upgrade.
					-- Seattle bureau 206-386-4848
Boeing Co defense and space group President Gerald King said he thought the company had a "better than 50-50" chance of surviving to the next round of the military's Joint Strike Fighter program.
He said in an interview he was "not quite as bullish" about the company's chances of surviving into the next round of competition to win a contract to develop a so-called Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle for the U.S. Air Force. (corrects program from "...develop the next-generation space shuttle launch  vehicle.") 
In the joint strike program, Boeing is competing with McDonnell Douglas Corp and Lockheed Martin Corp to win a contract to build about 3,000 jets in the next century for the U.S. Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps and the British Royal Navy.
The Pentagon will eliminate one of the bidding companies next month in a "downselect."
"This is high on our priority, so we put a lot of effort into coming up with what we think is the right solution," King said in an interview. 
He said he thought Boeing had a good chance because of the high degree of commonality in its design, which should allow it to come up with a lower price for the single modular aircraft with three different configurations.
"I think our chances our better than 50-50 of going to the next phase because I think we've come forward with a very innovative solution," he said.  "The customer is almost obligated to give us an opportunity to demonstrate that we can in fact deliver what we've committed to." 
But he said he was concerned the Pentagon might favor the other bidders, particularly McDonnell Douglas, on the theory that a broad national "industrial base" needs to be maintained.
He said such an argument would make "absolutely no sense" because the United States already has excess capacity to build commercial and military aircraft.
If Boeing were eliminated the company would be "available" to partner with the surviving contractors, King said.
On the space shuttle program, the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration is expected to select two finalists in December from among Boeing, McDonnell Douglas, Lockheed Martin and Alliant Techsystems Inc.
"Even though I think we have the best solution, I think the competition is extremely tough, with Lockheed Martin and McDonnell Douglas having present launch systems that they can evolve from," King said.
				   -- Seattle bureau 206-386-4848
Boeing Co defense and space group President Gerald King said the company's planned acquisition of Rockwell International Corp's defense and space business was on track to close in early December.
In an interview, King also said he expected the defense and space group to remain "a significant part of the Boeing Co" with 30 to 40 percent of the company's total revenues "over time."  
King said he expected federal regulators to complete an antitrust review of the planned Rockwell deal early next month. The proposal also needs to be approved by Rockwell shareholders at a meeting set for Dec. 4 and should close within a few days after that, he said.
"Something could always happen to the merger to keep it from going through, I suppose, even though it looks like a slam dunk in comparison with some of the other things that have been done in this industry," King said.  
Last year defense and space revenues of $5.58 billion were 29 percent of the company's $19.52 billion in revenues, with commercial aircraft sales accounting for the rest.
This year defense and space revenues are expected to be nearly flat, while overall company revenues rise to about $22.6 billion, reflecting growth in commercial jet deliveries, said analyst Peter Jacobs of Ragen MacKenzie.
The Rockwell acquisition will add about $2.6 billion in revenue to the defense and space group next year, and King said the company has no immediate plans for further acquisitions.
"We're looking only to make this one work first," he said. "If there's a next step, we'll think about that later."
King said the defense and space group continues to pursue commercial opportunities, including the Sea Launch program, which he said was on track for initial satellite launch in mid-1998.
King also said the company and its partner, Textron Inc's Bell Helicopter division, are offering a nine-passenger civilian version of their V-22 Osprey tiltrotor aircraft that will be available in 2001.
				 -- Seattle bureau 206-386-4848
A bankruptcy judge Monday cleared the way for Montana construction mogul Dennis Washington to take over storied engineering giant Morrison Knudsen Corp., rescuing the company from near-insolvency.
U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Peter Walsh, in Wilmington, Dela., approved the prepackaged reorganization plan under which Washington's main operating company will acquire the much-larger Morrison Knudsen for about $283 million in cash, stock and debt assumption.
Washington, 61, a billionaire through his interests in bridge and highway building, copper mining and shipping, will become non-executive chairman of the Boise, Idaho-based company when its merger with Washington Construction Group Inc. becomes effective Sept. 11.
Robert Tinstman, a company veteran appointed to be president and chief executive officer last year after the ouster of its high-flying former chairman, William Agee, will retain those titles in the new company.
The merger requires approval of Washington Construction Group shareholders, but that is a formality because Washington owns 68.5 percent of the shares.
The merged company will retain the Morrison Knudsen name and its Boise heaquarters, but shareholders of the old company -- known for such projects as the Hoover Dam and Alaskan oil pipeline -- will be left with little value.
A distribution of stock in the new company was valued by one analyst at about 15 cents a share, compared with nearly $30 before revelations of losses that stunned Wall Street and led to the ouster of Agee, whose lavish lifestyle had made him a lightning-rod for criticism.
"From a shareholder's point of view it's a pretty bad outcome," said the analyst, John Rogers of Jensen Securities.
Shareholders also get warrants to purchase additional shares in the new company at $12 a share, compared with Washington Construction's current price of $9.25. Bondholders will get from 93 to 95 percent of the $365 million they were owed, one banker said.
Executives say the new company will be profitable from the outset, with revenues estimated at $1.59 billion and net income at $31 million for its first full fiscal year beginning Dec. 1, according to bankruptcy court documents.
That compares with revenue of $2.72 billion and net income of $36 million in 1993, before the company reported losses that totalled more than $600 million over two years.
Analysts traced Morrison Knudsen's woes to a disastrous forway into railroads, including huge losses on bids to build new commuter transit cars, a business the company has exited.
Agee's ambitious plan to build new locomotives from the ground up never materialised, and its minority stake in MK Rail Corp. is being distributed to bondholders.
Agee himself, who once used a corporate jet to shuttle between Boise and his company-bought estate in Pebble Beach, Calif., was forced to give up some of his lucrative pension and severance benefits in a $63 million company settlement of class-action shareholder lawsuits.
The new Morrison will get about 90 percent of its revenues from three businesses -- industrial construction for Fortune 100 companies, heavy civil construction, and environmental remediation, mainly for government agencies, Tinstman said in an interview.
"Dennis very much wants this to be a well-balanced, diversified company," Tinstman said.
The remaining 10 percent of the company's business is mining.
Washington, who usually stays behind the scenes at his companies, will help set strategy at the new Morrison Knudsen but will not have a day-to-day role, Tinstman said.
Morrison Knudsen Chairman Robert Miller, who was brought in last year and is best known for helping to engineer Chrysler Corp.'s turnaround in the 1980s, will be vice chairman of the new company. The other vice chairman will be Washington aide Dorn Parkinson.
Boeing Co. said Thursday that profits climbed 13 percent in the third quarter on stronger sales of its commercial jets and higher interest income.
The world's largest aircraft maker said net income for the three months ended on Sept. 30 climbed to $254 million, or 74 cents a share, from $225 million, or 66 cents a share, in the 1995 quarter.
Sales soared to $5.60 billion from $4.38 billion in last year's third quarter as it delivered 54 airliners, up from 51.
The results were in line with Wall Street expectations, but Boeing stock fell $1.50 to $95.25 on the New York Stock Exchange, where blue-chip issues were dragged down by weakness in the bond market.
"It's a good quarter," said analyst Cai von Rumohr of Cowen &amp; Co. He and other analysts said they expected Boeing to announce further production rate increases soon, particularly on its narrow-body 737 and jumbo 747 models.
Boeing already has announced plans to raise overall production to 36 airplanes a month by next year's third quarter from 22.5 currently in response to rising orders from the airline industry.
As the airline industry has pulled out of a long tailspin and begun posting healthy profits, Boeing has been scrambling to meet demand, boosting its work force by nearly 15 percent this year after years of deep layoffs.
Boeing Chief Executive Officer Phil Condit said in a statement that "airline-announced order activity continues to be encouraging."
As of Sept. 30 the company had orders for 435 planes worth $34.9 billion, compared with 346 planes worth $31.2 billion ordered in all of 1996.
"Based on current trends and barring unexpected disruptions, Boeing should be positioned for several years of sharply increasing earnings," said analyst Wolfgang Demisch of BT Securities.
Boeing revenues are expected to rise to about $22 billion this year from $19.5 billion last year and should hit nearly $36 billion next year, one analyst said.
On average, analysts see earnings of $2.94 a share this year compared with $2.57 last year, excluding one-time items, according to First Call, which tracks estimates.
Analysts see earnings rising to $5.36 a share next year and $7.23 in 1998, First Call said.
Boeing said its sales increase for the quarter was slightly offset by higher costs from developing new versions of its 737 airliner and by a higher effective income tax rate.
For the first nine months, net income soared to $841 million, or $2.44 a share, from $175 million, or 51 cents a share, in the 1995 period, when the company took a $600 million charge for an early retirement programme.
Sales grew to $16.17 billion from $14.98 billion, though Boeing delivered only 156 airplanes, down from 170 a year ago.
After months of denying that a $500 Internet appliance would pose a threat to its industry dominance, Microsoft Corp. plans to announce a new push for inexpensive, easy-to-use personal computers.
Microsoft is working with Intel Corp. and major compouter manufacturers such as Hewlett-Packard Co. and Compaq Computer Corp. on the intiative and will announce details at a conference Monday, said a spokesman for the software giant, confirming a published report.
The announcement will come one day before the widely anticipated unveiling of an $800 device from Microsoft rival Sun Microsystems Inc.
The Sun product is among the first of an expected flurry of appliance-like devices dubbed network computers being positioned as Internet-friendly alternatives to PCs based on the "Wintel" standard of Microsoft Windows and Intel processors.
While Microsoft Chairman Bill Gates and other executives have downplayed the threat from network computers, they have been scrambling to come up with ways to make personal computers easier to use for home consumers and cheaper to maintain for businesses.
"They and Intel have certainly heard the network computer mantra and have discovered a new religion," said Rob Enderle, an industry analyst with Giga Information Group.
"The threat is very real," he said. "Particularly for the (corporate) community, the concern surrounding the cost of managing multiple Wintel systems has been driving them to consider other alternatives."
At the same time personal computer penetration into the home appears to be hitting a plateau far short of other mass-market electronic devices.
In a report early this year that set off alarm bells throughout the industry, Dataquest forecast sharply slowing growth. The research group predicted PCs would be in 38 percent of U.S. homes by 1999, compared with 29 percent last year.
But since Oracle Corp. Chairman Larry Ellison and other executives began publicizing the network computer a little over a year ago, Microsoft officials routinely have minimized its importance.
"We dont think it's likely that Internet appliances, network computers or whatever you call them are going to displace the PC anytime soon," Gates told a Harvard University audience in May.
At the same time Microsoft has been stepping up efforts to make the PC easier to use, acknowledging the machines are dauntingly complex for many consumers.
In April Gates unveiled a set of technologies for what Microsoft called the "Simply Interactive PC," which he said would make the personal computer "as easy and convenient to use as other home appliances."
Monday's announcement apparently will go further to bring consumers lower prices, which are being made possible by falling prices of memory and other components.
"They're validating the proposition we've been taking to the market for the last year," said Jon Kannegaard, vice president of software products for Sun's JavaSoft unit.
Jesse Berst, executive editor of Windows Watcher, an industry newsletter, agreed that Microsoft was late to acknowledge the importance of network computers.
"They're awful late to respond to what has been a very, very strong message from customers," he said.
"If they had been doing what they should have been doing, which is really driving down prices aggressively, they wouldn't have been in the position where someone has the opportunity to come and take their franchise away."
Boeing Co. is expected to use the biennial Farnborough Air Show in England next week to formally launch the long-awaited stretch version of its 747 jumbo jet, industry analysts say.
While officials of the aerospace giant remain tight-lipped, analysts say it is all but certain executives will make a major announcement on Monday regarding two new members of the 747 family that will be known as the 747-500 and 747-600.
"They're going to announce the airplanes -- there is no doubt," said Joe Campbell, an analyst at Lehman Bros.
He said the only question was whether Boeing would announce massive orders of $10 billion or more from launch customers or merely disclose that its board of directors had given authorisation to offer the jet.
The announcement of the new models, which would include a jet with 30 percent more capacity than today's largest commercial airliner, is expected to be the highlight of the air show, frequently the stage for major order announcements and other industry news.
Boeing officials have said they are talking with at least six airlines about the potential new versions of the jumbo jet, including British Airways Plc, Singapore Airlines Ltd. and UAL Corp.'s United Airlines.
Boeing President Phil Condit said the company's board of directors discussed the new plane at a regularly scheduled meeting Monday but had not made a decision on whether to launch it.
"That will depend on airline orders," he said in a brief interview Tuesday.
Specifications being circulated within the industry call for the 747-600 to hold 548 passengers in a typical three-class configuration with a range of up to 8,900 miles (14,300 km), compared with 416 passengers and 8,400 miles (13,500 km) for the current-generation 747-400.
The long-range 747-500 would hold 462 passengers in three classes and have a range of up to 10,000 miles (16,000 km).
Analysts say the 747 stretch is essential for Boeing to continue dominating the lucrative top end of the market -- which it has had to itself since the introduction of the four-engine jumbo jet in 1970, which nearly bankrupted the company.
Now Boeing's own new 777 twin-engine jet is replacing older 747s, and possible new versions of jets from rivals Airbus Industrie and McDonnell Douglas Corp. could threaten the lower end of the jumbo market.
"They really do need to be able to move up to again have a position of complete monopoly for the aircraft as they have had for a number of years," said analyst Paul Nisbet of JSA Research.
Meanwhile Airbus has signalled that it intends to go ahead with plans for its own all-new 550-seat plane, dubbed the 3XX, although analysts question whether the market for jumbo jets is big enough for two manufacturers.
"From an economic point of view, I don't think there's enough demand to justify the $10 (billion) to $15 billion cost" of an all-new jet, said Bill Whitlow of Pacific Crest Securities.
He and other analysts said they expect air travel in the fast-growing Pacific region to follow the Atlantic in migrating to pairs of smaller cities rather than routes between world capitals that require the largest jets.
The trend toward such more thinly travelled routes was among the reasons cited by Boeing when it shelved a project to jointly develop with Airbus a double-decker airliner that would hold up to 800 passengers.
But Lehman's Campbell predicted Europe's Airbus, which is transforming itself from a consortium into a single company, would go ahead with its own jumbo jet for commercial delivery in 2003, about three years after Boeing's new 747 models.
"They're not going to leave Boeing alone at the upper end," he said.
Campbell estimated that Boeing's 747 revision, which would include a new wing, new engines and possible new cockpit electronics, would cost from $5 billion to $8 billion to develop.
Rolls-Royce Plc has said it plans to offer a variant of its Trent turbofan engine to power the new Boeing craft, while rivals General Electric Co. and United Technologies Corp.'s Pratt &amp; Whitney unit have formed a joint venture to develop an alternative power plant.
An outbreak of bacterial food poisoning that sickened at least 13 children and young adults in the Seattle area has been traced to one company's tainted apple juice, health officials said on Wednesday.
Odwalla Inc, a rapidly growing fresh juice and beverage company based in Half Moon Bay, California, issued a nationwide recall of products containing fresh apple juice, and many retailers pulled all Odwalla beverages from their shelves.
State and county health officials said 10 of the 13 confirmed cases of E. coli food poisoning had been conclusively traced to the unpasteurized Odwalla juice and the remaining three were under investigation.
At least eight more suspected cases have been reported, Dr. Mimi Fields, the state's deputy health secretary, said.
"It's difficult to know where we are on the epidenmic curve, although I don't think we are going to see a large influx of masses of new cases," Fields told Reuters.
The outbreak was the state's worst since some 500 people became ill in the Seattle area and three children died in 1993 after eating undercooked hamburgers.
While adults may suffer diarrhea, stomach cramps or more mild, flulike symptoms after eating food tainted by the bacterium, young children are more susceptible to the disease and may suffer sudden kidney failure that can lead to permanent brain damage or death.
In the current outbreak, six children have been hospitalized, including two who required dialysis. Officials said all the children had been released except for one 2-year-old boy, who was in satisfactory condition.
The strain of E. coli implicated in the outbreak normally lives in the digestion system of cattle and can spread into the food chain through slaughterhouse contamination or   fertilizer
that includes steer manure.
Health officials said juice can be tainted when fruit falls onto fertilized ground and is not washed properly.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has launched an investigation and will be inspecting Odwalla's plant in Dinuba, California, health officials said.
"Our first concern is for the health and safety of those affected," Odwalla chief executive officer Stephen Williamson said in a statement. He said the company was cooperating fully with health authorities.
Although so far all the cases have been traced to Odwalla juice, authorities recommended that consumers in the Seattle area boil unpasteurized apple juice or cider for 10 seconds before drinking it until the investigation was complete.
Odwalla, which bills itself as the "leading branded fresh juice and beverage company," distributes its beverages in pint plastic bottles to supermarkets and retail outlets in Washington, Oregon, California, Texas, Colorado, New Mexico, Nevada and British Columbia.
In the fiscal year that ended Aug. 31, the company reported its sales rose 65 percent to $59.2 million from $35.9 million. But net income fell to $633,000, or 12 cents a share, from $997,000, or 22 cents a share.
An outbreak of bacterial food poisoning that sickened at least 13 children and young adults in the Seattle area has been traced to one company's tainted apple juice, health officials said on Wednesday.
Odwalla Inc, a rapidly growing fresh juice and beverage company based in Half Moon Bay, California, issued a nationwide recall of products containing fresh apple juice, and many retailers pulled all Odwalla beverages from their shelves.
State and county health officials said 10 of the 13 confirmed cases of E. coli food poisoning had been conclusively traced to the unpasteurized Odwalla juice and the remaining three were under investigation.
At least eight more suspected cases have been reported, Dr. Mimi Fields, the state's deputy health secretary, said.
"It's difficult to know where we are on the epidenmic curve, although I don't think we are going to see a large influx of masses of new cases," Fields told Reuters.
The outbreak was the state's worst since some 500 people became ill in the Seattle area and three children died in 1993 after eating undercooked hamburgers.
While adults may suffer diarrhea, stomach cramps or more mild, flulike symptoms after eating food tainted by the bacterium, young children are more susceptible to the disease and may suffer sudden kidney failure that can lead to permanent brain damage or death.
In the current outbreak, six children have been hospitalized, including two who required dialysis. Officials said all the children had been released except for one 2-year-old boy, who was in satisfactory condition.
The strain of E. coli implicated in the outbreak normally lives in the digestion system of cattle and can spread into the food chain through slaughterhouse contamination or fertilizer that includes steer manure.
Health officials said juice can be tainted when fruit falls onto fertilized ground and is not washed properly.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has launched an investigation and will be inspecting Odwalla's plant in Dinuba, California, health officials said.
"Our first concern is for the health and safety of those affected," Odwalla chief executive officer Stephen Williamson said in a statement. He said the company was cooperating fully with health authorities.
Although so far all the cases have been traced to Odwalla juice, authorities recommended that consumers in the Seattle area boil unpasteurized apple juice or cider for 10 seconds before drinking it until the investigation was complete.
Odwalla, which bills itself as the "leading branded fresh juice and beverage company," distributes its beverages in pint plastic bottles to supermarkets and retail outlets in Washington, Oregon, California, Texas, Colorado, New Mexico, Nevada and British Columbia.
In the fiscal year that ended Aug. 31, the company reported its sales rose 65 percent to $59.2 million from $35.9 million. But net income fell to $633,000, or 12 cents a share, from $997,000, or 22 cents a share.
Federal officials Sunday confirmed 29 cases of bacterial poisoning linked to fresh apple juice as investigators tested for contamination in samples pulled from Western U.S. and Canadian store shelves.
Bob Howard of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta said the agency had confirmed that 29 children and young adults had been infected with a potentially fatal strain of the E. coli bacterium after drinking Odwalla Inc. fruit juice in California, Washington, Colorado and the Vancouver area of British Columbia.
At least 36 additional cases are suspected or under investigation, state, county and provincial officials said.
State and federal officials continued to test Odwalla juice samples over the weekend but said they had not found any evidence of contamination.
"We're going to have to wait a few days to know for sure whether the samples are negative or positive," Arthur Whitmore of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration said. "It is quite possible we won't actually find anything, but we have a good selection of samples, including those from the company's library of samples."
Odwalla, a rapidly growing juice company based in Half Moon Bay, California, was able to provide samples from production runs of two weeks ago, when the first cases surfaced in the Seattle area.
Whitmore said he did not know of any cases in which illness set in after Oct. 23, although the disease can incubate for up to two weeks.
At least four children remained hospitalized because of complications caused by the E. coli O57:H7 bacterium, including a 2-year-old girl in critical condition in California. Tara Azizi was in critical condition "but improving slightly," Stephen Texeira of Children's Hospital in Oakland said.
Young children are most susceptible to the bacterium, which causes stomach cramps followed by bloody diarrhea. In severe cases the illness can lead to kidney failure, which is treated through dialysis but may cause brain damage and death.
The bacterium, which normally lives in the digestive system of cattle, can enter the food chain through fecal contamination, because of either improper slaughtering or contact with manure.
Health officials speculated that Odwalla may have used apples that had fallen onto the ground, although company officials say they do not use "ground apples" and all produce is thoroughly washed before processing at the company's Dinuba, California, plant.
Odwalla juices are not pasteurized. Heat processing kills bacteria but can also alter flavor.
The outbreak of E. coli O157:H7 is the biggest in the United States since 1993 when more than 500 people fell ill in the Pacific Northwest and three children died after eating tainted meat, mostly at Jack-In-The-Box hamburger restaurants.
The same strain of E. coli sickened 9,500 people and killed 11 in Japan last summer. No source was identified in that outbreak, though raw radish shoots were suspected.
The CDC's Howard said the agency recommended that people boil unpasteurized cider or juice.
Boeing Co. is expected to use the biennial Farnborough Air Show in England next week to formally launch the long-awaited stretch version of its 747 jumbo jet, industry analysts say.
While officials of the aerospace giant remain tight-lipped, analysts say it is all but certain executives will make a major announcement on Monday regarding two new members of the 747 family that will be known as the 747-500 and 747-600.
"They're going to announce the airplanes -- there is no doubt," said Joe Campbell, an analyst at Lehman Bros.
He said the only question was whether Boeing would announce massive orders of $10 billion or more from launch customers or merely disclose that its board of directors had given authorization to offer the jet.
The announcement of the new models, which would include a jet with 30 percent more capacity than today's largest commercial airliner, is expected to be the highlight of the air show, frequently the stage for major order announcements and other industry news.
Boeing officials have said they are talking with at least six airlines about the potential new versions of the jumbo jet, including British Airways Plc, Singapore Airlines Ltd. and UAL Corp.'s United Airlines.
Boeing President Phil Condit said the company's board of directors discussed the new plane at a regularly scheduled meeting Monday but had not made a decision on whether to launch it.
"That will depend on airline orders," he said in a brief interview Tuesday.
Specifications being circulated within the industry call for the 747-600 to hold 548 passengers in a typical three-class configuration with a range of up to 8,900 miles (14,300 km), compared with 416 passengers and 8,400 miles (13,500 km) for the current-generation 747-400.
The long-range 747-500 would hold 462 passengers in three classes and have a range of up to 10,000 miles (16,000 km).
Analysts say the 747 stretch is essential for Boeing to continue dominating the lucrative top end of the market -- which it has had to itself since the introduction of the four-engine jumbo jet in 1970, which nearly bankrupted the company.
Now Boeing's own new 777 twin-engine jet is replacing older 747s, and possible new versions of jets from rivals Airbus Industrie and McDonnell Douglas Corp. could threaten the lower end of the jumbo market.
"They really do need to be able to move up to again have a position of complete monopoly for the aircraft as they have had for a number of years," said analyst Paul Nisbet of JSA Research.
Meanwhile Airbus has signaled that it intends to go ahead with plans for its own all-new 550-seat plane, dubbed the 3XX, although analysts question whether the market for jumbo jets is big enough for two manufacturers.
"From an economic point of view, I don't think there's enough demand to justify the $10 (billion) to $15 billion cost" of an all-new jet, said Bill Whitlow of Pacific Crest Securities.
He and other analysts said they expect air travel in the fast-growing Pacific region to follow the Atlantic in migrating to pairs of smaller cities rather than routes between world capitals that require the largest jets.
The trend toward such more thinly traveled routes was among the reasons cited by Boeing when it shelved a project to jointly develop with Airbus a double-decker airliner that would hold up to 800 passengers.
But Lehman's Campbell predicted Europe's Airbus, which is transforming itself from a consortium into a single company, would go ahead with its own jumbo jet for commercial delivery in 2003, about three years after Boeing's new 747 models.
"They're not going to leave Boeing alone at the upper end," he said.
Campbell estimated that Boeing's 747 revision, which would include a new wing, new engines and possible new cockpit electronics, would cost from $5 billion to $8 billion to develop.
Rolls-Royce Plc has said it plans to offer a variant of its Trent turbofan engine to power the new Boeing craft, while rivals General Electric Co. and United Technologies Corp.'s Pratt &amp; Whitney unit have formed a joint venture to develop an alternative power plant.
A federal appeals court on Wednesday overturned a jury verdict that ordered Nintendo Co. Ltd. to pay $253 million for patent infringement.
With interest, the company could have been forced to pay nearly $300 million to tiny Alpex Computer Corp. for a technology allegedly used in the hugely popular Nintendo Entertainment System game device, Nintendo of America Chairman Howard Lincoln said in an interview.
But in a 16-page decision, the U.S. Court of Appeals in Washington, D.C., overturned the jury's decision that the Alpex patent had been infringed.
"It's a complete victory," Lincoln said. "I think our nightmare with these folks is over."
Alpex, which Lincoln described as a bankrupt mining concern, filed suit in 1986, charging Nintendo's 8-bit game device used a patented "bitmapping" display technology patented by two Alpex engineers in 1977.
In 1994 a U.S. District Court jury agreed and ordered Nintendo to pay a 6 percent royalty on each of the more than 35 million game units sold in the United States.
But a three-judge panel of the appeals court in Washington, which handles patent cases, said in a 16-page decision it found a "lack of substantial evidence to support a finding of infringement either literally or under the doctrine of equivalents."
Alpex's technology was used in early generation video games made by Mattel, Atari and Coleco. The company later won patent infringement settlements from Sega Enterprises Ltd. and others.
But with the appeal victory Nintendo preserved what Lincoln said was a perfect record of fighting in court to protect its intellectual property rights.
Lincoln said the case "cries out for a change" in the patent litigation system because it required a jury of laymen to sit through an eight-week trial that hinged on complex technical details of data storage and image display.
"The problem is you ask these juries to in effect become electrical engineers, and quite frankly the jury was not composed of electrical engineers," Lincoln said.
He also said the case was kept alive by lawyers working on a contingency-fee basis who stood to make huge profits.
While Alpex could appeal to the full appeals court or the Supreme Court, Lincoln said he was confident Nintendo would prevail.
Lawyers for Alpex could not be reached for comment.
Underdog Boeing Co., pitted against the nation's top two defence contractors, hopes to emerge as one of the winners next week when the Pentagon narrows the field to two competitors for the biggest weapons project of the early 21st century.
Boeing, Lockheed Martin Corp. and McDonnell Douglas Corp. are each leading teams bidding on a Pentagon contract to build 3,000 new joint strike fighters -- a deal that could be worth more than $170 billion over the next two decades.
Defence officials will announce on Nov. 18 the results of a hotly contested "down select" that will eliminate one of the three teams and leave the remaining bidders to build prototypes for a "flyoff" and final decision in fiscal year 2001.
"We have identified the joint strike fighter as our No. 1 new business opportunity," said Lee Whitney, a spokesman for Lockheed Martin, the nation's biggest defence contractor. "We have focused resources from throughout the corporation on our configuration and all the effort necessary to emerge as the winner."
The contract also is regarded as crucial for No. 2 McDonnell Douglas Corp., which recently announced its intention to reduce its commercial aviation efforts.
"Winning is more critical to Lockheed and McDonnell than it is to Boeing," said analyst Paul Nisbet of JSA Research.
But, he said, Boeing's entry was aggressive, promising up to 95 percent commonality among the three versions of the jet and a "flyaway" cost averaging less than $30 million for each plane, excluding billions in research and development.
"I think they're still viewed as being the dark horse, but if I really had to bet some money, I'd bet that Lockheed Martin is going to be the loser," Nisbet said. "They already have two-thirds of the F-22, and the other two proposals are at least as good or even better."
The joint strike fighter is aimed at cutting costs by serving the needs of the Air Force, Marines, Navy and the British Royal Navy with a single common airframe.
Some within the Pentagon chafe at the concept of a multi-purpose jet design with three versions -- including advanced air-to-ground strike capability for the Air Force and vertical "hover" landing capability for the Marines.
But the project appears to have the momentum to carry it forward into the 21st century, when it would replace four existing fighters after delivery begins in fiscal 2008.
In addition to the 3,000 jets being ordered by the four services -- including more than 2,000 for the Air Force -- industry executives believe another 1,000 could be sold for export to U.S. allies.
While Boeing has major roles in current projects, including the B-2 bomber and F-22 fighter, the Seattle-based company, best known for its commercial airliners, has not been the prime contractor on a tactical military jet since the Army's P-26 "Peashooter" of the 1930s.
But analysts say the company's innovative design for the joint strike fighter, which includes one engine type and one wing for all three versions, may well earn it a place among the two finalists.
"Boeing's design became much more credibly viewed because they're leveraging their derivative technologies that they've built up over years of commercial production," said Nick Heymann, an analyst at Natwest Securities.
Boeing has signalled its intention to remain a major player in the military arena with its planned purchase of Rockwell International Corp. 's defence and space properties for $3.2 billion.
"We've come forward with a very innovative solution," Boeing defence and space President Jerry King said. "The Pentagon is almost obligated to give us an opportunity to demonstrate that we can in fact deliver what we've committed to."
Upscale apparel retailer Nordstrom Inc. Monday posted a 16 percent increase in earnings for its third quarter as it boosted sales and reduced markdowns.
For the fiscal third quarter ending Oct. 31, Nordstrom posted sales of $984 million, up 9 percent over last year's $907 million. Net income rose to $34 million, or 42 cents a share, from $29 million, or 36 cents a share, last year.
When certain one-time gains and costs were excluded, the company earned about 38 cents a share, compared with a Wall Street consensus forecast of 36 cents, said Piper Jaffray analyst Saul Yaari.
He and other analysts said they expected to raise their estimates.
"It was a great quarter," said Jennifer Black Groves of Black &amp; Co. in Portland, Ore.
She noted the company had a difficult summer because of an over-reliance on unpopular body-hugging fashions and a merchandise reconfiguration that confused customers and sales executives.
The result was heavy markdowns in July and August that ate into earnings, but company executives said the deepest of the markdowns appear to be behind them.
"They sacrificed the short term for what will be very beenficial for them in the long term," Groves said.
She said the merchandise reconfiguration, aimed at bringing the company's clothing selections more into line with its customer base, has "rejuvenated the company."
"I think you're going to see some great numbers in the year ahead," she said.
Nordstrom said comparable-store sales, a closely watched measure of industry performance, fell 0.3 percent in the latest quarter but were up 1.5 percent for the year to date.
And executives told analysts in a conference call that their plans called for comparable-store sales to rise at least 2 percent in the critical holiday quarter compared with a relatively weak 1995 period.
"We have plenty of ability to respond to sales above that," Nordstrom co-Chairman John Whitacre said in the conference call.
Comparable-store sales are adjusted to represent only that retail space that has been open at least a year.
Nordstrom has opened several new stores this year and plans to open three new department stores and several smaller stores next year, adding about 719,000 square feet of store space to its current total of 11.74 million, executives said.
American Airlines is planning to place a long-awaited order for about $6 billion worth of Boeing Co. airplanes, according to reports published Wednesday.
Airline Chairman Robert Crandall was scheduled to make a "major company announcement" at a news conference Thursday.
Officials of Boeing and American declined to comment on the order, reported in the Wall Street Journal and New York Times, although an airline spokesman confirmed that directors of its parent company, AMR Corp., were meeting.
According to the reports, American will announce an order for more than 100 new Boeing jets, including 12 wide-body 777s and 75 narrow-body 737s.
Although American officials have said privately they have chosen Boeing for their fleet modernization program, the exact size of the initial order has not been revealed.
The orders are expected to be contingent on ratification by pilots of a new six-year contract, which could be put to a vote next month. The board of the pilots union was voting Wednesday on a tentative labor pact reached in September.
Industry analysts saw the order as a signal American could order hundreds of Boeing jets over the next two decades as it updates and expands its fleet, now a mix of planes built by Boeing, McDonnell Douglas Corp., Airbus Industrie and Fokker NV.
"I think basically this is a commitment to the Boeing family," analyst Bill Whitlow of Pacific Crest Securities said.
"If you look at their fleet, they (American) have kind of a hodgepodge of things," he said. "I think you can make the case that most of the airplanes they will be buying in the future will be these Boeing models."
American currently does not operate the 737, which seats from 108 to 189 passengers and initially will be used to replace the 75 older 727 jets used by the airline.
But analysts said that over the next decade American likely will buy more 737s to replace its fleet of 260 aging McDonnell Douglas MD-80 jets.
American already has announced plans to sell most of its wide-body MD-11 jets to Federal Express Corp. for use as cargo jets, and analysts said Boeing's 777 would be a likely replacement choice suitable for the carrier's potential expansion in the Far East.
Analyst Paul Nisbet of JSA Research said American, the nation's No. 1 airline by revenue, appears to be turning over "the whole fleet to Boeing aircraft."
"It's a huge fleet," he said. "Over the next decade there's going to be a lot more than $6 billion in planes delivered."
For beleaguered McDonnell Douglas Corp., the decision would be yet another blow for a company that has acknowledged it will be only a niche player in the commercial aircraft market and last week was knocked out of contention for the Pentagon's biggest weapons program of the early 21st century, a jet fighter.
Analysts said they still expect a big fleet-renewal order from No. 3 carrier Delta Air Lines Inc., which could go at least partly to McDonnell Douglas.
"Somewhere along the line this is going to bubble over in McDonell Douglas' favor," Nisbet said.
Other major U.S. carriers already have announced their intentions to buy new airplanes now that the industry has returned to financial health after a long downturn.
Earlier this month, USAir Group Inc. chose Europe's Airbus Industrie to supply it with narrow-body jets in an order that could be worth $18 billion over the next 13 years. The carrier is negotiating with Boeing and Airbus for new wide-body jets.
Boeing stock rose $2.375 to $96.375 Wednesday and AMR stock was off 62.5 cents at $91, both on the New York Stock Exchange.
American Airlines is planning to place a long-awaited order for about $6 billion worth of Boeing Co. airplanes, according to reports published Wednesday.
Airline Chairman Robert Crandall was scheduled to make a "major company announcement" at a news conference Thursday.
Officials of Boeing and American declined to comment on the order, reported in the Wall Street Journal and New York Times, although an airline spokesman confirmed that directors of its parent company, AMR Corp., were meeting.
According to the reports, American will announce an order for more than 100 new Boeing jets, including 12 wide-body 777s and 75 narrow-body 737s.
Although American officials have said privately they have chosen Boeing for their fleet modernisation programme, the exact size of the initial order has not been revealed.
The orders are expected to be contingent on ratification by pilots of a new six-year contract, which could be put to a vote next month. The board of the pilots union was voting Wednesday on a tentative labour pact reached in September.
Industry analysts saw the order as a signal American could order hundreds of Boeing jets over the next two decades as it updates and expands its fleet, now a mix of planes built by Boeing, McDonnell Douglas Corp., Airbus Industrie and Fokker NV.
"I think basically this is a commitment to the Boeing family," analyst Bill Whitlow of Pacific Crest Securities said.
"If you look at their fleet, they (American) have kind of a hodgepodge of things," he said. "I think you can make the case that most of the airplanes they will be buying in the future will be these Boeing models."
American currently does not operate the 737, which seats from 108 to 189 passengers and initially will be used to replace the 75 older 727 jets used by the airline.
But analysts said that over the next decade American likely will buy more 737s to replace its fleet of 260 ageing McDonnell Douglas MD-80 jets.
American already has announced plans to sell most of its wide-body MD-11 jets to Federal Express Corp. for use as cargo jets, and analysts said Boeing's 777 would be a likely replacement choice suitable for the carrier's potential expansion in the Far East.
Analyst Paul Nisbet of JSA Research said American, the nation's No. 1 airline by revenue, appears to be turning over "the whole fleet to Boeing aircraft."
"It's a huge fleet," he said. "Over the next decade there's going to be a lot more than $6 billion in planes delivered."
For beleaguered McDonnell Douglas Corp., the decision would be yet another blow for a company that has acknowledged it will be only a niche player in the commercial aircraft market and last week was knocked out of contention for the Pentagon's biggest weapons programme of the early 21st century, a jet fighter.
Analysts said they still expect a big fleet-renewal order from No. 3 carrier Delta Air Lines Inc., which could go at least partly to McDonnell Douglas.
"Somewhere along the line this is going to bubble over in McDonell Douglas' favour," Nisbet said.
Other major U.S. carriers already have announced their intentions to buy new airplanes now that the industry has returned to financial health after a long downturn.
Earlier this month, USAir Group Inc. chose Europe's Airbus Industrie to supply it with narrow-body jets in an order that could be worth $18 billion over the next 13 years. The carrier is negotiating with Boeing and Airbus for new wide-body jets.
Boeing stock rose $2.375 to $96.375 Wednesday and AMR stock was off 62.5 cents at $91, both on the New York Stock Exchange.
Sierra Semiconductor Corp.'s stock jumped more than 27 percent Thursday on expectations the company will emerge as a smaller but more profitable operation after it exits the computer modem business.
The San Jose, Calif.-based company's stock gained after its announcement Wednesday that it plans to pull out of the highly competitive modem-chip business and focus instead on the fast-growing market for computer networking equipment.
The stock rose $2.625 to $11.875 in late trading on NASDAQ.
"Certainly the company will be a much smaller company now, but it will be a more profitable business," said analyst Elias Moosa of Robertson Stephens &amp; Co.
But analysts noted that Sierra still has much painful work ahead of it, including cutting as many as 150 jobs from its work force, which currently has 500 people, and building up the business of its PMC-Sierra unit, which makes routing devices and chipsets for high-speed computer networks.
The company has announced plans to take a charge against earnings of $50 million to $80 million to write down the value of assets and inventories and cover severance payments.
Scott Randall of Soundview Financial Group said the company likely would have difficulty selling its modem-chip business.
"Once you announce your intention to exit a business, it becomes a complete buyer's market," he said.
He said that while the company is focusing on the fastest-growing part of its business, the market for networking chips has begun to attract the attention of much-larger players such as International Business Machines Corp
"As the market develops the question is, are they able to make that transition to be a much larger company?" Randall said.
Other analysts were more bullish, even though the company is expected to shrink to slightly more than half its current size in sales.
"It's a positive strategic move," said Miles Kan of Hambrecht &amp; Quist. "The modem business is a low-margin, commodity business," he said.
Sierra's PMC-Sierra unit generated $33 million of the company's $117 million in sales in the first half of the year, compared with $45 million in sales of modem chips, Kan said. But the PMC unit is far more profitable, he said.
Sierra's stock has fallen from a high of nearly $25 this year as the computer chip sector has been battered by falling prices and concern about slowing demand.
Sierra Semiconductor Corp jumped 23 percent Thursday on the expectation the company would emerge as a smaller but more profitable operation after its planned exit from the computer modem business.
The San Jose, Calif., company was up 2-1/8 at 11-3/8 after its announcement Wednesday that it planned to pull out of the highly competitive modem-chip business and focus instead on the fast-growing market for computer networking equipment.  
"Certainly the company will be a much smaller company now, but it will be a more profitable business," said analyst Elias Moosa of Roberston Stephens &amp; Co.
But analysts noted that Sierra still has much painful work ahead of it, including cutting as many as 150 jobs from its workforce, which currently has 500 people, and building up the business of its PMC-Sierra unit, which makes routing devices and chipsets for high-speed computer networks.
The company has announced plans to take a charge against earnings of $50 million to $80 million to write down the value of assets and inventories and cover severance payments.  
Scott Randall of Soundview Financial Group said the company likely would have difficulty selling its modem-chip business.
"Once you announce your intention to exit a business, it becomes a complete buyer's market," he said.
And he said that while the company is focusing on the fastest-growing part of its business, the market for networking chips has begun to attract the attention of much-larger players such as International Business Machines Corp.  
"As the market develops the question is, are they able to make that transition to be a much larger company?" Randall said.
Other analysts were more bullish, even though the company is expected to shrink to slightly more than half its current size in sales.
"It's a positive strategic move," said Miles Kan of Hambrecht &amp; Quist.
"The modem business is a low-margin, commodity business," he said.
The company's PMC-Sierra unit generated $33 million of the company's $117 million in sales in the first half of the year, compared with $45 million in sales of modem chips, Kan said. But the PMC unit is far more profitable, he said.
Sierra's stock has fallen from a high of nearly $25 this year as the computer chip sector has been battered by falling prices and concern about slowing demand. -- Seattle bureau 206-386-4848
Software giant Microsoft Corp. MSFT.N  plans to pay dividends to stockholders for the first time through a new issue of preferred shares, according to documents filed Monday.
The hugely profitable company, which has not paid dividends in its 10 years as a public company but has hoarded a cash pile that has grown to more than $7 billion, said it planned to issue $750 million worth of the new class of stock.
"We are responding to the desire of some investors for an income-yielding stock, while still allowing them to participate to a significant degree in the growth potential of our company," Chief Financial Officer Mike Brown said in a statement.
The preferred shares will protect investors against risk, guaranteeing they will get back their principal in cash or common stock at the end of three years along with quarterly dividends that will be specified at the time of the offering.
But investors will have only a limited opportunity to enjoy the kind of stock appreciation available to owners of Microsoft common stock, which has risen nearly 80 percent this year.
The value of the preferred shares will be capped at a percentage to be established when the offering is completed. Similar convertible preferred shares have been capped at 25 percent to 30 percent growth.
In the past, Microsoft Chairman Bill Gates and other board members have resisted calls for a common stock dividend, saying the fast-moving computer business required high research spending levels and the flexibility to make large acquisitions if needed.
Treasurer Greg Maffei said the planned issue of preferred shares was consistent with that philosophy, noting that the $750 million would represent less than 1 percent of the company's market capitalization.
"We dont believe the bulk of our investors want a common dividend," Maffei said. "We believe that the best use of (cash) is to reinvest in the business. On the other hand we do understand that some investors want a common dividend, and we created a security that offers them the opportunity to become investors in Microsoft."
The amount of the offering could rise to $862.5 million if underwriters Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley exercise options, Microsoft said in the filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Pending SEC approval the offering could be completed in the next several weeks.
The Internet browser wars heated up Monday as market leader Netscape Communications Corp launched its latest Navigator software and officials of rival Microsoft Corp. said they saw little new.
Netscape, countering Microsoft's high-profile launch of its Internet Explorer 3.0 last week, said it had linked up with more than 20 content providers, including The New York Times and Sportsline USA, to offer tailored news and information to users.
Microsoft last week made a similar offer, saying that users who download its new browser would get free trial subscriptions to The Wall Street Journal Interactive Edition, ESPN SportsZone and other services.
While Netscape has a commanding lead in the growing browser market, with a share estimated at over 80 percent, industry analysts say Microsoft's latest software poses a threat to that dominance.
"I'd say at the very minimum Microsoft has leveled the playing field, and the real battle can now begin," said Adam Schoenfeld of the Jupiter Communications research firm.
Microsoft said more than 1 million users had downloaded its browser off the Internet since it became available last Tuesday.
Microsoft stock fell 75 cents to $123.50 a share, while Netscape dropped $2.375 to $36.50, its lowest close since October.
In launching the latest version of Navigator, Mountain View, Calif.-based Netscape highlighted a new electronic mail feature that will deliver information from selected content providers directly to the user's computer "in box."
The new software also offers enhanced audio, video and three-dimensional animation.
In a statement sent to reporters, Redmond, Wash.-based Microsoft called Netscape's new electronic mail feature "glorified junk mail" and said its own Internet Explorer offers faster access to multimedia clips.
On its World Wide Web site, Microsoft was less blunt but invited users to try both products and compare.
"We're confident that in this scenario Internet Explorer 3.0 will fare very well," Microsoft said in the Web statement.
Schoenfeld agreed, saying, "To the average user now, the products are probably indistinguishable in terms of quality."
Microsoft also pointed out that its product is free, while Netscape charges most users a $49 license fee after a free 90-day trial period.
While Navigator is available for a variety of computer platforms, the new version of Internet Explorer so far requires Microsoft's most recent operating systems, Windows 95 or Windows NT.
Microsoft officials said versions for previous versions of Windows and for Apple Computer Inc.'s Macintosh system were forthcoming.
Analysts said while the rapidly expanding Internet market was big enough for both players, Netscape was certain to see its share of the browser market diminish.
They said the browser war was likely to become even more intense when Microsoft unveiled its Internet Explorer version 4.0, expected early next year.
The new browser will be integrated into the Windows operating system, allowing users to "browse" through their local computer as well as the Internet.
"Netscape doesn't own the operating system, so it will be very difficult for them to counter that," said Michael Wallace of UBS Securities.
Boeing Co, the world leader in commercial aviation, flew into the ranks of the top military contractors as well on Sunday when it announced its planned $13 billion acquisition of McDonnell Douglas Corp.
Boeing's increased resources should put competitive pressure on its commercial rival, Europe's Airbus Industrie. But industry analysts said the chief benefits for Boeing would be on the military side.  
"Historically Boeing's military business was something of an also-ran," said Cai von Rumohr, an analyst at Cowen &amp; Co. "With this transaction in one fell swoop they become a very major player."
One analyst said the combined company could get nearly 50 percent of its revenues from government contracts, up from Boeing's historical 25 to 30 percent.  
The deal follows by little more than a week the completion of Boeing's $3.2 billion acquisition of Rockwell International Corp's defense and space business and comes just a month after McDonnell Douglas was was eliminated from consideration to build the military's 21st century joint strike fighter plane.
Instead, the Pentagon chose Boeing and Lockheed Martin Corp -- the nation's largest military contractor -- to build prototype versions of the new fighter jet in a contract that could be worth $200 billion or more to the eventual winner.  
The addition of McDonnell Douglas' expertise makes Boeing "the team to beat" on that crucial program, said Paul Nisbet of JSA Securities.
Loss of the joint strike fighter was the final blow for McDonnell Douglas, said analyst Nick Heymann of Natwest Securities. McDonnell had already announced its intention to back away from the commercial aviation market, where it has been only a marginal player in recent years.  
"McDonnell Douglas just didn't have the resources to aggressively fund its development programs," he said. "They got stretched too thin on transports and fighters and commercial, and they underinvested."
Nevertheless the friendly all-stock deal does not necessarily mean that McDonnell Douglas executives failed in their effort to turn around the company, analysts said.
For one thing, the offer price of about $62.89 a share based on Friday's close is well beyond McDonnell's all-time high and about 10 times its level of the early 1990s, said Wolfgang Demisch of BT Securities.  
In addition, the merger is being done at the very beginning of an expansion cycle in the industry, meaning layoffs can be minimized and the companies have several years to rationalize their operations before the next expected downturn.
"It isn't a case that you're merging because you're starving to death," said Demisch. "It's a case that there's lots of opportunity. ... That's a much healthier basis on which to consolidate."  
Indeed, Boeing Chief Executive Phil Condit said the combined companies would have revenues of $48 billion next year, up more than 30 percent from a projected $35 billion this year.
"We are going to be going after $1 billion or more of savings a year, but we are going to be doing in it in an environment where the overall growth is occurring," Condit said at a news conference. "That's the advantage we have got right now."  
Company officials said any job losses would likely be minimal. There may be overlaps in some areas, Condit said, but he added: "I don't think those are going to be significant numbers."
Executives said the merger would cause "reassignments," and operations were expected to continue at existing major locations, including St Louis, where McDonnell Douglas is based.
Murray Weidenbaum, chairman of the Centre for the Study of American Business at Washington University and former chief economist for Boeing, said the deal could have benefits for St. Louis.  
Boeing has a better chance of landing the $200 billion U.S. fighter-jet contract, which is still up for grabs, with McDonnell Douglas on board, he speculated. That could mean more work for St. Louis.
"It's an opportunity and a threat to the St. Louis economy," he said.
Condit, who will become chairman and chief executive officer of the combined company, said final merger negotiations began Tuesday, the day after he was elected to become Boeing's chairman effective Feb. 1.
While Boeing does not currently need additional capacity to produce commercial jets, it will benefit from additional engineering strength, which will allow it to produce new models or variations of existing jets more quickly.
The merger will leave Airbus Industrie as the only other major player in the business of making large commercial aircraft. An Airbus spokesman said McDonnell Douglas has not been a competitor in the civilian aircraft business for a number of years "so it hasn't altered the equation in the commercial field at all for Airbus."
Analysts predicted the deal would win clearance from federal antitrust regulators, noting that no protests were raised this month when the two companies struck a deal to work together on engineering new wide-body jets.
They thought the deal would win approval from the Pentagon, which has encouraged industry consolidation and backed the deal that created No. 1 defense contractor Lockheed Martin in 1994.
Perhaps the chief concern for federal regulators will be Boeing's overwhelming size, which will be nearly twice that of its nearest rival Lockeheed Martin.
Major U.S. airlines said it was too soon to forecast the impact of the proposed merger on airliner prices or their airplane-buying strategies. "It is too early to tell," Delta Air Lines Inc spokesman Todd Clay said.
Boeing Co's planned $13 billion acquisition of McDonnell Douglas Corp. will propel it to a leading position as a military contractor, matching its stature as the world leader in commercial aviation.
While Europe's Airbus Industrie is likely to feel competitive pressure because of Boeing's increased resources, industry analysts said the chief benefits for Boeing would be on the military side.
"Historically Boeing's military business was something of an also-ran," said Cai von Rumohr, an analyst at Cowen &amp; Co. "With this transaction in one fell swoop they become a very major player."
One analyst said the combined company could get nearly 50 percent of its revenues from government contracts, up from Boeing's historical 25 to 30 percent.
The deal follows by little more than a week the completion of Boeing's $3.2 billion acquisition of Rockwell International Corp's defence and space business.
And it comes just a month after McDonnell Douglas was eliminated from consideration to build the military's 21st century joint strike fighter plane.
Instead the Pentagon chose Boeing and Lockheed Martin Corp -- the nation's largest military contractor -- to build prototype versions of the new fighter jet in a contract that could be worth $200 billion or more to the eventual winner.
The addition of McDonnell Douglas' expertise makes Boeing "the team to beat" on the crucial programme, said Paul Nisbet of JSA Securities.
Analyst Nick Heymann of Natwest Securities said the loss of the joint strike fighter was the crowning blow for McDonnell Douglas, which already had announced its intention to back away from the commercial aviation market, where it has been only a marginal player in recent years.
"McDonnell Douglas just didn't have the resources to aggressively fund its development programmes," he said. "They got stretched too thin on transports and fighters and commercial, and they underinvested."
Nevertheless the friendly all-stock deal does not necessarily mean that McDonnell Douglas executives failed in their effort to turn around the company, analysts said.
For one thing the offer price of about $62.89 a share based on Friday's close is well beyond the stock's all-time high and about 10 times its level of the early 1990s, said Wolfgang Demisch of BT Securities.
In addition the merger is being done at the very beginning of an expansion cycle in the industry, meaning layoffs can be minimised and the companies have several years to rationalise their operations before the next expected downturn.
"It isn't a case that you're merging because you're starving to death," said Demisch. "It's a case that there's lots of opportunity. ... That's a much healthier basis on which to consolidate."
Indeed Boeing chief executive Phil Condit said the combined companies would have revenues of $48 billion next year, up more than 30 percent from a projected $35 billion this year.
"We are going to be going after $1 billion or more of savings a year, but we are going to be doing in it in an environment where the overall growth is occurring," Condit said at a news conference. "That's the advantage we have got right now."
Condit, who will become chairman and chief executive officer of the combined company, said final merger negotiations began Tuesday, the day after he was elected to become Boeing's chairman effective Feb. 1.
While Boeing does not currently need additional capacity to produce commercial jets, it will benefit from additional engineering strength, which will allow it to produce new models or variations of existing jets more quickly.
Analysts predicted the deal would win clearance from federal antitrust regulators, noting that no protests were raised this month when the two companies struck a deal to work together on engineering new wide-body jets.
And analysts said they thought the deal would win approval from the Pentagon, which has encouraged industry consolidation and backed the deal that created No. 1 defence contractor Lockheed Martin in 1994.
Perhaps the chief concern for federal regulators will be Boeing's overwhelming size, which will be nearly twice that of its nearest rival Lockeheed Martin if the deal goes through.
Boeing Co.'s stunning agreement to acquire longtime rival McDonnell Douglas Corp. won a ringing endorsement from Wall Street and sent shock waves through the aerospace industry Monday.
Stock in both companies soared on expectations the deal would boost Boeing's operating profits immediately after its completion, targeted for mid-1997.
Boeing rose $4.375 to $101.125 and McDonnell Douglas jumped $10.375 to $62.375, down from earlier highs on the New York Stock Exchange but good enough to give the all-stock transaction an indicated value of nearly $14 billion.
Industry analysts saw few obstacles to the deal, which marks a startling transformation for a company that just a year ago was completing a final round of cutbacks that had slashed its work force by 30 percent in five years.
Since then Boeing has completed the $3.2 billion acquisition of Rockwell International Corp.'s defense and space business, won the right to compete for the richest military contract in Pentagon history and announced orders for a record $45.6 billion in new commercial jets.
"It's an incredible turnaround story," said Jon Kutler, president of Quarterdeck Investment Partners, which specializes in aerospace. "These are very bold, dramatic, uncharacteristic moves for Boeing and I applaud them for it."
While Boeing had been moving to cut costs and transform its management style under outgoing Chairman Frank Shrontz, the pace has accelerated at the once-sluggish company since Phil Condit was named chief executive officer in April.
Condit began the final round of merger negotiations with McDonnell Douglas last Tuesday, just a day after being formally elected Boeing chairman as of Feb. 1, 1997.
"We're seeing Boeing evolve from kind of a stodgy company to being very aggressive, nimble," said Bill Whitlow, a longtime Boeing analyst at Pacific Crest Securities who praised Condit's energy and stamina.
Executives at the two companies said the deal would be additive to operating profits immediately and reiterated their prediction that Boeing could achieve $1 billion in annual savings without any layoffs because of rapid growth.
Analysts said the merger was a good strategy for McDonnell Douglas, which already had announced plans to pull back from commercial aviation when it was eliminated from bidding for the Pentagon's 21st century joint strike fighter.
But Harry Stonecipher, chief executive of McDonnell Douglas, denied that the merger was born of desperation.
"This is the deal we wanted and we are very happy with it," Stonecipher told CNBC. "This is the only deal we considered."
Boeing executives told analysts they had no immediate plans to make further acquisitions, even though the combined company will generate cash flow of more than $4 billion a year on projected 1997 revenue of $48 billion.
The surprise merger immediately turned up the heat on Europe's Airbus Industrie to move ahead quickly with a restructuring plan. Without such a plan, the consortium would be unable to go ahead with a proposed super-jumbo aircraft to compete with Boeing's 747, which now is unchallenged at the profitable top end of the market, analysts said.
"Airbus Industrie and its partners must agree as soon as possible on an optimal structure that will allow Airbus Industrie to match its American competitors as a powerful, integrated European enterprise," German Economics Minister Guenter Rexrodt said in a statement.
Analysts noted that Boeing had ended any chance that Airbus would partner with McDonnell on a new large jet, and some said Boeing's own plans to stretch the 747 might now be deferred.
But both Airbus and Boeing could benefit from stabilized airplane prices with the No. 3 player out of the market.
Despite some overlapping businesses, including helicopters, rockets and missiles, experts saw little possibility the deal would be stopped by the Defense Department, although the combination of the nation's only manufacturers of commercial jets could give pause to federal antitrust regulators.
"It will be interesting to see what the airlines have to say about this," said Don Baker, a former antitrust official now with the firm Baker and Miller in Washington.
"It's worth remembering that there would be just two players in the worldwide market for big planes," he said. "But maybe two is enough competition for the airlines."
On the defense side, analysts said they expected the marriage of Boeing and McDonnell to spur further consolidation, with players such as Raytheon Co. and Northrop Grumman Corp. looking for partners.
Cowen &amp; Co. analyst Cai von Rumohr said the deal gives Raytheon, which supplies missile systems, "a window of opportunity" to buy Hughes Electronics Corp..
"It's not a long-term window," he said. "It will probably last until the (Boeing-McDonnell) deal is closed."
Boeing Co.'s stunning agreement to acquire longtime rival McDonnell Douglas Corp. won a ringing endorsement from Wall Street and sent shock waves through the aerospace industry Monday.
Stock in both companies soared on expectations the deal would boost Boeing's operating profits immediately after its completion, targeted for mid-1997.
Boeing rose $4.375 to $101.125 and McDonnell Douglas jumped $10.375 to $62.375, down from earlier highs on the New York Stock Exchange but good enough to give the all-stock transaction an indicated value of nearly $14 billion.
Industry analysts saw few obstacles to the deal, which marks a startling transformation for a company that just a year ago was completing a final round of cutbacks that had slashed its work force by 30 percent in five years.
Since then Boeing has completed the $3.2 billion acquisition of Rockwell International Corp.'s  ROK.N defence and space business, won the right to compete for the richest military contract in Pentagon history and announced orders for a record $45.6 billion in new commercial jets.
"It's an incredible turnaround story," said Jon Kutler, president of Quarterdeck Investment Partners, which specialises in aerospace. "These are very bold, dramatic, uncharacteristic moves for Boeing and I applaud them for it."
While Boeing had been moving to cut costs and transform its management style under outgoing Chairman Frank Shrontz, the pace has accelerated at the once-sluggish company since Phil Condit was named chief executive officer in April.
Condit began the final round of merger negotiations with McDonnell Douglas last Tuesday, just a day after being formally elected Boeing chairman as of Feb. 1, 1997.
"We're seeing Boeing evolve from kind of a stodgy company to being very aggressive, nimble," said Bill Whitlow, a longtime Boeing analyst at Pacific Crest Securities who praised Condit's energy and stamina.
Executives at the two companies said the deal would be additive to operating profits immediately and reiterated their prediction that Boeing could achieve $1 billion in annual savings without any layoffs because of rapid growth.
Analysts said the merger was a good strategy for McDonnell Douglas, which already had announced plans to pull back from commercial aviation when it was eliminated from bidding for the Pentagon's 21st century joint strike fighter.
But Harry Stonecipher, chief executive of McDonnell Douglas, denied that the merger was born of desperation.
"This is the deal we wanted and we are very happy with it," Stonecipher told CNBC. "This is the only deal we considered."
Boeing executives told analysts they had no immediate plans to make further acquisitions, even though the combined company will generate cash flow of more than $4 billion a year on projected 1997 revenue of $48 billion.
The surprise merger immediately turned up the heat on Europe's Airbus Industrie to move ahead quickly with a restructuring plan. Without such a plan, the consortium would be unable to go ahead with a proposed super-jumbo aircraft to compete with Boeing's 747, which now is unchallenged at the profitable top end of the market, analysts said.
"Airbus Industrie and its partners must agree as soon as possible on an optimal structure that will allow Airbus Industrie to match its American competitors as a powerful, integrated European enterprise," German Economics Minister Guenter Rexrodt said in a statement.
Analysts noted that Boeing had ended any chance that Airbus would partner with McDonnell on a new large jet, and some said Boeing's own plans to stretch the 747 might now be deferred.
But both Airbus and Boeing could benefit from stabilised airplane prices with the No. 3 player out of the market.
Despite some overlapping businesses, including helicopters, rockets and missiles, experts saw little possibility the deal would be stopped by the Defence Department, although the combination of the nation's only manufacturers of commercial jets could give pause to federal antitrust regulators.
"It will be interesting to see what the airlines have to say about this," said Don Baker, a former antitrust official now with the firm Baker and Miller in Washington.
"It's worth remembering that there would be just two players in the worldwide market for big planes," he said. "But maybe two is enough competition for the airlines."
On the defence side, analysts said they expected the marriage of Boeing and McDonnell to spur further consolidation, with players such as Raytheon Co. and Northrop Grumman Corp. looking for partners.
Cowen &amp; Co. analyst Cai von Rumohr said the deal gives Raytheon, which supplies missile systems, "a window of opportunity" to buy Hughes Electronics Corp..
"It's not a long-term window," he said. "It will probably last until the (Boeing-McDonnell) deal is closed."
Boeing Co. chief executive officer Phil Condit did not take long to leave his mark on the company.
Just one day after he was elected to become chairman of Boeing's board of directors Dec. 9, Condit began the final round of on-again, off-again negotiations that resulted in a $13.3 billion deal to acquire McDonnell Douglas Corp.
Condit, 55, an engineer who began his career with Boeing in 1965, will serve as chairman and chief executive of the merged company under the agreement, which requires approval from shareholders and federal regulators.
Condit, credited with spearheading the programme to design and build Boeing's new 777 twin-engine jet, was promoted to chief executive in April after more than three years as president under current Chairman Frank Shrontz, 65.
Condit's promotion to chairman is not even effective until Feb. 1, after Shrontz's retirement.
While Shrontz is a lawyer by training with a somewhat formal demeanor, Condit is known for his habit of changing clothes from a business suit to sweater and slacks for his frequent meetings with workers at all levels of the company.
"I'm real impressed with Phil," said Bill Whitlow, a longtime Boeing analyst at Pacific Crest Securities. "Phil's strength is he's a real communicator."
Condit shows an almost boyish enthusiasm for his work, exclaiming "Wow!" to sum up major business triumphs and declaring he is "overwhelmed" by his latest promotion -- no matter that it had been long expected.
Behind that enthusiasm is a drive to cut costs at a company once derided as the "Lazy B" and create a military and commercial aerospace giant better able to ride out the deep industry cycles that have whipsawed Boeing in the past.
"We're seeing Boeing evolve from kind of a stodgy company to being very aggressive, nimble," Whitlow said.
Over the past several years, as Boeing went through the final years of a long industry downturn, Condit was busy putting into practice the philosophy of "working together," which became a mantra for the 777 programme.
At Boeing the phrase means that engineers, contractors and factory workers, once happy to throw problems "over the wall" to the next division, work more closely than before to speed changes and improve processes.
The new philosophy and an overhaul of the company's computer equipment have allowed Boeing to cut the time between an airline order and delivery by as much as 50 percent.
The changes have hardly been accomplished easily. In addition to the layoffs that shrank Boeing's workforce by about one-third over the five years ending in 1995, the company endured a bitter 10-week strike last year by its 32,000 unionized Machinists.
Condit acknowledged last week that the company has "a long way to go" to repair relations with its workers.
Condit got his bachelor's degree in mechanical engineering from the University of California in Berkeley and has master's degrees in engineering and management from Princeton University and Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Boeing Co. chief executive officer Phil Condit did not take long to leave his mark on the company.
Just one day after he was elected to become chairman of Boeing's board of directors Dec. 9, Condit began the final round of on-again, off-again negotiations that resulted in a $13.3 billion deal to acquire McDonnell Douglas Corp.
Condit, 55, an engineer who began his career with Boeing in 1965, will serve as chairman and chief executive of the merged company under the agreement, which requires approval from shareholders and federal regulators.
Condit, credited with spearheading the programme to design and build Boeing's new 777 twin-engine jet, was promoted to chief executive in April after more than three years as president under current Chairman Frank Shrontz, 65.
Condit's promotion to chairman is not even effective until Feb. 1, after Shrontz's retirement.
While Shrontz is a lawyer by training with a somewhat formal demeanor, Condit is known for his habit of changing clothes from a business suit to sweater and slacks for his frequent meetings with workers at all levels of the company.
Condit shows an almost boyish enthusiasm for his work, exclaiming "Wow!" to sum up major business triumphs and declaring he is "overwhelmed" by his latest promotion -- no matter that it had been long expected.
Behind that enthusiasm is a drive to cut costs at a company once derided as the "Lazy B" and create a military and commercial aerospace giant better able to ride out the deep industry cycles that have whipsawed Boeing in the past.
Over the past several years, as Boeing went through the final years of a long industry downturn, Condit was busy putting into practice the philosophy developed with the 777 programme of "working together."
At Boeing the phrase means that engineers, contractors and factory workers, once happy to throw problems "over the wall" to the next division, work more closely than before to speed changes and improve processes.
The new philosophy and an overhaul of the company's computer equipment have allowed Boeing to cut the time between an airline order and delivery by as much as 50 percent.
The changes have hardly been accomplished easily. In addition to the layoffs that shrank Boeing's workforce by about one-third over the five years ending in 1995, the company endured a bitter 10-week strike last year by its 32,000 unionized Machinists.
Condit acknowledged last week that the company has "a long way to go" to repair relations with its workers.
Condit got his bachelor's degree in mechanical engineering from the University of California in Berkeley and has master's degrees in engineering and management from Princeton University and Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Pyramid Breweries Inc. Tuesday warned of lower-than-expected sales and earnings for the fourth quarter, blaming increasing competition in the craft beer industry.
Seattle-based Pyramid said sales would be 20 percent to 25 percent below last year's levels on a wholesale basis and said it expected to just break even for the quarter, compared with analysts' projections it would earn 9 cents a share.
In last year's fourth quarter, the company posted gross sales of $7 million and net income of about $1 million, or 13 cents a share.
Pyramid's warning was the latest to roil the trendy craft beer industry, which has disappointed investors who snapped up stock sold in a spree of offerings over the past two years.
Pyramid stock, which went public at $19 as Hart Brewing Co. in December 1995, fell 12.5 cents after the announcement to $4.125 a share in Nasdaq trading. It ended an abbreviated trading session 25 cents lower at $4.
Pyramid's crosstown rival, Redhook Ale Brewery Inc., which just last week warned of weak sales, was trading at $10.625 on Nasdaq, compared with its August 1995 offering price of $17 a share and a peak of $35.
Boston Beer Co., maker of Samuel Adams beer, was trading at $10 on the New York Stock Exchange, compared with an offering price of $20 little more than a year ago and a peak of $33.
Brewers have blamed tough competition, particularly in the Northeast and on the West Coast, where the premium-priced beers have caught on most quickly with consumers.
But market share for craft beers may have peaked in many of those initial markets, while an increasing number of varieties crowd grocery store coolers.
"Not a lot of new consumers are trying craft beers any more," said analyst Diane Daggatt of Dain Bosworth, referring to more mature markets. "The people who are going to try them have tried them. They just haven't built any brand loyalty."
She said about 400 craft brewers nationwide were distributing beer, up from 300 just a year ago. And brewers are adding more specialty beers, increasing competition and confusing consumers.
While breweries have been offering promotional discounts, analyst Scott McAdams of brokerage Ragen MacKenzie said the industry may be ripe for more serious price cuts and consolidation.
"People are going to have to think about addressing the price issue and spending more on marketing," he said. "They're going to have to play the beer game more than they have been playing the beer game."
But analysts said there was still a lot of room for growth in new markets. Nationally, craft beers account for about 3 percent of sales, compared with 8 percent to 10 percent in markets such as Portland and Seattle, she said.
Pyramid Breweries Inc.  PMIDO Tuesday warned of lower-than-expected sales and earnings for the fourth quarter, blaming increasing competition in the craft beer industry.
Seattle-based Pyramid said sales would be 20 percent to 25 percent below last year's levels on a wholesale basis and said it expected to just break even for the quarter, compared with analysts' projections it would earn 9 cents a share.
In last year's fourth quarter, the company posted gross sales of $7 million and net income of about $1 million, or 13 cents a share.
Pyramid's warning was the latest to roil the trendy craft beer industry, which has disappointed investors who snapped up stock sold in a spree of offerings over the past two years.
Pyramid stock, which went public at $19 as Hart Brewing Co. in December 1995, fell 12.5 cents after the announcement to $4.125 a share in Nasdaq trading. It ended an abbreviated trading session 25 cents lower at $4.
Pyramid's crosstown rival, Redhook Ale Brewery Inc. , which just last week warned of weak sales, was trading at $10.625 on Nasdaq, compared with its August 1995 offering price of $17 a share and a peak of $35.
Boston Beer Co., maker of Samuel Adams beer, was trading at $10 on the New York Stock Exchange, compared with an offering price of $20 little more than a year ago and a peak of $33.
Brewers have blamed tough competition, particularly in the Northeast and on the West Coast, where the premium-priced beers have caught on most quickly with consumers.
But market share for craft beers may have peaked in many of those initial markets, while an increasing number of varieties crowd grocery store coolers.
"Not a lot of new consumers are trying craft beers any more," said analyst Diane Daggatt of Dain Bosworth, referring to more mature markets. "The people who are going to try them have tried them. They just haven't built any brand loyalty."
She said about 400 craft brewers nationwide were distributing beer, up from 300 just a year ago. And brewers are adding more specialty beers, increasing competition and confusing consumers.
While breweries have been offering promotional discounts, analyst Scott McAdams of brokerage Ragen MacKenzie said the industry may be ripe for more serious price cuts and consolidation.
"People are going to have to think about addressing the price issue and spending more on marketing," he said. "They're going to have to play the beer game more than they have been playing the beer game."
But analysts said there was still a lot of room for growth in new markets. Nationally, craft beers account for about 3 percent of sales, compared with 8 percent to 10 percent in markets such as Portland and Seattle, she said.
Microsoft Corp stock is ending 1996 near where it began -- at slightly more than $80 a share.
But after adjusting for a stock split, the value of those shares is up a stunning 91 percent, and company chairman Bill Gates, the richest man in America, has seen his stake rise to about $23.6 billion from $12.4 billion.
While analysts are not predicting Microsoft will repeat that performance in 1997, the computer software giant carries a lot of momentum into the new year.
The company will start the year by launching the latest version of Office -- its biggest revenue producer -- and plans to flesh out its package of computer network software for the red-hot Internet market.
A new Internet browser due by midyear will change the look of the computer desktop, and upgrades to both of Microsoft's core Windows operating systems could be out by the end of the year.
Microsoft's high-end Windows NT system, which failed to catch on when it was launched in 1993, now forms the core of a business that could account for 25 percent of the company's estimated $10.6 billion in revenues in the current fiscal year ending June 30.
"The fundamentals are strong and getting stronger," said David Readerman, an analyst with brokerage Montgomery Securities.
On average, analysts expect Microsoft's earnings to rise about 20 percent to $2.06 a share in the current fiscal year from $1.71 last year and then another 20 percent in fiscal 1998 to $2.48 a share, according to the First Call service.
While that falls well short of last year's 51 percent earnings gain, it still represents a hefty increase for a $10 billion company, and Microsoft has a way of pleasantly surprising Wall Street with its earnings growth every quarter.
Analysts say Microsoft shows no signs of growing complacent despite holding a market share of 80 percent or more in its main businesses of personal computer operating systems and productivity applications.
In the past year alone the company virtually has tried to reinvent itself to focus on the rapidly growing Internet marketplace and beat back rivals led by Netscape Communications Corp.
"They've done a fabulous job. They've changed themselves from a company that was threatened by the Internet to one whose future is dependent on the Internet," said analyst Scott Winkler of the Gartner Group, a research and consulting company.
Virtually all Microsoft's upcoming products have strong Internet tie-ins: from the Office 97 upgrade, which makes word-processing and spreadsheet applications more compatible with Internet protocols, to server, or computer network, software in its BackOffice line that helps companies do business over the Internet.
Microsoft is spending some $500 million this year on media-related projects, including its relaunched Microsoft Network online service and MSNBC joint news venture with NBC.
While some of the projects could lose money for years to come, analysts say the media efforts represent a classic example of Gates' fondness for making big bets -- in this case, for a chance at a piece of online transaction fees that ultimately could be huge.
"If they are successful in pursuing their vision, this will be their core business five years from now," said Scott McAdams, analyst with brokerage Ragen MacKenzie.
"It's analogous to the early work they did with Windows itself," he said. "You start small and you keep chipping away."
Airbus Industrie's preliminary restructuring agreement may help the consortium become more efficient, but poses no near-term threat to Boeing Co's market dominance, industry analysts said Friday.
Although details of the Airbus agreement were not revealed, it appeared to represent a step forward from last July's announcement that the four-nation consortium would be transformed into a single corporate entity by 1999.  
"I think it's a step in the right direction," said Wolfgang Demisch of BT Securities. "They have a good franchise and they are going to be a contender."
Pressure on Airbus to act has increased since last month's stunning news that Boeing plans to acquire McDonnell Douglas Corp, its last remaining U.S. rival in commercial jets.
Analysts say Airbus needs to streamline its unwieldy management structure to have any hope of competing with highly centralized and rapidly expanding Boeing, which has access to enormous resources and the ability to subcontract work around the world.  
"If they are much more like a private company than they are now, certainly it would be to their benefit," said Paul Nisbet, an analyst at JSA Research.
Officials at Boeing, which controls about 60 percent of the worldwide market for commercial jets, compared with some 35 percent for Airbus, said they welcomed the news.
"We welcome an Airbus reorganization that would make its financial arrangements agree with generally accepted accounting principles and become transparent to public scrutiny, which includes the publication of regular financial statements," a Boeing spokesman said.  
He added that Boeing officials expect any reorganization would "further remove Airbus operating decisions from government control and influence."
Demisch believed the latest Airbus agreement would enable the consortium to better integrate aircraft development, although manufacturing would still be done by the four member companies.
The consortium members are French state-owned Ste Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, British Aerospace Plc, Daimler-Benz AG's aerospace unit and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA (CASA) of Spain.  
He said Airbus's success as a multinational should position it to compete in areas beyond its core commercial jet market such as defense and space.
While the Airbus restructuring is aimed in part at raising the billions of dollars needed to launch its planned A-3XX jumbo jet, Boeing officials have aggressively disputed the market projections put forward by the consortium.
Boeing, which is mulling a possible stretch version of the 747, says the market for a super-jumbo jet is barely big enough for one player, much less two. And Boeing says an all-new jet would cost far more than the $8 billion Airbus projects.
Meanwhile, Airbus recently postponed a decision on a far cheaper plan to stretch its A340 model to compete with the sallest 747 and largest 777 models.
((-- Reuters Seattle bureau 206-386-4848))
Boeing Co. took orders for a record 717 jets valued at $53 billion last year for a 64 percent share of the world market, company officials said Tuesday, adding that this year should be as good or better.
Figures compiled by Boeing show the Seattle-based aerospace giant had net orders for 559 airplanes with a "catalog" value of $42.8 billion after excluding cancellations and conversion.
That compared with 301 jets worth $21.6 billion for Boeing's European rival Airbus Industrie, which took a 32 percent share of the market.
McDonnell Douglas Corp., which Boeing has agreed to acquire, took net orders for 38 jets valued at $2.2 billion for a 3 percent share of the market for airplanes with 100 seats or more.
"Our customers put us on top again in 1996 because of the superior value of our complete family of airplanes," Boeing commercial airplane group President Ron Woodard said. "Our goal is to remain No. 1."
Woodard told reporters he expected 1997 to be as strong or stronger and said 1998 could see orders continue to roll in at a strong level as the international airline industry expands after the long downturn of the early 1990s.
"Airplanes are flying extremely full right now," Woodard said. "The orders we've seen to date are still catching up with what is a reasonable level given the demand.... It looks to us to be a pretty sustained, healthy cycle."
Boeing's order book went far beyond analyst expectations or the previous peak years of the late 1980s.
"It's an unbelievable year," said Paul Nisbet, analyst at JSA Research. "Nobody expected that at the beginning of the year.
Boeing's previous best year for total orders was 1990, the year the 777 was launched, when it took orders for 483 jets valued at $41.4 billion.
Calculating the order book each year is something of a public-relations exercise as airplane orders are frequently revised, canceled or converted.
For example, Boeing's total is comprised mainly of firm orders, but the manufacturer also included its massive $6.5 billion order from AMR Corp.'s American Airlines which was announced but not signed.
An Airbus spokesman said the European consortium did not include such "commitments" for an additional 172 airplanes received last year such as USAir Inc.'s stated intention to buy 120 jets worth at least $5 billion.
Nisbet said despite the gamesmanship, it seemed clear Boeing is on the way to its goal of a two-thirds share of the market, up from its historical 60 percent level.
Airbus will have about one-third of the market as virtually the only other player, assuming Boeing wins federal approval for its plan to absorb McDonnell Douglas, including its commercial jet operations.
The Airbus spokesman, David Venz, said the four-nation consortium still hoped to achieve its stated goal of a 50 percent market share around the turn of the century.
Airbus officials confirmed Tuesday they were negotiating with South Korean firms to help finance its planned A3XX jumbo jet, which would break the stranglehold on the lucrative top end of the market now held by Boeing's 747 jumbo jet.
Woodard said the business case for a new large jet was very difficult to make because of predictions the trans-Pacific market will "fragment" into less heavily traveled point-to-point routes rather than routes between the largest markets.
He noted that Boeing has not yet been able to drum up sufficient customer interest even to launch a stretch version of its 747, which would presumably be less expensive to develop than an all-new airplane.
Boeing delivered 218 airplanes last year, only slightly higher than the 206 delivered in 1995, when production was hampered by a 10-week strike.
Analyst Bill Whitlow of Pacific Crest Securities said he expected Boeing to deliver some 360 jets this year and 430 in 1998, based on announced increased in the company's production rates.
Boeing Co. took orders for a record 717 jets valued at $53 billion last year for a 64 percent share of the world market, company officials said Tuesday, adding that this year should be as good or better.
Figures compiled by Boeing show the Seattle-based aerospace giant had net orders for 559 airplanes with a "catalog" value of $42.8 billion after excluding cancellations and conversion.
That compared with 301 jets worth $21.6 billion for Boeing's European rival Airbus Industrie, which took a 32 percent share of the market.
McDonnell Douglas Corp., which Boeing has agreed to acquire, took net orders for 38 jets valued at $2.2 billion for a 3 percent share of the market for airplanes with 100 seats or more.
"Our customers put us on top again in 1996 because of the superior value of our complete family of airplanes," Boeing commercial airplane group President Ron Woodard said. "Our goal is to remain No. 1."
Woodard told reporters he expected 1997 to be as strong or stronger and said 1998 could see orders continue to roll in at a strong level as the international airline industry expands after the long downturn of the early 1990s.
"Airplanes are flying extremely full right now," Woodard said. "The orders we've seen to date are still catching up with what is a reasonable level given the demand.... It looks to us to be a pretty sustained, healthy cycle."
Boeing's order book went far beyond analyst expectations or the previous peak years of the late 1980s.
"It's an unbelievable year," said Paul Nisbet, analyst at JSA Research. "Nobody expected that at the beginning of the year.
Boeing's previous best year for total orders was 1990, the year the 777 was launched, when it took orders for 483 jets valued at $41.4 billion.
Calculating the order book each year is something of a public-relations exercise as airplane orders are frequently revised, cancelled or converted.
For example, Boeing's total is comprised mainly of firm orders, but the manufacturer also included its massive $6.5 billion order from American Airlines which was announced but not signed.
An Airbus spokesman said the European consortium did not include such "commitments" for an additional 172 airplanes received last year such as USAir Inc.'s stated intention to buy 120 jets worth at least $5 billion.
Nisbet said despite the gamesmanship, it seemed clear Boeing is on the way to its goal of a two-thirds share of the market, up from its historical 60 percent level.
Airbus will have about one-third of the market as virtually the only other player, assuming Boeing wins federal approval for its plan to absorb McDonnell Douglas, including its commercial jet operations.
The Airbus spokesman, David Venz, said the four-nation consortium still hoped to achieve its stated goal of a 50 percent market share around the turn of the century.
Airbus officials confirmed Tuesday they were negotiating with South Korean firms to help finance its planned A3XX jumbo jet, which would break the stranglehold on the lucrative top end of the market now held by Boeing's 747 jumbo jet.
Woodard said the business case for a new large jet was very difficult to make because of predictions the trans-Pacific market will "fragment" into less heavily travelled point-to-point routes rather than routes between the largest markets.
He noted that Boeing has not yet been able to drum up sufficient customer interest even to launch a stretch version of its 747, which would presumably be less expensive to develop than an all-new airplane.
Boeing delivered 218 airplanes last year, only slightly higher than the 206 delivered in 1995, when production was hampered by a 10-week strike.
Analyst Bill Whitlow of Pacific Crest Securities said he expected Boeing to deliver some 360 jets this year and 430 in 1998, based on announced increased in the company's production rates.
Microsoft Corp. faces increasingly stiff competition and some skeptical corporate customers as it launches the latest version of its hugely profitable Office suite of applications.
Company Chairman Bill Gates has predicted Office 97 will be the biggest upgrade ever in percentage terms for the market-dominating product, which has an installed base approaching 50 million users including component applications such as Word and Excel.
While early reviews of Office 97 have been positive, industry analysts said corporate users in particular will take a hard look before deciding whether the dozens of new features are worth an upgrade investment of $200 per seat or more.
"Corporations are realizing they don't need to upgrade their office suite environment nearly as often as Microsoft would like them to," said Michael Pinckney, research director for the Gartner Group.
By most estimates Microsoft dominates the market for desktop productivity suites, capturing more than 90 percent of revenues.
Office and its component applications have been a key driver for the company's earnings, contributing some $1.8 billion of Microsoft's $8.4 billion in sales for the fiscal year that ended June 30, 1996, estimated analyst Scott McAdams of Ragen MacKenzie.
He projected Office would account for nearly $3 billion of a total $10.2 billion in revenues this year.
"There's no question, it's enormous," he said.
In addition to its financial importance the new Office is filled with Internet hooks designed to drive broader acceptance of Microsoft's Internet Explorer browser, "so it's an important product strategically," McAdams said.
But Microsoft, which will launch the product Thursday at a glitzy media event featuring Gates on the stage of New York's Alice Tully Hall, faces increasingly aggressive competition from Canada's Corel Corp. and International Business Machines Corp.'s Lotus unit.
Corel, which uses WordPerfect word-processing software as the core of its suite, made a significant dent in Microsoft's retail market share in the second half of last year, according to PC Data.
"Corel has proven that if a competitor has the right offering at the right price point, even Microsoft is vulnerable -- at least temporarily," said Liz Buyer of T.Rowe Price in a newsletter.
And Corel has gotten a jump on the market by announcing a new version of its suite based on Java, the Internet-friendly programming language.
Analysts say the emergence of network computers and their "thin client" applications pose no immediate threat to Microsoft Office, which demands over 100 megabytes of hard disk space for a standard installation.
"Over time you will move toward a more Internet-intranet driven model, where the basic applications reside inside your Internet structure and you download it as you need it, but that's going to take a few years," said Tim Bajarain, president of Creative Strategies consulting.
In the near term, the biggest threat to Office 97 is intertia, analysts said.
Most Office users take advantage of only a small percentage of features as it is.
Analysts are divided on whether significant demand will be driven by Office 97 features including a built-in system to track appointments and phone numbers and animated assistants to guide users through tasks.
More importantly, many large enterprise users have not upgraded to the Windows 95 or Windows NT operating systems, which are required to use Office 97.
Microsoft Corp expects desktop applications led by its Office suite to bring in about $5 billion in revenues in the current fiscal year ending June 30, an executive said in an interview.
Richard Fade, vice president in charge of the desktop applications division, also said in the interview he expected 35 to 45 percent of users to upgrade to the new Office 97 version, although he declined to project a timeframe.  
Office has an installed base of some 24 million customers, and another 30 million use its component applications such as Word and Excel, which also are being upgraded.
Analysts estimate the software giant will post overall revenues of slightly more than $10 billion this year, up from $8.7 billion in fiscal 1996. With an expected spike in sales driven by Office 97, the productivity applications alone could account for $3 billion, analysts say.
Office 97 is "a huge release for us," Fade said.  
"It's probably the most significant thing aside from the browser work that we've done since the simultaneous introduction of Office 95 and Windows 95 a little more than a year ago," he said.
Fade said hundreds of person-years went into the new release, in the works since late 1994. He said virtually the entire Office division of nearly 1,000 people had been working on the product since August 1995.  
In addition to a new information management system called Outlook, the product includes better integration of applications and better compatibility with the Internet.
Fade said Microsoft plans to target different user types through four separate packages of the Office components and other Microsoft applications.
Office standard and professional versions will be available widely Thursday, while versions for small businesses and home users will be out within two months.
Fade expressed skepticism that an alliance of Corel Corp and Netscape Communications Corp announced this week would be able to achieve the tight integration of the Office suite.
But he said the plan by the two companies is an indication of the continuing tough competition in a category Microsoft has dominated for several years.
"It's a very competitive, alive category," Fade said.
((-- Reuters Seattle bureau 206-386-4848))
Microsoft Corp. is expected to report modest earnings growth for the latest quarter Friday despite tough comparisons with the year-earlier period and a sales slowdown ahead of an upgrade of a popular software package.
Industry analysts surveyed by First Call on average expect Microsoft to report earnings of 51 cents a share for its second quarter ended on Dec. 31, up about 16 percent from the 44 cents a share reported a year earlier. Sales are expected to rise about 14 percent to more than $2.5 billion.
Analysts consider that a strong performance against tough comparisons with the year-earlier period, the first full quarter of availability for the Windows 95 operating system.
In the 1995 second quarter sales soared 54 percent and net income jumped 48 percent.
"These guys are just incredibly strong now," said Rob Owens of Pacific Crest Securities in Portland, Ore. "They'll probably meet or beat (Wall) Street's estimate again."
Investors will have all weekend to analyse the results, which are due to be released after the close of trading Friday.
Microsoft executives originally had scheduled the release for Thursday but decided to delay the report until a day after an event publicising the launch of Office 97, its best-selling package of business software.
Analysts estimated that revenues of Office and its component applications account for up to 30 percent of Microsoft's total, but the figure will be lower for the quarter just ended because of the impending upgrade.
For much of the quarter Microsoft offered Office 95 buyers coupons good for a free upgrade, which will result in some revenues being deferred into future reporting periods.
But strong growth in personal computer sales and in acceptance of Microsoft's high-end Windows NT operating system continue to buoy the company's profits.
"The ongoing strength of the NT cycle is what's carrying the day," said Chris Galvin of Hambrecht &amp; Quist. "Countervailing that is the tough comparison last year with the Windows 95 release, so it's a mixed scenario."
Owen said that while sales of PCs to consumers were sluggish in the latest quarter, declining prices and increased processing power had sparked a new wave of corporate buying.
He said 30 percent or fewer of corporate desktops have made the transition to the Windows 95 or Windows NT systems.
"That's a tremendous opportunity for Microsoft," he said.
Microsoft Corp is expected to report on Friday that it had modest earnings growth in the second quarter, despite tough comparisons with the year-earlier period and a sales slowdown ahead of an upgrade to its top-selling software bundle.
Industry analysts surveyed by First Call on average expect Microsoft to report earnings of $0.51 a share for its second quarter ended December 31, up about 16 percent from the $0.44 a share reported a year earlier. Revenues are expected to rise about 14 percent to more than $2.5 billion.  
Analysts consider that a strong performance against tough comparisons with the year-earlier period, the first full quarter of availability for the Windows 95 operating system.
In last year's second quarter revenues soared 54 percent and net income was up 48 percent.
"These guys are just incredibly strong now," said Rob Owens of Pacific Crest Securities in Portland, Ore. "They'll probably meet or beat the Street's estimate again."
Investors will have all weekend to analyze the results, which are due to be released after the close of trading Friday.  
Microsoft executives originally had scheduled the release for Thursday but decided to delay the report until a day after an event publicizing the launch of Office 97, its best-selling suite of business software.
Analysts estimate that revenues of Office and its component applications account for 20 to 30 percent of Microsoft's total, but the figure will be lower for the quarter just ended because of the impending upgrade.  
For much of the quarter Microsoft offered Office 95 buyers coupons good for a free upgrade, which will result in some revenues being deferred into future reporting periods.
But strong growth in personal computer sales and in acceptance of Microsoft's high-end Windows NT operating system continue to buoy the company's profits.
"The ongoing strength of the NT cycle is what's carrying the day," said Chris Galvin of Hambrecht &amp; Quist. "Countervailing that is the tough comparison last year with the Windows 95 release, so it's a mixed scenario."
Owen said that while sales of PCs to consumers were sluggish in the quarter that just ended, declining prices and increasing availability of 32-bit applications are sparking a new wave of corporate buying.
He said 30 percent or fewer of corporate desktops have made the transition to the Windows 95 or Windows NT systems.
"That's a tremendous opportunity for Microsoft," he said.
((-- Reuters Seattle bureau 206-386-4848))
Microsoft Corp is expected to report modest earnings growth for the latest quarter on Friday despite tough comparisons with the year-earlier period and a sales slowdown ahead of an upgrade of a popular software package.
Industry analysts surveyed by First Call on average expect Microsoft to report earnings of 51 cents a share for its second quarter ended December 31, up about 16 percent from the 44 cents a share reported a year earlier. Sales are expected to rise about 14 percent to more than $2.5 billion.
Analysts consider that a strong performance against tough comparisons with the year-earlier period, the first full quarter of availability for the Windows 95 operating system.
In the 1995 second quarter sales soared 54 percent and net income jumped 48 percent.
"These guys are just incredibly strong now," said Rob Owens of Pacific Crest Securities in Portland, Ore. "They'll probably meet or beat (Wall) Street's estimate again."
Investors will have all weekend to analyse the results, which are due to be released after the close of trading on Friday.
Microsoft executives originally had scheduled the release for Thursday but decided to delay the report until a day after an event publicising the launch of Office 97, its best-selling package of business software.
Analysts estimated that revenues of Office and its component applications account for up to 30 percent of Microsoft's total, but the figure will be lower for the quarter just ended because of the impending upgrade.
For much of the quarter Microsoft offered Office 95 buyers coupons good for a free upgrade, which will result in some revenues being deferred into future reporting periods.
But strong growth in personal computer sales and in acceptance of Microsoft's high-end Windows NT operating system continue to buoy the company's profits.
"The ongoing strength of the NT cycle is what's carrying the day," said Chris Galvin of Hambrecht &amp; Quist. "Countervailing that is the tough comparison last year with the Windows 95 release, so it's a mixed scenario."
Owen said that while sales of PCs to consumers were sluggish in the latest quarter, declining prices and increased processing power had sparked a new wave of corporate buying.
He said 30 percent or fewer of corporate desktops have made the transition to the Windows 95 or Windows NT systems.
"That's a tremendous opportunity for Microsoft," he said.  
The Malaysian Prime Minister said participants had raised concerns about shortages of skilled knowledge workers, and about how to market products in neighbouring countries.
Malaysia's newly formed Multimedia Development Corp is preparing to take formal applications beginning in March from "world-class companies" wanting to set up operations in the Multimedia Super Corridor.
McNealy said Sun Microsystems was already planning to put a Java Software Development Competency Center in the new high tech zone, and a senior executive of NTT Corp said the Japanese telecommunications giant was also planning to locate a research and development centre in the multimedia corridor.
NTT also wants to join other participants in forming a Multimedia University which Malaysia envisions for the area.
Some of the executives said the project was ambitious, and would likely face many pressures for the plan to change as it progressed, despite its success in attracting initial support.
"You cannot command creation," said Bishop. "We have an impeccable plan, but execution still has to happen. We know enough in this new digital world that there are a lot of unpredictable discontinuities that occur. No country has a monopoly on these things."  
Mahathir said individual panel members would continue to meet over the next year, and that a further full meeting would be called in Malaysia a year from now to review progress.
Microsoft Corp. Friday reported better-than-expected second-quarter profits on broad strength in sales of its personal computer software but warned of slower earnings growth next year.
The Redmond, Wash.-based software giant posted earnings of $741 million or 57 cents a share in the second quarter of fiscal 1997, a 29 percent increase over the $575 million, or 45 cents a share, in the year-ago quarter. Revenues rose 22 percent to $2.68 billion from $2.2 billion a year earlier.
The results, issued after the market had closed, beat analysts' highest forecasts, sending shares of Microsoft as high as $89 in after-hours trading, but the stock later fell to $85.50 due to the warning about slower earnings growth. In regular Nasdaq trading, Microsoft had gained $1.125 to $87.125.
"It was a terrific quarter," said Goldman Sachs analyst Rick Sherlund. "Compared with expectations, revenue was quite a bit stronger than expected, as was the earnings number."
Wall Street analysts on average had expected Microsoft to report earnings of 51 cents a share, with estimates ranging from 47 to 55 cents, according to First Call.
Microsoft's earnings in the quarter were driven by strong sales in virtually all areas, including its Windows computer operating systems, BackOffice server software and desktop applications such as Office, executives said.
Revenues from "OEM" sales through computer manufacturers rose 29 percent to $866 million, while revenues from countries outside the United States, Canada and Europe rose 32 percent to $424 million, with Japan a particularly strong performer.
But in the earnings statement and in a conference call later with reporters and analysts, Microsoft chief financial officer Mike Brown warned that the company's growth is likely to slow in fiscal 1998, which begins July 1.
"We are pleased with the current financial results and growth prospects for the next two quarters, particularly with the outlook for sales of Office 97," Brown said in the statement.
"However I do anticipate slower earnings growth in fiscal 1998 (beginning July 1997) due to lower revenue increases in our maturing businesses and margin pressure from continuing aggressive spending on research and development and new business ventures," Brown said.
In the conference call he went so far as to wonder aloud about Microsoft's high stock price compared with its anticipated earnings growth.
"It's not my purpose to second-guess the market," he said. "However I will say that our current EPS (earnings per share) multiple is cause for curiosty at least to me."
Sherlund said such cautionary comments were typical of the company's financially conservative nature.
"Directionally those comments were quite consistent with what we've heard before," Sherlund said.
Scott McAdams, an analyst at Ragen MacKenzie, said that while Microsoft's price-earnings multiple is higher than would be expected given its slowing growth, investors pay a premium for its ability to consistently beat earnings estimates.
In a sign of Microsoft's financial strength, the software giant said it ended the quarter with $9.16 billion in cash and short-term investments, up from $7.1 billion just three months earlier.
And the company's "unearned revenues," representing sales deferred to reflect costs incurred over the life of cyclical products such as Windows 95 and Office, rose to $1.013 billion from $651 million at the end of the previous quarter.
Microsoft Corp Chief Financial Officer Mike Brown said he expected earnings and revenues to rise sequentially in the fiscal third and fourth quarters compared with the just-ended second quarter.
Brown said in an interview he expects the recent release of Office 97 to provide a "nice step" up in earnings in the third quarter from the $0.57 a share reported for the second quarter, and he sees a "small sequential step up" in the fourth quarter.
Brown also said he expected revenues and earnings growth in the 20 percent range for fiscal 1998 beginning July 1, 1997.  
"It doesn't seem wise to get beyond that with data we have today," he said.
Brown said he was pleased with the record results of the just-ended second quarter, which he said was strong "across the board."
But he said the company thought it was prudent to issue a warning about slower growth in fiscal 1998, when Microsoft will not enjoy the benefit of major revenue-enhancing upgrades such as Windows 95 last year and Office 97 this year.  
While the company does have an opportunity to boost its OEM revenue with the increasing penetration of the high-end Windows NT operating system, which generates more revenue per unit than Windows 95, Brown said he expected that to be more significant in fiscal 1999.
"It's just a good time to be a little bit realistic about '98," he said.
Brown said he expected research and development spending to continue to grow faster than revenues in fiscal 1998, although he declined to be specific. He noted that the company's R&amp;D spending now exceeds an annual rate of $2 billion, and he expected that to exceed $3 billion "at some point" in the future, putting pressure on profit margins.
He said while the company has reduced its cost of goods sold this year, it is unlikely to be able to reduce them much further next year.
But he said the company could continue to reduce its sales and marketing expenses as a percentage of revenues.
Brown also said the company's cash position spiked up in the second quarter, in part because of a hedging transaction connected with its stock option program. ((-- Reuters Seattle bureau 206-386-4848))
Microsoft Corp's share price rose to recored levels Monday despite a warnings by the software giant of slowing growth in fiscal 1998.
Microsoft, which reported "blowout" second quarter results on Friday, was up 4-3/4 at 91-7/8 and sparked a broad rally on Nasdaq, where it was the most active issue with nearly 15 million shares changing hands.
After the market closed Friday the company reported second-quarter earnings of $0.57 a share, up from $0.45 a year earlier and easily surpassing a consensus estimate of $0.51.  
"They had a great quarter," said Frank Michnoff of Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette. "(And) the outlook for the next two quarters looks very good; they said so themselves -- uncharacteristically."
More characteristic were comments by Microsoft executives in the earnings statement and a conference call with analysts afterward: They warned of a slowdown in growth in fiscal 1998, which begins July 1.
Microsoft Chief Financial Officer Mike Brown even went so far as to question the high valuation of the company's stock.  
In a comment worthy of Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan, Brown said Microsoft's high price-to-earnings multiple was a "cause for curiosity."
But while Piper Jaffray downgraded the stock to hold from buy, based on its 100 percent increase over the past year, few investors heeded the warning.
"They do that every year," Michnoff said, referring to Microsoft's conservative forecasts. "It's a bit like the boy who cried wolf. People are just not believing it."
Most analysts who follow Microsoft raised their earnings estimates for the company.  
First Call, which tracks estimates, said a consensus of 19 analysts surveyed today was that the Redmond, Wash.-based company would earn $2.33 a share for fiscal 1997, ending June 30, up from a previous consensus was $2.07. The company earned $1.72 a share in fiscal 1996.
For fiscal 1998, analysts now see the company earning $2.71 a share, up from a previous consensus of $2.48.
Analysts say fiscal 1998 will be a year of tough comparisons for Microsoft after the 1995 introduction of the Windows 95 operating system, last year's upgrade of Windows NT, and this year's launch of the Office 97 application upgrade.  
While Microsoft plans an upgrade to Windows 95 more tightly integrated to its Internet browser, it is unlikely to derive the benefits of another price increase or significant further operating cost reductions, analysts said.
"I think that Microsoft does have a lot of hurdles to get over," said Rob Owens of Pacific Crest Securities, who calls the stock "fairly valued" at its current level of more than 30 times fiscal 1998 earnings.
But analyst Scott McAdams of Ragen MacKenzie said investors are happy to pay a premium for a company that dominates one of the biggest growth industries and consistently surpasses Wall Street expectations.
"They've delivered consistent earnings, and Wall Street hates ugly surprises," he said.
Analyst David Readerman of Montgomery Securities said Microsoft would like to slow the meteoric rise in its stock price, if only to meet the challenge of providing enough shares to fulfill employee stock options.
"Yet it's difficult, with such a compelling long-term growth story, to keep a great stock down," he said in a published comment.
((-- Seattle Bureau 206-386-4848))
Microsoft Corp.'s share price rose to record levels Monday despite a warning by the software giant of slowing growth in fiscal 1998.
Microsoft, which reported "blowout" second-quarter results on Friday, closed at $90.75, up $3.625, and sparked a broad rally on Nasdaq, where it was the most active issue, with more than 18 million shares changing hands.
After the market closed Friday,the company reported second-quarter earnings equal to 57 cents a share, up from 45 cents a year earlier and easily surpassing a consensus estimate of 51 cents.
"They had a great quarter," said Frank Michnoff of Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette. "(And) the outlook for the next two quarters looks very good; they said so themselves -- uncharacteristically."
More characteristic were comments by Microsoft executives in the earnings statement and a conference call with analysts afterward; they warned of a slowdown in growth in fiscal 1998, which begins July 1.
Microsoft Chief Financial Officer Mike Brown even went so far as to question the high valuation of the company's stock.
In a comment worthy of Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan, Brown said Microsoft's high price-to-earnings multiple was a "cause for curiosity."
But while Piper Jaffray downgraded the stock to hold from buy, based on its 100 percent increase over the past year, few investors heeded the warning.
"They do that every year," Michnoff said, referring to Microsoft's conservative forecasts. "It's a bit like the boy who cried wolf. People are just not believing it."
Most analysts who follow Microsoft raised their earnings estimates for the company.
First Call, which tracks estimates, said a consensus of 19 analysts was that the Redmond, Wash.-based company would earn $2.33 a share for fiscal 1997, ending June 30, up from a previous consensus was $2.07. The company earned $1.72 a share in fiscal 1996.
For fiscal 1998, analysts see the company earning $2.71 a share, up from a previous consensus of $2.48.
Analysts say fiscal 1998 will be a year of tough comparisons for Microsoft after the 1995 introduction of the Windows 95 operating system, last year's upgrade of Windows NT and this year's launch of the Office 97 application upgrade.
While Microsoft plans an upgrade to Windows 95 more tightly integrated with its Internet browser, it is unlikely to derive the benefits of another price increase or significant further operating cost reductions, analysts said.
"I think that Microsoft does have a lot of hurdles to get over," said Rob Owens of Pacific Crest Securities, who calls the stock "fairly valued" at its current level of more than 30 times fiscal 1998 earnings.
But analyst Scott McAdams of Ragen MacKenzie said investors are happy to pay a premium for a company that dominates one of the biggest growth industries and consistently surpasses Wall Street expectations.
"They've delivered consistent earnings, and Wall Street hates ugly surprises," he said.
David Readerman of Montgomery Securities said Microsoft would like to slow the meteoric rise in its stock price, if only to meet the challenge of providing enough shares to fulfil employee stock options.
"Yet it's difficult, with such a compelling long-term growth story, to keep a great stock down," he said.
