Revisions to Ivory Coast's coffee and cocoa auction system have been finalised in line with donor loan conditions and need only government blessing to come into effect, donor sources and exporters say.
"It could be done in 12 hours if the government wanted it," one exporter told Reuters on Tuesday.
Talks with the World Bank and the Caistab cocoa and coffee marketing board to boost transparency and prevent overbidding were concluded in September, he said.
"There will be a weighted allocation among the highest bidders in proportion to the size of each bid," said a banker close to the reforms.
The Caistab launched an electronic screen auction system to replace telephone dealing six months late in May to meet World Bank loan conditions, but it has been under review since July after complaints.
Bankers said the final touches needed ministerial approval before $45 million of a three-tier $150 million World Bank loan to Ivory Coast could be disbursed in mid-October.
"There will be changes in management rules when Yves-Marie Koissy (the new Caistab president) arrives but the management will have to be approved by the government rather than the Caistab," one told Reuters.
The exporter confirmed that the Caistab would award export contracts for the price and quantity bid by the five highest bidders, but bids would be downscaled pro-rata if they outstripped total sales slated for that session.
One source close to the market said the system had been flawed. "If you knew the quantity on sale at a particular time you place a high bid for the right amount and walk away with the lot. Apart from that it was a matter of speculation with the best information to hand or who you knew," said another.
Smaller exporters, cooperatives and unions say exporters with less financial clout in international markets were pushed aside by overbidding.
Caistab staff said Koissy, appointed in September but yet to finish his contract with the International Monetary Fund in Washington, was due in Ivory Coast on October 9-10.
This raised expectations that the 1996/97 cocoa marketing season would open as announced on October 15 despite some doubts in the market. Koissy would then leave again to return at the end of the month.
Exporters had complained that two European-backed firms had priced others out of the market earlier this year to win contracts under a rule that rewarded the highest bidders.
Under the existing system the Caistab offers to sell an undisclosed quantity of produce in two daily sessions.
The highest bidder in terms of price gets the quantity he requests at the second highest bid price provided there is enough produce on offer. Anything left over goes to the next highest biddder at his price and subsequent buyers thereafter.
Donor sources say $60 million of the $150 million loan have been granted already as the auction system was in place even though about 600,000 tonnes of the 1996/97 had been sold forward by telephone before the auction opening in May.
"We expect next year's crop to be entirely sold through the auction. This year the only condition was for it to be operational," a source close to the negotiations said.
He said a third, $45 million, part of the loan would be given in 1997 depending on the auction's success. London trader ED &amp; F Man in a September report put the total forward sale of 1996/97 crop by the end of August at 590,000 tonnes, 65,000 up on the previous year.
"I would say the figure, which is not really known, is closer to 500,000," said the source close to the negotiations. "Next year all the cocoa should be sold on the system."
($1=515 CFA francs)
--Abidjan Newsroom +225 21 90 90
Ivory Coast might cut cocoa freight slightly for 1996/97 but a decision on rates is not likely to hold up shipments as it did last October, exporters and shipping lines said.
Shipments should start when export licences and finances are in place, they added.
"We have already written last year's (1995/96) rates into our costs for next year's (1996/97) accounts. Any change will be small," one major shipping line manager told Reuters.
"The government might choose to cut a bit as (shipping) costs have gone down since liberalisation," said a large fleet manager. He added, "You never can tell. I don't think they will cut, but certainly not much more than one and a half percent."
But there was uncertainty over how to fill in official forms, due to be in by October 15, requesting data on import and export cargo this year and rates to be applied in 1996/97.
"We have to get this done quickly and there still has not been a meeting (of trade body FEDERMAR) to decide how to fill in the forms and what to argue with the Caistab," said one shipping line marketing manager.
"We don't know if they want separate freight rates or the conference guide rate," he said. Shipping managers were trying to arrange a meeting, he added.
Cocoa shipments in 1995 were blocked from early October to mid-November when shipping lines rejected a 25 percent cut in cocoa and coffee freight rates to Europe set by Ivory Coast's Caistab marketing board. A rate of seven percent was eventually agreed.
Fob rates of 415,836 CFA per tonne for cocoa and 856,732 CFA for coffee were set for 1995/96.
"We have heard from the Caistab that rates should not change between this season and last season. But it is still open, there may be a change of one and a half percent in either direction," said another shipping manager.
The exporters' forum GEPEX foresees at most a small rate change. "I think after last year's problems it will be difficult to make much of a change to the rates," said one exporter.
A transport ministry official said 1996/97 rates would be stable. "It will be difficult to rock the boat again after last year. Liberalisation does not mean rates should be forced down artificially." The decision rested with the Caistab, he added.
The seven percent cut in the 1995/96 rate to northern Europe and an unchanged price for shipments to Mediterranean, British and French ports was agreed in November last year.
Freight rates were cut by 12 percent in 1992/93 but were left unchanged in 1993/94 and 1994/95.
Another government transport official said he was sceptical about the benefits of shipping liberalisation, which is part of wider donor-sponsored reforms aimed at increasing commodity market efficiency and transparency.
"All prices are set behind close doors. The Caisse pays to exporters the price set in the bareme but exporters are pocketing money by getting lower freight rates and rebates from shipping lines," he said.
An announcement of other 1996/97 marketing rates, including farmgate prices is expected this week, but some industry sources think the season might not get going until October 21 or 23.
Cocoa farmer prices are broadly expected to rise only in line with inflation, if at all, from 320 per kilo of bagged cocoa in 1995/96.
Coffee producer prices are expected to fall to 500-600 CFA per kilo, from 700 CFA in 1995/96, in line with lower world prices.
Export taxes are expected to remain stable for cocoa at 160 CFA per tonne.
"The coffee tax (150 CFA) is likely to be slashed," said an international banker, pointing to earlier World Bank advice to that effect.
- Abidjan newsroom +225 219090
Cocoa producers broadly agree on output management and have struck a compromise to unite against use of non-cocoa fats in chocolate in the European Union while accepting the change in other markets, Ivory Coast's commodities minister said on Monday.
"Europeans are rich consumers who can afford to carry on buying pure chocolate," Gauze, outgoing head of the Cocoa Producers Alliance (CPA) ministerial council, said on the sidelines of a two-day council meeting in Gabon.  
But Gauze added that world cocoa demand could rise by allowing use of vegetable fats in some countries.
"Residual markets needs dynamising," he said after palm-oil and cocoa producer Malaysia dropped its blanket acceptance of non-cocoa fat use as part of the compromise.
"Malaysia has moderated its position," he said. "It has adopted the same line as the CPA."
The ministers, who wrap up their meeting on Tuesday, were reviewing a 1993 International Cocoa Agreement and plans to cut member output by 90,000 tonnes by the year 2000.  
Gauze, current chairman of the International Cocoa Organisation Council, predicted that members would resolve differences over CPA output projections for the next three years by Tuesday.
"The differences are slight," he said after objections from Brazil, Ghana and Malaysia during preliminary talks among experts last week.
He said Malaysia had put forward a 1996/97 output proposal of 120,000 tonnes against a 130,000 tonne CPA projection. Malaysia's 1997/98 projection was 140,000 tonnes compared to the CPA's 137,000 tonne forecast.  
Gauze said Ghanaian and CPA projections for Ghana's 1996/97 output differed by only 20,000 tonnes.
"I do not want to leave here with any outstanding differences," Gauze said, adding that member output agreements were likely to be available late on Tuesday.
Gauze said efforts would continue to persuade the largest non-CPA producer Indonesia to join and to persuade Mexico to reconsider a decision to quit the alliance. Colombia would also be asked to join, he said.  
Ivory Coast, the world's top producer, has spearheaded opposition to European Union plans to allow use of up to five percent of non-cocoa fats in chocolate throughout the EU next year. It says this would cut demand for cocoa by 200,000 tonnes and harm cocoa-producing economies.
A Dutch study in September put the drop in demand at just 33,000 tonnes.  
Ministers from producing nations agreed in September at an ICCO meeting to cut output by 15,000 tonnes in 1996/97 and by 30,000 tonnes and 45,000 tonnes respectively in the two following seasons to balance world supply and demand and boost cocoa prices.
-- Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
Ivory Coast 1996/97 cocoa marketing season began on Thursday with the farm-gate price unchanged, the export tax lower, but confusion over freight rates.
Agriculture Minister Lambert Kouassi Konan told a news conference late on Wednesday that the farm-gate price would remain at 320 CFA francs per bagged kilo.  
Kouassi Konan, whose comments were broadcast on Ivorian state television on Thursday, said the Droit Unique de Sortie (DUS) export tax would be cut from 160 CFA francs to 150.
"To maintain the price, the government itself had to agree to a sacrifice of about 10 billion CFA francs, through the lowering of the Driot Unique de Sorti for cocoa," he said.
"If we had not made this cut we would have had to touch the price. The head of state insisted that the price of 320 CFA be maintained for our producers."
Exporters had been expecting no significant price change.
Shipowners spoke of disagreements with officials over an indicative freight rate for 1996/97.
The Office Ivoirien de Chargeurs had requested detailed information on proposed freight rates on shipments for 1996/97, they said.
"We cannot give that kind of information now that markets have been liberalised. This is a part of our business strategy," one said.
"Normally (the Ivorian shipping industry forum) FEDERMAR would organise a meeting to discuss matters but we have been waiting."
Kouassi Konan said the government had approved on Wednesday without amendment a decision taken by the Caisse de Stabilisation marketing board on the campaign.
Noting that the 1995/96 campaign was ending on Wednesday, he added, "As a result, remaining stocks must be declared to the Caistab."  
The opening of the season had been delayed by about three weeks. The government had given no explanation but some exporters linked the delay to the appointment only last month of new Caistab head Yves-Marie Koissy.
Koissy, who previously worked for the International Monetary Fund in Washington, has formally taken over but is not expected back in Ivory Coast until mid-November.
The 1995/96 season produced a record of around 1.2 million tonnes but a dispute over shipping rates blocked exports from early October to mid-November.
Export financers say bank liquidity was good with interest rates down on last year after Ivory Coast repaid some external debt.
"When exporters present their licences and backing contracts we can go ahead. Export licensing should be no problem," said an international banker.
Commodities Minister Guy-Alain Gauze, speaking on the sidelines of a two-day ministerial review in Gabon of the 1993 International Cocoa Agreement, said on Monday that Ivory Coast's 1996/97 cocoa production would be between 900,000 and 950,000 tonnes.
--Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90  
(c) Reuters Limited 1996 (c) Reuters Limited 1996
Cocoa arrivals in Ivory Coast at the start of the 1996/97 season are slower than normal with exporters awaiting financing and warehouses filling up at the main port, Abidjan, exporters and shipping sources say.
"There is a problem of finding space in the port," the head of the exporters' trade body, GEPEX, Rene Ekra, told Reuters.
He and others say delays in issuing export licences and freight rates had blocked shipments of cocoa. Large consignments of cotton were also taking up port space, they added.
Exporters were also unable to secure bank finance without export licences and contracts.
"Some are financing buying operations themselves but up-country buyers are keeping busy," said a San Pedro exporter.
Ivory Coast opened its 1996/97 cocoa marketing season on October 24 with its farmgate price unchanged at 320 CFA per bagged kilo and the cocoa export tax down 10 CFA to 150, but has yet to set reference exporter rates and buyer commissions as well as freight rates.
"Arrivals are lower than normal but we should get back into a rhythm in the next couple of weeks," said the San Pedro exporter.
"We are hoping all rates will be out within a fortnight," said GEPEX President Ekra. He said 31 exporters were given licences last year but 1996/97 applicants were still waiting for government approval.
About 600 buyers were expected to be approved, he added.
Yves-Marie Koissy, new head of the Caistab cocoa marketing agency which grants licences and sets reference exporter and buyers' commission rates is expected to return from the United States in early November.
Precise arrival figures remain unclear. Market estimates range from 8,000 to 9,000 for San Pedro in the week to October 25 and over 7,000 tonnes for Abidjan.
"It is too early to get a clear picture of quantities. Wait until mid-November," said one exporter. "Last year, arrivals were 180,000 tonnes in November. I think it will be less this year but 950,000 tonnes for the whole year cannot be discounted," he added. "Bean sizes and quality are very good, around 95 per 100 grammes."
Early arrivals were also greater at San Pedro.
"Liberalisation of transport means it is cheaper to go to the nearest port. If San Pedro exported 30 percent of cocoa last year, it could well be 35 to 40 percent this year (1996/97)," said the San Pedro exporter.
Buyers around Daloa and Gagnoa said rains were regular with good sunshine. "There are plenty of flowers. But we need regular showers between now and December for a good April and March crop," said Daloa-based buyer Makkram Haddad.
Up-country buyers around Gagnoa and Daloa said some stocks were still held up-country because heavy rains in July, August and in some areas, September had made bush tracks impassable.
"We are buying 20 new three-tonne covered trucks to get through to farmers who cannot move their stocks," said Gagnoa buyer Hussaini "Some tracks have been repaired but there is a lot of damage and 15-tonne trucks are too big."
Buyers say they usually replace their trucks every two years. One truck importer told Reuters sales were rising.
Sunny weather south of Gagnoa in the past couple of weeks had dried many areas, Khaled and others said. Intermittent rain has continued north of Gagnoa.
Up-country sources said stocks of cocoa being held by buyers in centre-west and south-west areas around Soubre, Daloa, Duekoue and Guilgo would be taken to port when the full scale of marketing costs was known.
-- Abidjan Newsroom, + 225 21 90 90
The Inter-African Coffee Organization (IACO) will focus on low world prices at its 1996/97 coffee season annual meeting in Abidjan on November 17-19, IACO's chief economist said on Friday.
"In spite of a world export programme the indicative robusta price is only at 73 cents per pound. This is too low," chief economist Donald Kaberuka told Reuters on Friday.
"We do not aim to set a target price but today's composite price for robusta and arabica, 99.29 cents, is also low," he said. "Any recommendations will be sent to the Association of Coffee Producing Countries (ACPC)."
Last May the ACPC, which represents 80 percent of world production, agreed to limit green coffee exports from its 14 members to 53.5 million 60-kg bags in the year to June 1997 after 48.9 million in 95/96.
Africa's total 1996/97 export allocation under the ACPC plan is 12,840,000 bags, or 24 percent of total ACPC target.
The 25-member group of African IACO exporters were very concerned by persistent low prices on the world markets despite a producer plan to limit exports, Kaberuka said in an interview.
"The market could be in balance this year as there is only a small production surplus. We are perplexed by the low prices and want the plan to have an impact," he added.
Kaberuka, who is in charge of ACPC target management for IACO, said IACO provisions allowed a review of the export plan after six months, meaning December.
IACO's 25 members would study the situation and then decide if action was needed. Full agenda details are not yet available.
IACO last met in Gabon in November 1995 to review volatile world markets, coffee rehabilitation plans and financing deals for exporters.
This time last year the world export plan aimed to stabilise market prices at 135 cents/lb for robusta and 165 cents for arabica. Prices then were 114 and 128 cents respectively.
The current export targets were set at the May ACPC review of the export plan, now in its second year (July 96-June 97). In 1995/96 the ACPC set total world exports at 60.4 million bags, including non-ACPC producers. --Abidjan Newsroom + 225 21 21 90
Exporters have united to oppose an Ivorian government plan to make them liable for income tax owed and frequently unpaid by upcountry buyers, exporters said on Tuesday.
Tax laws approved by parliament in February allowed for deductions equivalent to about 7.5 percent of commission paid by exporters to agents buying cocoa on their behalf in the 1996/97 season, they told Reuters.
"Because we hold export licences does not mean we are qualified to act as tax collectors. We are in discussions with the government," GEPEX exporters' forum president, Rene Ekra, told Reuters on Tuesday.
One exporter said the dispute had contributed to export delays at the start of the 1996/97 marketing season but a decision was expected by the end of the week. "Banks are ready to finance but we still do not have an export rate to work on and now we are into November," he said.
Exporters say the plan means a deduction of about 2.5 CFA per kilo from buyers' commissions. Buyers are currently paid a 1995/96 commission rate of about 32 CFA per kilo of collected cocoa, but Ivory Coast opened its 1996/97 cocoa marketing year October 24 without setting new reference rates for exporters and buyers along the farmgate-to-shipment marketing chain.
Exporters say if the law is applied, tax collection costs should be given by the government to exporters.
"We would also have to find ways of getting buyers to pay up and cover the tax collection costs if it goes through," one told Reuters.
Donors say the plan is part of a clampdown on tax evasion by up-country buyers.
"Buyers must pay their income tax and the government has found it difficult to get them to pay. The idea is to get exporters to pay it up front," said a bank official.
Exporters say the tax plan is poorly defined as well as misdirected.
"We cannot pay such amounts in advance," said one. "For every thousand tonnes exporters would have to pay the govenment 2.5 million CFA (francs)."
Some up-country buyers said they would avoid the tax by setting up as GVCs, tax-exempt buyers' cooperatives currently under government review for lack of accounting transparency.
"It would be easy to hire someone to set up on that basis," said one trader, but cooperatives say laws under consideration could make such a move more difficult.
"Buyers might set up as GVCs but it will be harder in future. Accounting standards might be tightened later this year and licensing could be stricter," a UNECACI farm cooperative leader said.
Exporters say the law might not be implemented. "It is possible. GVCs crop up and disappear overnight. There is talk of tightening up GVC management but no sign of it yet." said one.
The government has had problems identifying traitants because of the sporadic nature of their work and their locations, said one international banker. "Exporters usually know whom the buyers are as well as where they are," he added.
--Abidjan Newsroom + 225 21 90 90
Shipments of cocoa from Ivory Coast's main port of Abidjan are matching arrivals, leaving intact a standing stock of about 90,000 tonnes reported at the end of October, shipping sources said on Tuesday.
"The majority of transporters are shipping cocoa but some are still cautious as freight rates have not been agreed," one port source told Reuters. "Total stocks have not really changed since last week," he added.
Port sources said arrivals seemed to be picking up with increasing numbers of trucks arriving.
Shipping companies and exporters last week said delays in issuing freight rates and export licences had blocked some cocoa at Abidjan. Exporters now expect 1996/97 export licences to be issued this week.
"The Caistab (marketing board) told me licences would be out this week" said one exporter. "Some exporters have decided to wait for their licences and bank finances before buying anything but some are going ahead."
Shipping companies say they would continue shipping at the 1995/96 reference freight rates agreed with the Caistab last November.
Shipments at the start of the 1995/96 cocoa marketing season were delayed from early October to mid-November when shipping companies refused to cut their freight rates by 25 percent as requested by the Caistab. A cut of seven percent was evenutally agreed.
"So far we have avoided a repeat. Shipments have carried on so far but we will just wait see what happens," said one port source.
Rates for this year are widely expected to remain unchanged.
Shipping companies have been asked by government agencies to submit detailed information on freight rates and projected volumes for next year but say prices are confidential business information.
Caistab spokesmen were not immediately available for comment and no date has been set for fixing the reference freight rates for the 1996/97 cocoa season.
--Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
One of Ivory Coast's largest cocoa and coffee exporters, SIFCA, will appoint a liquidator for its loss making up-country buying subsidiary, SOGEPAG, but exporters and buyers say port arrivals will not be affected.
"Our cost calculations were wrong and farmers never really caught on to our new ideas," Pierre-Dominique Blind, spokesman for SIFCA, owners of the SOGEPAG buying subsidiary, told Reuters in an interview. "We lost too much money and could not go on refinancing debts."
"Purchase volumes were too small and farmers' debts became a vicious circle," said Blind, managing director of UCEPAG, a holding company set up by SIFCA to run SOGEPAG.
SOGEPAG's warehouses could be empty for the rest of the season after a liquidator is named this week, and SIFCA would probably take back assets it wanted, he added.
Liquidation is expected to take at least three months.
Minority 33 percent shareholder DAFCI, an Ivorian exporter, was not immediately available for comment.
UCEPAG figures show cocoa purchases of 46,000 tonnes of cocoa and 9,741 tonnes of coffee in 1995/96, but other exporters said the figure was underestimated. In 1994/95 the amounts were shown as 43,000 and 9,000 tonnes.
SOGEPAG was set up in 1991 and guaranteed farmers fixed farmgate prices when world prices dipped. It paid official reference prices while other buyers paid less, said Blind.
"Our operation was based on protection against prices going down, but prices went up after 1991," he said. "The aim was to take 20 percent of the market in three years but our sales only rose by about seven percent a year."
The total Ivorian cocoa crop in 1995/96 was about 1.2 million tonnes.
Up-country buyers said SOGEPAG had not understood buying strategy upcountry. It paid cash but sometimes three days late.
"Our strategy was wrong. Farmers preferred immediate cash in hand, even if less than our prices," said Blind. "We gave prefinancing and logistical support to farmers on good terms and then they would sell to someone else."
SOGEPAG built up the number of its sites to 17 from four at its inception.
Other exporters said SOGEPAG's closure would have no effect on the market. "SIFCA and DAFCI will probably take control of the key assets and others will step in to buy whatever is sold," said one.
"We will buy some of their trucks," said one buyer. "No cocoa will be left in the bush."
SOGEPAG has 120 vehicles, mainly collection trucks and tractors it used to hire to farmers and GVCs -- farmers' cooperatives which aim to sell directly to exporters.
SIFCA's parent SIFCOM is a main distributor of Nissan vehicles.
Blind said SOGEPAG was owed 160 million CFA francs for vehicle hire at one point but only 60 million had been repaid. "Farmers saw us as a cash cow," he said. "Variable cost inflation after depreciation of the CFA also got out of hand."
He said many modern trucks on the market were too sophisticated and expensive for farmers.
Some industry analysts said farmers had made money out of SOGEPAG but did not see why a decision had been taken to close operations at this point.
"It is a pity for the farmers.  The World Bank had just approved funding for us to give them more training," said Blind. "Now they will be paid less than reference prices and many GVCs have poor little logistical expertise."
Ivory Coast, the world's largest cocoa producer, opened its 1996/97 cocoa marketing season on October 24, setting farmgate cocoa prices unchanged at 320 CFA per bagged kg but delaying an announcement on guideline buyers and exporters rates.
($1=512 CFA francs)
-- Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
A prolonged dry spell In Ivory Coast has stretched into the small rainy season, but its impact on mid-crop cocoa pod setting and main crop growth may not be clearer until later this year, crop and weather analysts said on Wednesday.
"The weather is very, very strange. We have a mixture of harmattan (hot, dry) conditions in some places but light rains nearby," said one crop analyst. "Pod setting and progression could be affected. It just depends on rains before December as the front passes," he added.
Weather analysts said the front that usually heads southwards in September, giving Ivory coast a light rainy season between September and December, had finally moved south over the weekend. But rains were still far below average.
"It is now over Dimbokro (seventh northern parallel) but rains are well over a month late. So far we have not had a small rainy season," said one weather analyst.
Weather data showed less than 50 percent of average October rains fell in Ivory Coast. Data for early November were not available to build a clear picture of the overall rainfall pattern in early November, said analysts.
"Flowering and soil moisture vary greatly between regions but cherelle (early pod) setting should be clearer later in November," said a crop analyst who recently toured Ivorian farms.
Up-country buyers around Daloa told Reuters intermittent rains had started in the centre-west cocoa region but more rain was needed for late main and early mid-crop development.
Ivory Coast opened its 1996/97 cocoa marketing season late on October 24 after rain deluges in July and August. Bean moisture was no longer a problem, they said.
"Now there is a nice mixture of rain and sun but we need more rain up to the end of the year to avoid small mid-crop bean sizes," said one buyer. Beans sizes of over 110 per 100 grammes are not considered to be of export quality.
Crop analysts said soil moisture levels were low in some areas and could affect pod sizes if sunny weather continued. One crop analyst told Reuters he had only seen rain on two out of his 10 days of treking around the whole cocoa belt.
Official weather data showed average or above rains in Man and Gagnoa, but rain deficits elsewhere, particularly south of Gagnoa, around Sassandra, Abidjan and Adiake.
Sunny conditions had prevailed in the south as monsoon air was at higher altitudes south of Gagnoa than usual, said the weather analyst.
"The sun is burning off low clouds," he said.
Elsewhere, one crop analyst said the danger in Ghana of blackpod, a fungus hitting cocoa pods in prolonged cool and damp spells, had gone after regional attacks in September. Rains there had been heavier than in Ivory Coast.
--Abidjan Newsroom +225 21 90 90
Delayed export financing is slowing Ivory Coast cocoa arrivals but shipments for existing contracts will continue ahead of an imminent government decision on licences and marketing rates, exporters and shipping sources said on Friday.
"The central bank has stopped backing private lenders," said one exporter. "Buying activity has slowed down in the past two days."
No immediate figures on  latest arrivals were available on Friday.
At least one major bank has stopped financing, and exporters expect others to follow suit unless rates are published soon.
"Exporters with licences from 1995/96 and enough money are carrying on buying and shipping. November contracts are fewer than December but still have to be met," said one exporter.
Ivory Coast opened its 1996/97 cocoa marketing season on October 24 but delayed an announcemement on guideline buyer and exporter marketing rates. "They have never been so late," said an exporter.
Almost no cocoa trucking activity was visible at Abidjan on Friday. But large consignments of cocoa can be seen in warehouses and total port stocks are now estimated by shippers to be over 100,000 tonnes.
One banker financing some large exporters said many of their clients had no cocoa in port and the owner of the stocks was not clear. A large shipment to Amsterdam from Ivory Coast is expected within two weeks.
"Port stocks will probably slip before cocoa arrivals pick up after licensing," said one exporter. "Activity will probably pick up after November 15 when licence finances have been sorted out."
Exporters are expecting total arrivals for November of between 150,000 and 180,000 tonnes, rising to a December peak before a slow January tail-off. Exporters' total year crop estimates pivot around 900,000 tonnes.
Shipping companies expected licences to be out by Friday but are now waiting for an announcement next week.  "Many companies we deal with were saying licences would be out by the weekend but we have heard nothing about rates," said one source.
Licences are usually announced by the Ministry of Agriculture but no date has been set.
Caistab sources said this week a list of approved cocoa exporters had been drawn up by Wednesday but still had to be signed by the Minister of Commerce. The list had been expected by exporters on Wednesday.
Caistab president Yves-Marie Koissy is still in the U.S, but could return next week, said Caistab sources.
Exporters have rejected Caistab requests to them to argue for a cut in freight rates. They have also rejected a government plan to make exporters responsible for collecting buyers' unpaid income taxes.
"The Caistab is also trying to get exporters to pull down freight rates but they (exporters) are refusing to approach shipping lines," said another port source.
"Exporters want the rates set the same, so their rebate from the Caistab is not cut," the source added.
Pod counters recently up country said large quantities of cocoa were seen along roadsides and moving through warehouses.
"November arrivals will be strong as soon as the uncertainty is over," said one.
--Abidjan Newsroom +225 21 90 90
Cocoa buyers in central Ivory Coast say their purchases are down by 30 percent from this time last year and expect the country's total 1996/97 cocoa output to be under 850,000 tonnes.
"The estimates have been too high. The crop will be about 800-850,000 tonnes for the whole year," said one buyer. Most other buyers in the area visited by Reuters agreed.
"We have had two strong years but now we are going back to normal levels," said one buyer with nine purchasing centres. "Our business is running at 65 percent of last year."
The state of cocoa farms between the main central towns of Gagnoa and Daloa seen by Reuters varied widely with cocoa pod deterioration strongest in the north around Daloa.
Ivory Coast exporters said this week cocoa arrivals were down 25 percent on this time last year.
Exporters and buyers in southwest Ivory Coast expect arrivals of the 1996/97 crop to be no more than 900,000 tonnes.
Private forecasters last summer projected a main crop alone of 850-900,000 tonnes. The 1996/97 season opened on October 24.
Prime Minister Daniel Kablan Duncan said recently he expected his country's total cocoa crop to shrink to 950,000 tonnes in 1996/97 from a record 1.2 million tonnes last year.
Buyers in Daloa told Reuters production from older trees in their area would pull down average Ivorian cocoa production figures boosted by higher yields from young hybrids around Soubre and San Pedro in the southwest.
They said bean sizes varied widely from farm to farm and between trees, with a range of 90-100 per 100 grammes and 9-10 percent humidity.
Beans totalling no more than 105 per 100 grammes are considered exportable.
"The trees here are older and have not recovered from giving a massive mid-crop last year," said the biggest cocoa buyer in Daloa. "Overall quality is good but the beans are smaller and mid crop beans might be too small for export."
Several buyers said they would close their stores in June.
"Crop forecasts have been too high while pod survival has been poor. There is little on trees for the rest of the year," said the main Gagnoa buyer.
Pods had wilted on trees because of sparse rains since September and insects had thrived in the dry conditions as farmers could not afford treatments early in the harvesting season, said one plantation owner.
Six farms visited by Reuters between Daloa and Gagnoa showed plenty of wilted, deformed or undersized pods with insect damage and occasional "black pod" fungal disease.
Mature but discarded November and December-harvest pods lay in heaps on some farms with mid-crop flowering rare.
However, the situation south of Gagnoa was markedly different with little disease, insect damage or pod wilting.
"If farmers could afford to spray (treatments) other plantations would be in much better shape," said one farmer.
Several farms had good pod sizes and age distribution with flowering concentrated on some trees.
"Rains south of Gagnoa have been more spread out so the situation is better there," said the manager of one well-kept plantation.
He said Harmattan season sun mixed with some cloud cover and daily showers would help flowering for mid-crop pods.
Buyers said most cocoa had now been brought out of the bush with few village stores remaining full. Transportation to port would not be delayed much by road conditions, they said.
The up-country buying operations of recently liquidated SOGEPAG, a subsidiary of large Ivorian exporter SIFCA, have been taken over by Daloa-based private buyer Enza Diaby -- an associate of SIFCA.
Larger SOGEPAG stores have stopped receiving cocoa but smaller centres were operating. The firm offered cooperative-like terms and logisitical help to farmers.
"Diaby is running the small stores. He has enough trucks for collecting cocoa," said other buyers.
One farmer said long-term output around Gagnoa was set to decline as trees aged and government agencies encouraged farmers to plant rubber and diversify agricultural production.
-- Abidjan bureau +225 21 90 90
Ivory Coast's 1996/97 coffee crop is set to return to the 250-300,000-tonne levels seen before farmers neglected their trees in the early 1990s, exporters and up-country buyers say.
Coffee output in 1995/96 was around 180,000 tonnes and experts see the increase as part of a new good-moderate-weak cycle that tends to dominate the sector.
"It is a very good crop although there are some quality problems," one San Pedro exporter told Reuters.
"I think the crop will be at least 250,000 tonnes," said a large buyer visited in the coffee-rich areas around Man and Vavoua. "Exporters are not yet buying and the world price is still very low."
Prime Minister Daniel Kablan Duncan last week said the crop would exceed 200,000 tonnes after a 32 billion CFA franc rehabilitation plan, favourable weather and better maintenance.
The government set a higher 1995/96 price to encourage production, but reference farmgate coffee prices were set lower this year to lessen government subsidisation of the sector.
Ivory Coast slashed its 1996/97 farmgate price to 500 CFA from 700 CFA for unhulled green coffee cherries, with lower prices for hulled cherries.
Most buyers and exporters visited by Reuters in a tour this week have not yet seen a full 1996/97 marketing list detailing their commissions, but they said they would have to accept rates shown in a copy obtained by Reuters.
"Buyers will lose out on commission," said one. Exporters said operations would go ahead in spite of some objections.
The new marketing season opened on November 14, delayed from early October.
Coffee marketing would get underway from mid-December as usual after cocoa harvests tail off, San Pedro exporters said.
"Most coffee is now held in village stores and the weather means drying and sorting will take more time," said one buyer.
Good yields meant some farmers had stripped ripe and unripe beans and mixed them together, they said.
Large amounts of coffee, both green and ripe red cherries, were this week seen by Reuters drying, some mixed together, along roadsides and in bush clearings, particularly in the north. Green cherries are bought at discounted prices.
Well-managed plantations visited were harvesting once a month but many trees around villages showed signs of unselective stripping, buyers said.
"Farmers take less care when quantities rise so we will have to consider the price," said a Daloa buyer. "Exporters have not put in orders yet so we are not buying."
One Abidjan-based exporter who went up-country this week also said quality was down. "It is pretty bad in some places but the quantities are excellent," he said.
One crop analyst recently forecast 1996/97 production at 230,000 tonnes but most buyers and exporters said the figure was too low. Some up-country buyers said output could even be higher than 250,000 tonnes.
One expected 300,000 tonnes this year but most estimates put 1996/97 yields at one-third higher than the previous season, matching expected percentage drops in cocoa output.
A mild dry season favouring flowering and the natural production cycle of coffee trees had lifted the crop from a relatively poor 180,000 tonnes range in 1995/96, said Jean Toullec, a plantation manager in Gagnoa.
"I think 250,000 tonnes is possible as farms are being well maintained," he said. "We are seeing 600 kg of coffee per hectare each harvest instead of 450."
-- Abdidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
Cocoa arrivals at Ivory Coast's ports this season could be 25 percent below last season's record 1.2 million tonne because of erratic weather and insect damage starting in July, buyers and exporters around San Pedro say.
They predict cumulative arrivals to the end of November of around 250,000 tonnes and of up to 300,000 for December.
"Mid-December to February will dip because of the rains in July," said one exporter in the southwestern port. "Harvests will now be later and more prolonged, but not over 900,000 tonnes."
Buyers said heavy July and August rains hurt flowers for December and January pods. Sunshine after August had helped the outlook for March while lighter rains, which started in early November, would boost flowering for mid-crop pods.
Widespread wilting of smaller pods was noted this week on on southwestern farms east and north of San Pedro last visited in September. Insect damage and "black pod" fungus had also been noticeable.
The Ivory Coast has slated 950,000 tonnes for its total 1996/97 output after private forecaster estimates of 850-900,000 for the main crop alone. The 1995/96 season hit a 1.2 million tonnes record after a higher than expected mid-crop of 200,000 tonnes.
But one San Pedro exporter said, "There will be no more than 900,000 tonnes for the whole year. It could have been better but pod deterioration, insects and maybe even the trees' natural cycle have had an effect."
Local buyers and other exporters in the southwest agree, some putting the output at even less, but they say mid-crop predictions are unreliable.
Few flowers and pods were seen on coastal farms and little cocoa was drying along roadsides. Tree pods and village stores were more plentiful in productive Meadji and Soubre areas.
Exporters and buyers in the southwest now matching cocoa arrivals data with last season's say volumes are down, with humidity higher at 8-10 percent and smaller bean sizes of between 93 and 100 per 100 grammes, against 85-90 last year.
"There is less cocoa than last year. It takes twice as long to fill a truck driving around the bush and it needs a lot of drying," said a buyer in Sassandra. Buyers elsewhere agreed.
Cumulative arrivals to end-November could be 250,000 tonnes, the sources said. One put registered cumulative arrivals at 213,000 to November 24, with 85,000 arriving in the week up to then. November arrivals last year topped 300,000.
Buyers and exporters foresee arrivals of around 250,000- 300,000 for December against about 400,000 in 1995/96.
A San Pedro exporters' agent said he had taken in 22,800 tonnes of cocoa this season with 10,000 still in stores and room for 25,000 more. Many San Pedro warehouses were full this time last year.
Another said their cumulative year-on arrivals were down 15 percent at November 24 and expected the gap to widen in December.
San Pedro's largest port handler expects up to 30 percent less volume this year and said arrivals to November 17 totalled 70,000 tonnes. The port expects to handle a third of this year's crop.
Cocoa quality is good but some mouldy, moist and deteriorated beans were being mixed in the rush to supply exporters.
"Some buyers can charge higher prices as export contracts have been sold up to March and have to be met," said one. Mould levels were around four percent, he added.
Some buyers have supplied farmers with insecticides and say dry Harmattan weather moving southwards will help drying. One 15-tonne capacity dryer was out of action after a fire at a San Pedro plant on Saturday.
Exporters said they now accept the 1996/97 list of marketing prices set by the government this month after a late start to the season. But they said the Caistab marketing board had not altered its auctioning system to prevent overbidding.
Smaller exporters say some people have been laid off until March as they cannot match prices bid over opening calls.
"About 750,000 tonnes have been sold to highest bidders but the Caistab has not sold the 15 percent it retains. Maybe they are waiting for higher world prices," one exporter said.
A San Pedro factory said it aimed to process 25-30,000 tonnes of cocoa this year.
-- Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
Sporadic rain showers up to the end of November have continued to water Ivory Coast's cocoa belt but mid-crop campaign prospects are not yet clear, say weather and crop analysts.
A weather front expected to bring hot dry weather southwards over the whole of Ivory Coast had backtracked to the country's northern border with light rains taking hold in dried out areas.
"It has moved up to Korhogo (10th northern parallel) from Dimbokro (8th)," said one weather analyst. Rains usually fall in a sweep 200 km to the south of the front's position, he added.
Crop analysts said the front's retreat meant no dramatic changes in cocoa pod development but they welcomed continuing rains.
"We are now seeing the first fruits for the mid-crop ," said one crop analyst. "December weather will now determine the full potential. It is too early too draw conclusions," he addded.
Weather data show variable rains for the last 10 days of November with 650 percent of normal levels falling around Bondoukou in the north-east, put down to local effects, compared to 53 percent for San Pedro and Tabou in the southwest.
An average of 30mm fell at ten weather stations monitored in the last ten days of November with heavy showers concentrated around Abidjan and Yamassoukro. In the preceeding ten days the average was 42mm, also boosted by heavy showers in Abidjan.
Overall November rains in three successive ten day periods rose from 104mm to 423mm before dropping to 295 mm in the last third of the month.
Light rains fell in Daloa and Man, after none in the first ten days of November. More southern cocoa belt areas received 53 percent of end-November average rains around San Pedro, and 62 percent around Gagnoa. Rains around Abidjan and Yamassoukro were 200 percent above average.
"November rains moved into surplus in the south towards the end of the month but we are still in deficit in the north," said a weather analyst.
Crop analysts said the latest weather picture was highly variable and mid-crop development would depend on December's pattern. Rains last year continued into December, they said.
"This year, dry weather up to early November slowed down mid-crop development but we could still be heading towards a reasonable crop," said the crop analyst.
"It is too early to draw conclusions as last year's weather picture was different," he said.  "We had twice the normal rains for December but then a strong mid-crop."
One crop analyst said on November 20 a long dry spell pushing into the year's short rainy season could slightly affect young cocoa fruits. The degree would depend on an extension rains seen since early November which would cushion the drying effect of Harmattan conditions, he said then.
Up-country buyers welcomed rains after dry weather in September and October but said drying problems had increased harvested cocoa humidity levels to up to 10 percent.
"Drying has slowed deliveries a bit, but overall quality is still good," said one.
Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
Shipments of cocoa from Ivory Coast's two main ports are estimated to have risen to around 120,000 tonnes by end-November but official figures would not be ready until later this month, shippers and exporters said.
"About 120-130,000 tonnes sounds right," said one. Others agreed and said Abidjan and San Pedro port stocks had risen over the past week.
Official statistics for October and November are not yet available but about 100,000 tonnes had been exported by the same date in 1995/96. Shipments then had been delayed in a shipping freight rate dispute, making year-on comparisons difficult.
Under 10,000 tonnes were exported in October 1996 and volumes for this year are expected to be small as the marketing season opened over two weeks later than usual on October 24.
Exporters said arrivals in 1996/97 had reached 285,000 tonnes by end-November. Some put the figure at closer to 300,000.
"That would leave stocks of around 150,000 tonnes, which sounds a bit high," said one. But large shipments in early December would have already cut into that volume, he added.
Shippers looking ahead expected arrivals to slacken from mid-December to end-January before a steady flow until the end of March.
"There's also plenty of coffee to deal with this year. Cocoa should take off again in February and March," said one exporter. "There's not much demand and plenty of stocks in Europe."
Cocoa crop analysts said an extension of light rains well into December would greatly improve mid-crop prospects. Drying could slow arrivals but only marginally. Shipments would rise again from February.
"The trees are flushing now and large pods have been taken off. That gives trees more reserves for flowering," said one.
Peak 1996/97 harvesting is expected in late December and early January, boosting early February arrivals for shipments to meet benchmark March contracts.
Harvested cocoa usually takes about 21-27 days to reach ports for shipment, after fermenting, drying, sorting, bagging and transport.
"The year will certainly be drawn out until March," he said.
Mid-crop volumes from March onwards still unpredictable but will be favoured by continuing light rains.
Some shipping freight rate elements were still under discussion this week but those set on October 24 in the 1996/87 Caistab marketing agency price list were largely accepted. No delays to shipments were expected, said exporters.
Some exporters said they had negotiated cheaper rates for some destinations than last year, especially for U.S.-bound cargo, as premiums on space had dropped with arrivals volumes down.
-- Abidjan newsroom + 225 21 90 90 REUTER MPB
Ivorian 1996/97 cocoa arrivals stood at 330,000 to 350,000 tonnes by early December, analysts and exporters said.
The December 7 figures were down from an estimated 410,000 tonnes by December 3 last year, but some analysts said a further 50,000 tonnes should be added to this year's figures for comparative purposes as the season had opened three weeks late.
"The gap from last year will widen in December but February and March look good," one exporter said. "Arrivals are down from about 60,000 last week to probably 35-40,000 tonnes by the end of this week."
Ivory Coast opened its 1996/97 marketing season (October-September) three weeks later than usual on October 24 and initially expected a total crop of around 950,000 tonnes.
About 285,000 tonnes had arrived from October 24 to the end of November 1996.
The sources said that 100,000 tonnes had been taken by Ivory Coast's second port, San Pedro, so far this season. Ivory Coast's two main ports usually take less cocoa over the Christmas and New Year holiday periods.
Some cocoa is likely to be delayed by drying problems. Weather analysts point to rain in early December, normally a dry month.
But cocoa inspectors say quality is good, with humidity levels of 8-10 percent and widely ranging bean sizes averaging 90 per 100 grammes -- well within the export standard of 105 per 100 grammes.
"Some people are also concentrating on buying coffee," said one exporter. A large and slightly earlier 1996/97 coffee crop was diverting attention from cocoa, exporters said.
Last year's cocoa crop rose to a December peak before dropping off in January, with arrivals in 1995/96 reaching 668,000 tonnes by the end of December before the season ended with a record 1.2 million tonnes.
An unexpectedly strong mid-crop (April-September) boosted 1995/96 output, so analysts are now scouting cocoa plantations to calculate the prospects for this season as flowering begins.
A different 1996/97 cocoa crop profile is expected.
"The curve is flatter but more sustained than last year. February and March arrivals will push figures up again," said one analyst. Mid-crop forecasts are expected between now and January.
Port stock levels are unknown, but one set of figures showed exports since October 1 totalling 220,000 tonnes. Port sources said large shipments of up to 50,000 tonnes had since left but updated figures were not available.
Large stores of cocoa could be seen around Abidjan and San Pedro ports early this week.
"There is plenty of cocoa around and stocks now just depend on when and if contracts are going to be met," said one port source. "People either have cocoa but no contracts or they simply have not shipped yet."
Some companies said tallying arrivals had been more difficult since personnel changes in the Caistab cocoa marketing agency made by its new managing director, Yves-Marie Koissy.
"Information is thinner on the ground," said one exporter.
Exporters said continuing arguments with the Caistab over some of its official cocoa and coffee marketing and reference shipping freight rates, as well as its new electronic cocoa contract auctioning system, could also have slowed activity.
"The GEPEX (exporters' trade body) is still in discussions (with the Caistab)," said one exporter.
-- Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
Revised rules for Ivory Coast's electronic cocoa and coffee auction system have been agreed to stop overbidding, a source close to discussions on the issue said.
Changes agreed between marketing board Caistab, exporters and the World Bank were expected to be put in place but no date had been set.
"Bidders will be held to the price they offer rather than the second highest bid price now applied," said the source.
"There are two main changes we have agreed which should now be applied quickly," he told Reuters, pointing to a date in late December or early 1997.
The second rule change would allow exporters to buy 15 percent of contracts previously reserved for Caistab direct sales to traders abroad if prices were right, said the source.
Existing rules mean the Caistab's 15 percent is withdrawn and submitted for later auction even when exporters are prepared to pay more than outsiders.
The rules were originally designed to ensure lots could be held back in the hope of higher offers later.
"Direct sales only act as a safety valve when traders bid more than exporters," said one observer. "The changes on that point will favour the exporters as more will remain on offer."
Contracts would also be awarded to the five highest bidders rather than one and scaled down pro rata if total demand outstripped supply. Bids are made without knowing what quantities are on offer for a particular session.
The donor-backed auction was launched on May 2 as part of a $150 million World Bank loan deal, but Commodities Minister Guy-Alain Gauze said at the time it could lead to distortion of contract prices.
"There is a double speculation here because the futures
market is a type of speculation and the same goes for the auctioning system," he said.
Up to 115,000 tonnes of cocoa is estimated by exporters and industry analysts to have been sold forward for 1996/97, plus another 100,000 tonnes for 1997/98, since the new screen-based system replaced telephone trading.
About 660,OOO tonnes of 1996/97 cocoa was sold before the auction opened.
Exporters told Reuters average quantities now offered at each auction session were too small.
Others said exporters had bought cocoa on the spot market but lacked Caistab contracts for shipping to clients abroad.
About 2,500 tonnes are auctioned daily, or about 20,000 tonnes in each of 50 trading weeks after allowing for about 15-20 percent destined for local production, one said.
"We would prefer two weekly sessions of 10,000 tonnes to make sure we can secure whole contracts in one go," he said. "Coffee contracts are smaller so the same problem doeen't arise there."
"Support for the system is disappearing, especially for physicals traders. Most of this year's crop is sold so we are really talking about contracts for next year," said one exporter.
The exporters' GEPEX trade body was still in talks with the Caistab this week after claims that a few firms had won too many contracts by bidding unrealistically high prices.
Exporters have said they lack the financial clout of foreign operators and face higher costs.
"It (the auction) is completely unworkable," said one exporter.
The Caistab has estimated a total of 950,000 tonnes of cocoa and 230,000 tonnes of coffee for the 1996/97 season.
Bulk cocoa shipments from West Africa will more than double to 325,000 tonnes in 1996/97, solidifying a cost-cutting trend sparked by recent trial shipments, exporters and shippers said.
"West African shipments will reach at least 325,000 tonnes this year (1996/97)," said one trader, with most going to large Amsterdam-based buyers. "And that is only a start." he added.
Bulk shipments include beans stuffed directly into containers or poured loose into ship's holds, replacing traditional stacks of 60 kg jute bags.
Ivory Coast would ship about 270,000 tonnes in bulk this year. The world's largest producer blazed the trail by shipping 120,000 tonnes in 1995/96 as bagged cocoa lost favour with large buyers, said the source.
Of this year's total, about 260,000 tonnes would be shipped for two Amsterdam-based clients out of an expected crop of 900,000 to one million tonnes, said the trader.
Less than half, about 120,000 tonnes, would be shipped loose on holds against the same tonnage for all forms of bulk shipments in 1995/96. The remainder would be leave in twenty-foot bag-lined containers packed with drying agents.
Additional shipments of about 5,000 tonnes for trials to Germany, and less for Mediterranean ports would take the total of both bulk methods to around 270,000 tonnes.
Ghana is also expected to build on small shipments with 25,000 tonnes possibly leaving in December. Volumes from Nigeria and Cameroun are widely expected to rise.
Little was shipped in bulk from other West African ports last year but shipping companies say that will change.
Dutch transporters Spliethoffe completed three successful trials from Ivory Coast in 1995/96 totalling about 10,000 tonnes followed by another 110,000 tonnes for processors Gerkens and Cacao De Zaan.
The loading and shipment methods developed then has prompted an expected 100 percent plus jump in overall regional tonnages for 1996/97, say shippers.
Shipping lines Nedlloyd, Compagnie Maritime Belge (CMB) and Delmas (SDV) are already taking bulk cargos from forwarders SAGA and Delmas, and Ivorian exporters/forwarders Jean-Abile Gal and SIFCA.
"Each have loading systems (total of 8) in Abidjan and San Pedro (Ivory Coast's second port) but only direct users have reception facilities," a West Africa region shipping manager said. "Not everyone has a 4,000 tonnes a day capacity plant with storage facilities," he added, referring to large processors in Amsterdam.
"In future, about  25 percent of all cocoa will leave in bulk," said one shipping manager, depending on the size of the reference crop
The manager of another shipper handling large volumes put the figure at 40 percent by 2000 for Ivory Coast.
"The economics are simple. What used to be shipped in four containers is now shipped in three," he said, or 100 tonees per six 20 foot containers.
Shipping companies had gained a 25 percent freight space saving and exporters would expect rebates in return, he said.
A typical charter on FIOS (free in and out, stowed) rates would be 55 dollars, with another 25 dollars in handling to be added depending on terms, said one shipping line.
The marginal cost of loading a container was about 3,750 CFA a tonne with 55,000 CFA for positioning a container, but labour and time savings more than compensated. Conveyor belts, silos and tip-up containers are all used for loading.
Plans to build a new bulk reception warehouse in Amsterdam unveiled by Dutch Cocoa Association (NCV) president Louis Bensdorp on Friday would encourage bulk cocoa advocates, said local exporters.
-- Abidjan newsroom + 225 21 90 90
Ivory Coast's coffee industry faces more Caistab market reforms and fresh uncertainties over its returns in 1997, exporters and analysts said.
"The Caistab has a battle on its hands to keep farmers interested while meeting obligations to liberalise the sector to meet (World Bank) loan conditions," said one analyst. "There could be a lot of changes in store and not all of them welcome."
Ivory Coast slashed its reference farmgate price to 500 CFA per kilo from 700 CFA and opened its 1996/97 marketing season late on November 14.
Prices were set high in 1995/96 to encourage rehabilitation of plantations, but world prices slid to levels well below prices guaranteed by the Caistab.
The World Bank fears a repeat in the coming year. It wants a rapid end to cross-subsidies to the coffee sector from cocoa earnings and is waiting for new Caistab chief Yves-Marie Koissy to unveil plans early in 1997.
One export bank risk manager doubted whether all subsidies to the coffee sector would be paid this year.
Some exporters project coffee output to exceed the 230,000 tonnes forecast by Caistab, which could mean higher-than-budgeted subsidies.
"We are not funding (exporters) until we are sure the Caistab will keep its word," the risk manager said. "It (Caistab) has funds but export margins are already non-existent."
Industry opinion is split on what action the World Bank should take when British consultant Landell Mills (LMC) presents its ideas for market liberalisation in January.
Ivory Coast no longer guarantees a set coffee price to farmers, using instead to a guideline minimum price.
"Internal prices have been liberalised but it is still not clear if you would be jailed for paying below that level. The law is not clear," said a buyer. "What is clear is the government exerts a quasi-monopoly on external marketing by its allocation of export contracts and export licences."
"We have nothing to fear if quality checks are kept in place along with some back-seat stabilisation functions," said one.
Thin up-country buying this month has seen merchants paying farmers less than the reference price. Farmers were being paid only 300 to 340 CFA per kilo, one crop analyst said.
One large coffee processor operating in Ivory Coast said it was now paying 40 CFA above the reference price for premium quality coffee, even though other buyers paid less.
"We are for a completely free market with quality checks," said a manager.
Exporters said they were generally satisfied with trading via a new electronic auction system introduced in May to make dealings more transparent. Cocoa traders using a similar system have complained about contract sizes and excessive bidding to win contracts.
Exporters expect no changes to the 1996/97 list of coffee marketing prices issued by Caistab in November.
Port dues at Ivory Coast's main port of Abidjan will rise by up to 6.4 percent from January 1 to fund expansion projects, a government statement said.
Rates would increase by 6.3 percent for ships, 6.4 percent for container gantry cranes, 5.8 percent for containers and 2.5 percent for cargo and other items, it said.
The charges, which caught shipping companies off guard, were agreed by Abidjan Port Authority in September but awaited government blessing. "The cabinet has approved the new rates," the statement said.
Shipping companies said the costs would probably have little impact but were awaiting more details from Port Authority.
"We have not done our calculations yet but if this is just a port charge rather than a direct handling charge it will passed straight on to the consumer," said one container line manager.
Others said growing competition on West Africa-European routes would mean some companies might choose to absorb some costs to attract business.
"Competition determines what costs are passed on," said another shipping manager. More ships had been deployed in the West Africa region recently as freight rates were higher than on Far Eastern routes.
"Port costs are a hell of a lot higher than in the Far East but freight rate earnings are also better," said the manager. "We will wait for clearer details."
International donors have been pushing for efficiency measures rather than investment in infrastructure as a way to boost cargo handling capacity. In December 1995 the government urged port operators to meet efficiency targets to attract private sector development loans from the World Bank.
"Things have definitely improved. Container throughput time at the port for imports was 17 days," said a container shipping manager. "Now it is only 11 and the target was set at seven."
The efficiency drive began last December but shippers say export cargo efficiency targets have been less successful. A target of three days was set for export container throughput.
"For exports we are talking about rapid documentation for transit cargo. Bureaucracy there has not changed much," said another line manager. This is mainly cotton from the Sahel.
Measures include shortening times for declaring ships' manifests to customs, under the threat of port fines, and avoiding duplication of paperwork.
Gantry cranes, plagued by downtime, were expected to be in use 90 percent of the time and handle 16 containers an hour.
Local shipping agents said they were also concerned by talk of a bunker surcharge. Large customs fines for non declaration of ships' bunkers have been levied over the past year.
"It's a problem. But the port needs money and still competes well with others in the area," said one. "Other ports in the area have applied all kinds of add-on charges."
Projects put on hold after devaluation of the CFA franc in 1994 included new gantry cranes, renovating a fruit terminal, building a fish wharf, dredging and a new container park.
Increasing quantities of Ivory Coast's principal cocoa and coffee exports are being shipped in containers. --Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
Rains ended abruptly throughout most of Ivory Coast in the second 10 days of December, allowing crops to dry after the extended rain, upcountry buyers and weather analysts say.
Weather data showed average rain down to 8mm from about 45 mm at the start of December, with little or no rain falling at six of eight stations monitored in the 10 days to December 20.
A total of 65 mm fell compared to 400 mm at nine stations in the first 10 days of the month. Only the northern Daloa area, with 21.8 mm, and the far southwest around Tabou, with 42.5 mm, received noticeable amounts.
Around 250 mm fell in San Pedro and Tabou alone in early December during a late, small rainy season usually seen in October and November.
"The inter-tropical weather front has still not brought down Harmattan (drier conditions usually seen in early December and on through January after rains)," said one weather analyst.
Farmers visited by Reuters over Christmas had begun drying beans but some exporters in Abidjan were rejecting moist beans, some of which had sat uncollected in villages before mud tracks solidified.
Heavy rains fell in early December, leading to deterioration of bushtracks and raising cocoa bean humidity levels to up to 11 percent, compared to exportable levels of about eight percent.
One crop analyst said before the latest figures that mid-crop (April-September) prospects would be boosted by another 20mm rain by January. Sporadic rains have fallen upcountry since December 20 but month-end rainfall figures were not immediately available.
Midcrop flowers are expected to give cherelles (small cocoa pods) as insect activity gets underway after rains end. Crop analysts will be looking for clear indications of prospects in early January.
Crop analysts see the rains as beneficial for pods still on trees as a preceding small dry season had also been late and wetting would cushion the effects of coming dry Harmattan winds.
The data, from Ivory Coast's national weather station, shows rainfall for the second 10 days of December in the following key growing areas -
Dalao 21.8mm, Gagnoa 0 mm, San Pedro 0.7 mm, Tabou 42.5 mm and Man 0 mm, Dimbokro 0 mm, Yamoussoukro 0 mm, Adiake 0 mm.
No data was available for Abidjan and Sassandra but sporadic rains have been seen by Reuters in south coast areas, including Abidjan, since Dec 20. --Abidjan Newsroom + 225 21 90 90
Ivorian 1996/97 cocoa arrivals stood at around 390,000-410,000 tonnes by mid-December, after a slow start to the month, analysts and exporters say.
Exporters blamed a combination of crop profile and demand factors for the dip in December -- usually the strongest month.
The figures to December 16 were down from an estimated 540,000 tonnes by that date last year, but some analysts said a further 50,000 tonnes should be added to this year's total for comparative purposes as the season had opened three weeks late.
An averaged figure plus the 50,000 tonnes would put arrivals since October 1 at 450,000. Various sources put arrivals at San Pedro since October 1 at 130,000-140,000 tonnes with the rest going to the main port of Abidjan.
"Arrivals were slower than usual for December but in the past week arrivals have overtaken last year's (weekly) rate," said one exporter. "People are completing December contracts but January will be strong," he added.
Subsequent arrivals up to December 22 were said by exporters to be around 50,000 tonnes per week. They expected the deficit in arrivals compared to last year to grow in December before narrowing sharply in January, when arrivals pick up again.
Difficulty in obtaining export contracts from the Caistab marketing board and problems with bean drying after rains upcountry had accentuated the usual Christmas period drop-off.
Rains had damaged bushtracks, delaying collection and raising humidity and moisture to above acceptable levels in some areas.
"We are refusing some cocoa. There is a lot more coming down now the sun is out," said one Abidjan-based exporter.
Drying problems and poor fermentation had raised bean humidity to 11 percent in some areas, extending both normal and machine drying times.
"Humidity levels are slipping back down from anything up to 11 percent," said one San Pedro-based buyer, and the guideline farmgate price of 315 CFA per kilo had on the whole been paid to growers.
Upcountry buyers visited by Reuters over Christmas had taken the chance to dry out large quantities of fresh through to greyish moist beans as a wet early December gave way to usual dry sunny weather ahead of the holiday.
"It's patchy, but sunny days are here again," said one buyer. "Whatever was cut off in village stores or too wet can now be properly dried out," he added.
San Pedro received over 15,000 in the week from December 16, exporters there said.
Reports of smuggling to Guinea continue to surface but one Western diplomat recently returning by road from Conakry said road conditions were appalling and few covered trucks had been seen.
Large shipments in the past weeks are expected to cut into port stocks.
"Port area stocks are unclear but there are a lot of bulk shipments," said one exporter.
-- Abidjan Newsroom +225 21 90 90
Ivory Coast-based firms and new investors aim to boost local cocoa processing in 1996/97 but will not reach the country's 50 percent of production target by 2000, industry sources and analysts say.
"The 50 percent is usually understood to mean about 400,000 tonnes (beans) but we're still way off that," said a spokesman for Abidjan-based processor UNICAO, one of Ivory Coast's top processors with rival Callebaut-Barry.
The country can already process around 180,000 tonnes but the industry sources said other potential investors might lift the total by at least another 110,000 tonnes to nearer 300,000 tonnes from 1997 if plans are completed.
Ivorian exporter SICC told Reuters its first processing project is likely to take shape in early 1997. The firm handles a total of 200,000 tonnes of cocoa in 1996/97 for clients including Cargill's Netherlands processing subsidiary Gerkens.
"We cannot think of handling that much without going into processing. We want to start in 1997 and are now at the decision stages with our partners," Deputy-Director Guillaume Adome told Reuters in an interview.
He said plans partly hinge on government incentives.
"A minimum of 50,000 tonnes (of beans could be processed) at Abidjan or San Pedro depending on space availability," said Guillaume, adding that Ivory Coast's second port San Pedro offered better tax advantages.
"It (the plant) would cost about $2 million and we will do it, one way or another," he said.
At least four other exporters and foreign traders are said to be interested in processing in Ivory Coast.
French group CEMOI restated in December its interest in processing up to 60,000 tonnes a year in Ivory Coast but has not detailed plans.
"We thought Cargill or (Cacao) De Zaan would buy into UNICAO," said one exporter. Others said they were waiting to see whether Cargill or its subsidiary Gerkens would boost its presence in Ivory Coast after its supplying trader Phibro's cocoa purchase contract with Ivory Coast's Caistab marketing body ended in late 1997.
UNICAO says its own 1997 processing expansion plans will go ahead despite the December sale of a 30 percent holding of its parent, largest Ivorian exporter SIFCA, to Arthur Daniels Midland by rival W.R. Grace.
A third 21,500 tonne capacity production line would be ready by October with production under way around January 1998.
"Capacity (bean grinding) will then be 86,000 three lines," said UNICAO's deputy director Kanga N'Ze, producing 50 percent cocoa butter and cake and 50 percent liquor. Capacity in 1995 was 43,000 tonnes.
UNICAO's only main rival Callebaut-Barry has three plants operated by its subsidiaries SACO and Chocodi, grinding up to 80,000 tonnes of beans a year.
Analysts, who see 30 percent as a more realistic processing target, say the aim of adding value to exports might be hi-jacked by short-termism.
"It takes a year to build a plant from scratch but is everyone committed for the long-term?" said N'Ze. "Running, especially energy costs, are still high so why would a European firm move?"
Ivory Coast produced a record 1.2 million tonnes in 1995/96 but has forecast closer to a million tonnes for 1996/97.
Commodities Minister Guy-Alain Gauze said earlier this year fiscal reforms, a new investment code, various incentives and the prospect of cheaper energy from offshore gas should encourage investment in cocoa.
Chad holds much-delayed parliamentary elections on Sunday with voters hoping that democratic reforms and oil development will bring a lasting end to sometimes bloody ethnic rivalry.
An estimated 300,000 nomads in the sprawling arid nation on the edge of the Sahara Desert started voting on Thursday, three days before the rest of the 3.5 million voters throughout the Moslem north and centre and largely Christian south.
A total of 658 candidates from 49 parties will be vying for the 125 seats in a new national assembly which will convene on March 31 when the former French colony's democratic transition finally draws to an end.
"Oil is really what is at stake. Christian and Moslem differences have calmed although Islamic fundamentalism is rising," one diplomat told Reuters.
Polls open from 7 a.m. (0600 GMT) to 6 p.m. (1700 GMT).
French troops, stationed in Chad under a defence pact, will help fly voting materials and the 30 international observers to far-flung polling stations.
President Idriss Deby, the former northern guerrilla leader who seized power in a French-backed coup in 1990, won a long-delayed presidential election in July against southern rival and fellow general Wadal Abdelkader Kamougue.
Deby's Patriotic Salvation Movement, leading member of the 27-party Republican Front coalition, starts favourite to win Sunday's election or to be able to cobble together a working majority after the poll.
Election officials expect vote counting to end by Wednesday, provisional results a week later and final results by January 25, once the appeal court has checked them. Any run-offs will be held on February 23.
Many opposition parties disputed the first-round results of the presidential poll and urged their supporters to boycott the runoff but polling passed off peacefully. The opposition are grouped in a 17-party coalition.
The capital was calm on Saturday following a peaceful campaign, which ended on December 31.
Election issues tended to be local or ethnic but diplomats said that all parties were looking for a fair distribution of any wealth from oil, which is expected to come on stream by the year 2000. Chad has about 100 ethnic groups.
"People still largely vote on local grounds and Deby is not president of all Chadians," former national assembly leader, Jean Alingue, another defeated presidential hopeful, told Reuters.
"Turnout will be low because people know the fraud apparatus is still in place and nothing much will change," he predicted.
Chad has known coups, civil war or conflict with northern neighbour Libya for much of its life from independence in 1960.
It had a 57-member interim legislature under a 1993 transitional charter. Elections were repeatedly delayed, the parliamentary poll at least twice in 1996. Election officials cited organisational delays.
Chad held much-delayed multi-party parliamentary elections on Sunday but there was little enthusiasm in the sprawling and volatile African nation for its fourth round of voting in less than a year.
Some polling stations in the capital opened late as voting materials were not ready for the scheduled 7 a.m. (0600 GMT) start. Few queues formed in the shimmering heat of the day and those that did were small.
Some opposition candidates denounced incidents of fraud but the 30 or so international observers reserved judgment and there were no immediate reports of electoral unrest in the majority Moslem nation with a lively southern Christian minority.
President Idriss Deby, the former northern guerrilla leader who seized power in a French-backed coup in 1990, paid tribute to Chad's democratic progress after voting in the capital.
"We have made a non-negligible step in the democratic process set up in 1990," he told reporters.
Others took a different view. "Turnout will be low because people know the fraud apparatus is still in place and nothing much will change," said former national assembly leader Jean Bawoyeu Alingue, a defeated presidential hopeful.
More than 650 candidates from 49 parties contested the 125 seats in the national assembly, which will convene on March 31 to end the former French colony's transition to democracy.
Chad has known coups, civil war or conflict with northern neighbour Libya for much of its life from independence in 1960.
After repeated electoral delays, Deby won a multi-party presidential election in July after a run-off against southern rival and fellow general Wadal Abdelkader Kamougue.
Almost 68 percent of voters took part in the first round of that poll, which followed a March constitutional referendum. Voter interest tailed off in the second round.
A total of 3.5 million people were eligible to vote on Sunday in the nation on the fringes of the Sahara Desert. An estimated 300,000 nomads started voting on Thursday.
Deby's Patriotic Salvation Movement, leading member of the 27-party Republican Front coalition, started favourite to win or to be able to cobble together a working majority after the poll.
The opposition, which called a boycott of the presidential runoff alleging first-round fraud, has a 17-party coalition.
Election issues tended to be local or ethnic but diplomats said that all parties were looking for a fair distribution of any wealth from oil, which is expected to come on stream by the year 2000. Chad has about 100 ethnic groups.
"Oil is really what is at stake. Christian and Moslem differences have calmed," one diplomat said.
"It does not take much to make people feel better off," Alingue said. "We don't want to see the money vanish abroad."
Polls were to close at 6 p.m. (1700 GMT). Election officials expected provisional results within 10 days and final results by January 25, once the appeal court had checked them. Any run-offs will be held on February 23.
Voters in Chad, who showed little apparent enthusiasm for Sunday's election to end their much-delayed transition to democracy, face a long wait before they know the shape of their new national assembly.
"Provisional results are set for January 15 and final results for January 25 after approval by the court of appeal," the president of the Independent National Electoral Committee, Pascal Yaodamnadji, told Reuters.
Runoffs are scheduled for February 23.
Polling for the 125-seat assembly, which began last Thursday for nomads in the sprawling and volatile African country with a Moslem majority and lively southern Christian minority, passed off calmly with no reports of major incidents.
A total of 658 candidates from 49 parties stood for the assembly, which will convene on March 31 to end the former French colony's transition to democracy.
Chad has known coups, civil war or conflict with northern neighbour Libya for much of its life from independence in 1960.
President Idriss Deby, a former northern guerrilla leader, seized power in the arid nation in a 1990 French-backed coup.
After repeated electoral delays, he won a multi-party presidential election in July after a runoff against southern rival and fellow general Wadal Abdelkader Kamougue.
Almost 68 percent of voters took part in the first round of that poll, which followed a March constitutional referendum. Voter interest tailed off in the second round, which many opposition parties urged their supporters to boycott.
About 3.5 million of Chad's 6.4 million people were eligible to vote on Sunday but there was little enthusiasm for the poll in the capital, which accounts for 10 percent of all voters and where turnout appeared well down on previous polls.
Some opposition candidates denounced instances of fraud.
Former national assembly leader Jean Bawoyeu Alingue, a defeated presidential contender, cited three types of fraud.
"Electoral cards were copied, pre-stuffed envelopes were taken into booths by voters and nomads have been allowed to vote in an uncontrolled manner," he told Reuters.
The 30 or so international observers, many of whom were yet to return from monitoring polling in the provinces, were expected to report their findings on Wednesday.
British European Parliament member Michael McGowan praised the organisation of polling in the capital. "On the whole the elections seemed to me to be well-organised and thorough."
Deby's Patriotic Salvation Movement heads the 27-party Republican Front coalition. The opposition, which alleged fraud in the presidential poll, has a rival 17-party coalition.
Election issues tended to be local or ethnic but diplomats said all parties sought fair distribution of any wealth from oil, expected to come on stream by the year 2000.
Chad's cotton monopoly Cotontchad is forecasting rises in output and processing capacity in the 1996/97 November-October season, thanks in part to higher world prices.
At the same time, it is looking to new markets in China and Russia to boost sales of what is currently the nation's main source of foreign exchange.
But company administrative director Mahamet Tahi Kherallah says that despite the optimistic outlook, the industry remains hostage to external factors beyond its control.
"The future depends on the problems of world cotton price fluctuation, rain levels, and the exchange rate for sales in dollars," he told Reuters in an interview.
Africa's fifth largest cotton producer, majority state-owned Cotontchad limited the impact on production of a 1996 drought.
"The threat of drought has been overcome by enlarging the area under cultivation," Kherallah said. "Rains in (southern Chad) cotton areas were largely sufficient. We needed four months of good rain between May and September."
Rain in other areas was up to 50 percent below average.
Cotontchad sees its seed cotton purchases rising to a record 204,600 tonnes in 1996/97 from 157,476 tonnes in 1995/96. It projects the area under cultivation rising to 264,557 hectares from 209,750 in 1995/96.
Africa produces no more than five percent of world cotton.
Chad's National Office for Rural Development (ONDR) in November raised Grade 1 cotton farmgate prices for 1996/97 by 30 CFA francs a kg to 170 CFA to pass on world market price increases to farmers and encourage production.
The rise followed a 20 CFA increase in 1995/96, a move that had already encouraged farmers to plant cotton and use insecticides and fertilisers.
Total seed cotton processing capacity at Cotontchad's eight southern factories, which handle all the annual crop, has been increased to cope with the projected production increase.
In 1995/96 they produced 61,808 tonnes of fibre. In 1996/97, officials expect them to produce 83,991 tonnes.
"We recently added capacity to an existing factory at Pala, which is now our most modern facility," Kherallah said. "Quantities and quality are particularly good around Pala."
Processing capacity has also been boosted to 40,000 tonnes of seed cotton a year at Moundou and Kelo, with plans to do the same at Koumra over the next two to three years, he added.
Exports could be boosted, with China and Russia showing interest. Traditional markets for Grade 1 cotton are Portugal, Germany, Japan and France -- plus Nigeria for Grade 2.
With world average per capita consumption expected by some experts to rise to 7.24 kg in 1997 from 7.12 kg in 1995, Cotontchad says demand for its produce is already increasing.
"Our cotton is sold throughout the world but we are getting a lot of interest in people setting up business with us," Paris-based Marketing Director Ibrahim Malloum told Reuters.
Cotontchad hopes oil revenue, expected from 2000, will be used to improve dirt bush tracks. Road construction is under way in southern cotton belt areas but some tracks are closed to large trucks by law during two to four months of rains.
Cotton thrives in Chad's wetter southern areas. It was not farmed commercially until French colonisers gave Coton Fran, later Cotontchad, a monopoly on cotton purchasing and ginning.
Cotontchad is owned by Chad (75 percent), the CFDT French textile development board (17 percent), banks (six percent) and the CFD French Development Board (two percent).
An estimated two million of Chad's 6.4 million people depend directly on cotton, but textile manufacturing is still a minor industry.
The country's one textile plant, the partly French-owned Cotex factory at Sahr, took only 500 tonnes from Cotontchad in 1995/96, Kherallah said. The plant has a 1,000-tonne capacity.
($1=530 CFA francs)
-- Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
Security forces in Chad have summarily executed scores of people since a November official decree sanctioned instant justice for criminals caught in the act, local human rights officials said on Friday.
A pregnant woman, streetchildren and supected thieves are among victims of public executions reported, but human rights groups fear scores of other killings were carried out secretly.
"The policy has been carried out since November. It is quite open but the total numbers killed are not," a charity worker who gave her name only as Marie-Odile told Reuters.
"We are called out to scenes of executions and we talk with relatives of those killed," she said.
Officials confirmed the shoot-at-sight decree, but refused to go on the record. Instead they cited a public statement by President Idriss Deby whose office issued the order to paramilitary gendamrie commanders nationwide.
"N'Djamena is being held hostage by real organised gangs which, when they are apprehended by the law, are systematically freed again by the justice system. After they are freed they continue to give law enforcers problems," Deby told a news conference after meeting rights groups on November 23.
Insecurity is a major problem in Chad, which has been gripped by internal conflict or war with Libya for more than two decades until 1990.
"Crime is a huge problem. The whole place is run by the army and bandits and roads outside N'Djamena are subject to roadblocks by robbers," a Western resident said.
The vast but largely desert country also borders the volatile states of Sudan and Central African Republic, with whom it is seeking a common strategy against cross border banditry.
A transport worker at a dock on Lake Chad was among victims of the shoot-to-kill order listed by the human rights groups.
"A docker accused of breaking into an empty container was executed in the market. The shooting caused one pregnant woman at the scene to miscarry under emotional shock," the Chadian Human Rights League (LTDH) said in a December 26 report.
A Paris-based human rights group, in its account of the executions, said a pregnant woman suspected of stealing grain in a market was shot dead on the spot by gendarmes on November 16. A boy was put in a bag and shot dead on the banks of the Chari river in similar circumstances two days earlier.
Three suspected livestock thieves were shot in public on December 26, the International Federation of Human Rights Leagues told Paris daily Liberation.
A copy of the November 14 order to security forces seen by Reuters in N'Djamena read in part:
"We remind you once again that robbers must not be the object of normal procedures (of arrest). If one is caught in the act, you must immediately proceed with his physical elimination.
"Non-application of this order will result in very severe punishment including possible loss of rank and sacking from the force."
LTDH workers say two gendarmerie officers who leaked the order were taken into custody and had not been seen since. The two, named as Job Mbaibougue and Abel Djimong were arrested on November 23 and taken to Faya Largeau prison, they said.
Foreign Minister Saleh Kebzabo defended Chad's new policy of summarily executing alleged criminals, saying it was justified because the country's courts systematically freed wrongdoers.
Human rights groups say scores of Chadians have already been executed by security forces, including 11 people shot in public on New Year's eve.
"The policy has worked. We no longer see the levels of violence before it was introduced," Kebzabo told Reuters in an interview in the capital N'Djamena on Saturday.
His comments were the most senior official confirmation of a decree issued by President Idriss Deby. An order to police commands in the country to forget the courts when dealing with criminals caught in the act was leaked to reporters last week.
"It came to force around the beginning of November," Kebzabo said. "If you want to know how effective it has been, ask a white woman in the market. Before they couldn't even go there without being attacked for their jewellery."
Deby justified the policy, saying the courts were corrupt and systematically freed criminals.
Insecurity is a major problem in Chad, which was gripped by civil war or conflict with Libya for more than two decades until 1990. The vast but largely desert country also borders the volatile states of Sudan and Central African Republic, with whom it is seeking a common strategy against cross-border banditry.
Kebzabo, a former journalist and close political associate Deby, dismissed critics who say the shoot-at-sight policy is a gross human rights violation.
"While the situation continued there was no question of human rights for those attacked," said Kebzabo, who heads the National Union for Development and Renewal party.
He said there were no official figures for those executed so far, but he did not directly dispute the Chad Human Rights League's reports of scores killed.
"Some people, if they heard 10 people had been killed, they would say 100. There are no figures. But when the League makes a statement it is usually pretty true," said Kebzabo, himself a former activist who had brushes with authorities before joining the government.
In one crackdown, nine people accused of theft and banditry were executed at Fianga in the southwestern region of Mayo-Kebbi on Christmas Eve, campaign group Chad Non-Violence said in a report submitted to the Human Rights League on Friday.
"Nine people were arrested on December 22 and kept at the Fianga gendarmerie. On December 24 they were tied up and executed in a public market in the presence of administrative, political and military authorities," said the report signed by Chad Non-Violence president Lazare Serge Tikri.
"Also in Fianga, 11 others were arrested and received the same treatment on December 31," it added.
A League spokesman said it was not unusual for reports to reach N'Djamena two weeks late because of poor communications.
A December 26 League report listed some of the people killed since November, including a pregnant woman, streetchildren and suspected thieves.
"A docker accused of breaking into an empty container was executed in the market. The shooting caused one pregnant woman at the scene to miscarry under emotional shock," it said.
"It is quite open but the total numbers killed are not," an aid worker said. "We are called out to scenes of executions and we talk with relatives of those killed."
Many ordinary Chadians interviewed about the shoot-to-kill policy said they initially supported it because of rampant crime but that they now feared it could get out of hand.
As Chad's odyssey to oil production from 2001 enters financing and tender stages, senior officials are asking for guarantees that benefits will trickle down to the impoverished population.
"I am afraid about the oil because the experience of other African countries shows that it is always mismanaged," Chad's Foreign Minister Saleh Kebzabo told Reuters in an interview.
"It will change people's mentality for the worse. No preparations have yet been made at political and management levels and there has been no public debate," he said.
After decades of civil strife or conflict with neighbouring Libya, Chad held its first multiparty legislative elections on January 5, marking a symbolic transition to peace.
Other political party leaders, who like Kebzabo, contested the elections, voiced similar concerns.
"We must have laws to ensure all interests are served, with Chad at the centre," said Lol Mahamet Choua, who draws support near the smaller Sedigi oilfield on the shores of Lake Chad.
Exxon's unit Esso Exploration and Production Chad Inc., a 40 percent-share consortium member with Shell's Chad unit (40 percent) and Elf (20 percent) in November sealed a deal with Chad on finance and legal terms for Chad's main field 350 miles (560 km) south of N'Djamena.
Doba, due on stream in 2001, is forecast to yield 900 million barrels, or 200,000-250,000 bpd over 15-20 years, at a cost of $3 billion, according to Exxon, Houston. Cheaper electricity is expected from power stations using Sedigi crude.
"There are some milestones needing to be resolved but something could happen next month," Exxon spokesman Ed Burwell told Reuters last week as Chad's finance minister left for discussions in Washington and officals held talks on a pipeline through Cameroon.
Chad's Gross National Product per capita income at $237 in 1995 is one of Africa's lowest. It is dependent on cotton, livestock and gum arabic revenue and badly needs foreign currency after 30 years of war since independence from France in 1960 and devaluation of the regional CFA franc in 1994.
Investors hope Moslem President Idriss Deby, once dubbed "Cowboy of the Sands" for lightning jeep-based warfare against Libya, can both welcome oilmen to his country -- twice the size of Texas -- and heal North-South, Moslem-Christian strife.
The consortium is nearing the end of exploration and engineering studies, despite logistics problems in the sprawling Sahel state with only 300 km (170 miles) of paved roads.
Doba's geological profile is such that horizontal flow and recovery of oil is small, meaning costly vertical well-drilling.
Most financial aspects of Doba remain unclear. "Chadians are told nothing at all about what is going on," Assistant Government Secretary Saleh Makki told Reuters. "Royalties are a closely guarded secret, but if there is no transparency people will find other ways to express themselves."
Production slipped back from 1998 to 2001, partly due to rebel activities in southern areas led by Moise Kette. The group wants an autonomous Chrisitan region in the south where Chad's cotton, and soon oil, wealth is concentrated.
Chad buys oil from southern neighbours Nigeria and Cameroon.
"Oil has not made people's lives much better in those countries, despite United Nations figures. Our oil money should not also disappear abroad," former National Assembly leader and ex-prime minister Jean Bawayou Alingue told Reuters.
Compared with Chad's per capita income of $237, that for oil-producer Cameroon is $813 and Gabon -- with Elf dominating offshore oil production -- $4,400. Chad has appealed for food aid for 1997.
"There will be enough money in government coffers for them to do some smart things," said Louis Adande, vice-president at the Abidjan unit of Citibank, reviewing finance options for the consortium. "But Chad is obviously still looking for stability and has an interest in promoting it."
A private Swiss firm, Cotecna, hired to manage Chad's treasury funds, recently ended a two-year contract. Opposition parties fear political use of future revenues.
The half-desert central African state of 6.5 million has held talks with the World Bank over partial funding of a 30-inch (76 cm), 650 kilometre (404 mile), pipeline with four pumping stations to take landlocked Chad's oil to French-built refineries, and marine terminals, at Kribi port in Cameroon.
An airport for supply planes is planned for Doba along with roads to N'Djamena and 300 long-term jobs are expected.
Ivory Coast and other African coffee nations will hold talks with Vietnam on Tuesday on robusta output ahead of an emergency meeting of coffee producers in Rio de Janeiro on January 23, InterAfrican Coffee Organisation (IACO) officials said on Monday.
"The Vietnam meeting is a seminar to convince Vietnamese at the highest level to join the ACPC," IACO Secretary General Aregu Worku told Reuters, referring to the Association of Coffee Producing Countries (ACPC).
"There will also be a fact-finding mission with tours to plantations to see developments in Vietnamese production and techniques," he said by telephone.
Ivorian Commodities Minister Guy-Alain Gauze, also IACO's chairman, has already left Abidjan for Vietnam where the Asia International Coffee Conference '97, organised by IBC Singapore, is being held in Ho Chi Minh City from January 14 to 18.
Gauze was accompanied by IACO's chief economist Donald Kaberuka, Worku said. Ivory Coast's new Caistab marketing board coffee department director Avi Adroh will also attend.
Gauze in November blamed non-ACPC member exporters, including Vietnam, for instability in the world robusta price. He called for an urgent ACPC review.
"The real talks will take place in Rio de Janeiro (at the January 23 meeting) when proposals made by the African group will be discussed," said Worku.
African producers would renew demands for an additional 2.5 million bags export quota cut for the first six months of 1997.
"That is the area we have been talking about," said Worku, adding that Ivory Coast had stuck to its ACPC quota while non-members had increased production.
"Indonesia has insisted on Vietnam joining and we will have to come up with something in Rio to be able to stick with our strategy after June," said Worku.
Gauze and Kaberuka were expected to arrive in Ho Chi Minh City on Monday night or Tuesday morning for the Vietnam talks, an IACO secretary said.
-- Abidjan newsroom + 225 21 90 90
Ivorian 1996/97 cocoa arrivals picked up in early January, pushing the total to 640,000-650,000 tonnes by January 13, analysts and exporters said.
This was still down on the 730,000 tonnes recorded by January 13 last year.
The 1996/97 figure includes 50,000 tonnes of arrivals in the first three weeks in October as the season opened three weeks late.
"The problem now is that there is too much cocoa in the port," said one exporter with offices in Abidjan and San Pedro.
"Some exporters in San Pedro are slowing down (buying) because there is no storage space left."
Sources close to the Caisse de Stabilisation marketing board gave an even higher arrivals total -- 707,000 tonnes by December 27, excluding the pre-season 50,000 tonnes. Exporters said the estimate was too high.
One exporter put arrivals lower, with 185,000 tonnes at San Pedro and 450,000 taken to Abidjan.
Other exporters put total arrivals at 555,000 tonnes by the end of December after 450,000 for mid-December.
"Cocoa is coming in at about 60,000 tonnes (a week) so there's a lot of cocoa about," said another exporter. "Quality is still quite good with bean sizes averaging 95-97 (beans per 100 grams)," he added.
Humidity levels were around 9-10 percent due to a lack of harmattan drying winds usually seen at this time of year, he said. Exportable quality is 7-8 percent.
Up country buyers noted, however, that humidity levels had already fallen from 11 percent noted in December.
"Bean sizes are around 95-97 per 100 grams but humidity is already down to 9-10 percent because of the sun," said one Gagnoa buyer, adding that the harmattan had arrived there.
National weather data showed no rains at eight out of 10 monitoring stations in the first 10 days of January. Rain at the other two was negligible.
Up-country buyers said bush tracks had now dried out after late-December problems and collection rates were normal.
"There is still a bit of cocoa out there and we expect February will be a bit better than usual," said Husseini Khaled, a buyer working around Gagnoa. "As for the mid-crop question, we don't know yet," he added.
Buyers said they were paying at least the minimum recommended farmgate price of 315 CFA a kilo despite poor world prices and initially poor exporter offtake.
Exporters had originally said they would begin marketing a large coffee crop earlier then usual. "Some people turned attention back to cocoa as coffee quality turned out to be terrible," said one exporter.
San Pedro exporters said they expected strong arrivals to continue at least into early February. Other exporters said they expected a late-January tail-off.
Shipping forwarders said warehouses were filling up but did not give precise warehouse figures. One source said at least 350,000 tonnes of cocoa had been exported since October 1.
"People talk of between 100,000 and 300,000 sitting as stock," said the port source. "A middle figure would be a good working assumption," he added.
The industry's focus is now turning to final estimates for the mid-crop, which so far has been put at anything between 70,000 and 200,000 tonnes.
Pod counters were expected to complete up-country tours in January before firming up estimates.
-- Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
Ivory Coast's 1996/97 coffee season has begun amid slow buying and reports of variable quality, industry sources said.
"SIFCA (the largest Ivorian buyer) has started buying, so we are likely to see others follow," said one large exporter. "You could say that marks the real start of the season."
Buying had been limited in December although up-country agents had been active with larger than usual volumes.
Output is put at 230,000-250,000 tonnes for 1996/97, against 180,000 in 1995/96.
The season was officially opened on November 14, rather than early October, as the Caistab marketing agency struggled to set a recommended price closer to falling world market levels.
"It will be a very large crop," said one local analyst. "The coffee is now mainly off the trees and being sat on by farmers at village level."
Buyers reported variable quality and humidity up to 15 percent in some areas, against export limits of 13 percent. "Quality is particularly good around (northwestern) Man but elsewhere you will find opinion dependent on who you talk to," said one.
One source put arrivals by January 10 at San Pedro port at 3,337 tonnes, but figures for Abidjan were less clear.
Bank sources said in December they were reluctant to put money into coffee because of fears borrowers would not receive transfer payments from Caistab and would default on loans.
"That remains the case," said one exporter. "Banks are certainly reticent, so purchasing is still low." Continuing low world market prices added to the uncertainty, others said.
Bush tracks had dried out and some farmers were profiting from January sun to dry produce that was still damp because of the failure of harmattan desert winds to arrive in some areas in late December.
"Some farmers are also being paid below offical, recommended (500 CFA) a kilo prices," said one buying source.
Prices ranging between 300 and 500 CFA per kilo were being offered, depending on area and quality, the source said. But others said they were offering up to 540 for top quality grades.
One industry analyst said 44 exporters were licensed, against 32 last year, so some would struggle to balance accounts amid more acute internal price competition.
Attention is also turning to a report on further coffee sector liberalisation expected to be with donor market reform sponsors by the end of January.
Private British consultant Landell Mills and Co will submit its report amid donor calls for an end to cross-subsidies to the coffee sector from cocoa profits from the beginning of 1997/98.
"The price support is running at around 100 CFA a kilo based on current world prices," said one source.
The focus is also turning to Association of Coffee Producing Countries (ACPC) talks on January 23 which will focus on pushing up world prices through voluntary export restraints.
Unilever subsidiary Blohorn will overhaul palmoil plantations and nine factories recently bought from Ivory Coast, a senior Blohorn official said.
"The strategic issue for us was to win vertical control of raw supplies as there was a danger of others exporting for overseas revenue," group vice-president Martin Rushworth told Reuters in an interview.
The supplies from the plantations and factories, in which Blohorn now holds a 34 percent stake, total 190,000 tonnes of annual oil production, he added.
Ageing plantations on 36,000 hectares would be overhauled as some trees were nearing the end of their 28-year productive life and needed replacing at a rate of 4-6 percent a year.
"In some plantations trees have an average age of 22 years so there will have to be extensive replanting," Rushworth said.
Nine crop processing factories would also be refurbished over two years.
Palmoil prices (CIF Europe) averaged around $380 a tonne in 1993, $680 in 1994, $650 in 1995 and $540 in 1996, he said.
"Export prices are now around $560 a tonne but we think they will stabilise at around $540 a tonne in 1997," said Rushworth.
Blohorn's tender for leading stakes in the two state-owned Palmindustrie blocks were accepted by Ivory Coast and signed on November 28 and December 27.
Blohorn linked up with competitor SIFCA to complete the purchase along with the Belgian firm SOCFIN SA for its technical expertise in plantation management.
"Output will be used for domestic production of cooking oil and soaps with only consumer goods and refined oil for export," he said. Sites would sell palmoil to Blohorn at going-rate transfer prices and operate largely as separate entities.
Other Palmindustrie capacity of 40,000 tonnes was taken by the Belgian firm SIPEF with Ivorian SAFIPAR taking the remaining 35,000 tonnes.
Blohorn, whose main oil-based domestic brands are Dinor cooking oil and Savon de Marseille, bought three sites sold as two large blocks. Shareholders paid a total 64.5 billion CFA and took on 24 billion CFA in staggered government debt.
Palmoil processors are also seen as potential cocoa grinders but Rushworth said Blohorn would only do so from June to August to help with overheads during slack periods.
Ivory Coast's donor-sponsored privatisation programme saw 26 companies sold between 1991 and 1995 and another 10 in 1996.
Blohorn's main 34 percent shareholding is followed by Ivory Coast (30 percent), SIFCA (17 percent), village farmers (11 percent), SOCFIN (5 percent) and employees (3 percent).
-- Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
An Ivory Coast liberalisation study focusing on quality, competition and less bureaucracy will be ready as planned by January 31, according to sources close to reforms.
"Four options have to be reviewed," said one source. "Price stability while making each year self-financing (with no carryovers between years) will be looked at," the source added.
The donor-sponsored study by private British firm Landell Mills Consultants (LMC) would also seek to avoid pitfalls seen in countries such as Cameroon where unfettered liberalisation led to coffee quality problems and loss of premium.
Ivory Coast embarked on a series of coffee and cocoa sector reforms in 1995 as conditions for a three-tranche $150 million World Bank Agricultural Sector Adjustment Loan.
Although the guideline farmgate coffee price was cut by 200 CFA a kilo to 500 CFA when the 1996/97 season opened in November, exporters point to continuing low world prices and the need for further support for the sector out of cocoa revenues.
"We are in favour of complete liberalisation but with good quality controls kept in place," said one industry buyer. "The Caistab's role should be limited to a hands-off marketing role giving quality assurance and statistical information."
Coffee exporters expect support for coffee to run at around 100 CFA a kilo, as world prices remain low, until recommended prices are reset or entirely scrapped for 1997/98.
The Caisse de Stabilisation (Caistab) marketing board sets a guide price for farmers whereas once it dictated prices. Donors have already demanded further streamlining of its operations and increased transparency about a shadowy set of costs referred to in accounts as "Delta" costs.
Delta expenditures for 1996/97, which will partly determine stabilisation fund levels for coffee, are due to be set from January when the Caistab gives details of coffee forward sales.
"The problem is that the Caistab has not released any (forward sales) data since October," said one source. "That puts everyone in a very difficult position."
The Delta cost for both coffee and cocoa is budgeted to be largely unchanged in 1996/97 from 53 CFA a kilo in 1995/96.
The Caistab, whose new managing director Yves-Marie Koissy was appointed in September but did not formally take over until October, declined immediate comment on the planned report.
The Caistab employs over 900 people but with its role reduced it is expected to cut staff levels after overruning many budgeted running cost items in 1995/96.
"The real number of employees in unclear," said on source.
The report will also look at how the Caistab can cut marketing margins through competition to below levels in competitor countries.
"Some exporters who were expected to be off the list in 1996/97 for debts were let back in through the window this year," said one source.
Advice for further competition in transportation, quality control and coffee bean hulling is also under review.
Forward sales policy amid volatile world market prices and an increasingly spot-driven world market are also expected to be considered in the LMC report.
Ivory Coast aims to encourage plantation rehabilitation and boost output to closer to 300,000 tonnes a year from a forecast 230,000 tonnes in 1996/97.
The Caistab phased out purchasing centres from 1995/96 to speed up the flow of produce to Ivory Coast's main ports.
It has also ended its monopoly over the import and distribution of collection sacks for coffee upcountry, but provides protection to local manufacturers against cheap imports from Asia.
($1= 542 CFA francs)
-- Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
Light rains in Ivory Coast after a dry start to January will help mid-crop (April-Sept) cocoa crop development, particularly if they extend into February, a crop analyst said on Thursday.
"We have seen around average rain levels for January so far but a little more now and in February would help," another local crop analyst told Reuters.
Distribution of rains was patchy.
Most fell in central and northern cocoa and coffee areas, particularly around Man, Daloa, Yamoussoukro and Gagnoa, the data showed. Little fell in coastal areas around San Pedro and Abidjan.
"The front (associated with rain) is now over central areas," said one weather analyst. "Central areas have seen a surplus for the period but southern areas are in deficit," he added.
One crop analyst told Reuters rains seemed to have reached most cocoa and coffee areas.
"There seem to have been good light showers in most cocoa areas," said the crop analyst after returning from an up-country tour. "There is no dust on most bush tracks."
Dry harmattan conditions from the Sahara had now retreated northwards after failing to reach southern Ivory Coast as usually expected in late-December or early January.
Exporters and crop inspectors said cocoa humidity levels remained around 8-10 percent against exportable quality of eight percent, despite drying efforts
Coffee farmers have also had drying problems but export activity remained low after shipments put by port sources at 10,492 tonnes for October to December, exporters said.
Quality inspectors said a better picture of coffee humidity and quality after rains would emerge as arrivals picked up.
The data, from Ivory Coast's national weather station, showed the following rainfall for the second 10 days of January in key growing areas plus the commercial capital Abidjan:
Dalao 47.5 mm, Gagnoa 7.8 mm, San Pedro 0.1 mm, Tabou 6.2 mm and Man 0 mm, Dimbokro 4.6 mm, Yamoussoukro 44.8 mm, Aidjan 6 mm, Sassandra n/a, Adiake n/a, Korhogo 0 mm.
No data were available for Adiake and Sassandra.
-- Matthew Bunce Abidjan Newsroom +225 21 90 90
After years of war-induced poverty, gum arabic is offering drought-stricken Chad's rural poor a lifeline to the production plants of the world's food and beverage giants.
The name gum arabic may mean little to most people but the sticky acacia tree sap balls are a valued commodity in companies as diverse as Coca Cola Co, drug manufacturer Hoechst and bubble gum factories around the globe.
For impoverished sub-Saharan states producing the bulk of world demand, gum arabic simply means export currency.
"Gum arabic is one of nature's best emulsifiers but the industry has suffered from low prices in recent years," a senior U.N. Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) official said.
"But with synthetic food-substitutes losing favour prices could move up again as quality is improved," FAO's programme director Mahamat Ali Hassam told Reuters in the capital N'Djamena.
Soft drinks makers now consume 30 percent of world output but it is also used in sweets such as pastilles and chewing gum. The food industry uses it as a stabiliser and a preservative.
Chad, neighbour of the world's largest gum arabic producer, Sudan, is planning a quality blitz to win markets after years of falling yields and bloody turf disputes between foraging nomads and commercial farmers.
"About 70-80 percent of world output (about 35,000 tonnes) is African with Sudan producing 25,000 to 30,000 tonnes," said FAO Chad director Pierre Gence. "But Chad has the potential to match Sudan's output."
The FAO and the French aid agency Caisse Francaise de Developpement (CFD) are both working on projects to propel Chad's output to 30,000 tonnes from around 3,000 tonnes today.
Some experts say Chad has the capacity to produce 160,000 tonnes a year but that world demand would have to increase dramatically to accomodate that.
Gum arabic has a history dating back to ancient times. Arab traders brought it north from Africa in caravans to Middle Ages Europe and the Middle East along with gold, ivory and slaves.
It is also highly prized as a soluble food fibre because, unlike other strong vegetable emulsifiers with thickening and gelling qualities, it can be used in foods and beverages without altering texture.
It is used in everything from indelible ink for Chad's Koranic schools to textile dyes, glues, pastilles, perfumes and pharmaceutical products.
Despite traces of arsenic it is also nutritious, with 90 percent sugar and 2.5 percent each of fat and protein in addition to copper, calcium, sodium and magnesium.
Hungry nomads pluck gum arabic as they pass with grazing goats and cattle.
But state land rights for Chad's 25,000 producers are poorly defined. "People get killed over this," said one French worker.
"Our studies aim to entirely review and reform the whole sector so everyone's interests are respected and output can grow," said a spokesman for the French CFD development agency.
Trees take five years to mature yielding about 150 grams in each of two main harvests between November and March.
"Some super-trees yield eight kg per harvest so we are trying to find out their genetic code and plant more," said the FAO's Mahamat Ali.
Gum arabic is dried from squash-ball sized yellow blobs of sap into quartz-like chunks and split into top grade Kitir followed by Tarlah grades before it enters a highly secretive marketing chain in 2.5 kg Corlo lots.
Marketing data is kept secret.
Commercial planting has not got underway but existing trees have suffered from 20 years of drought. Rains of 300-500 mm are needed whereas some areas are only forecast to get little over 100 mm in 1997. Chad has already appealed for food aid.
Chad's four-year "Gum Arabic Project" to 1999 seeks to improve knowledge of the sector and its practices -- from commercial tree bleeding, tooling, drying, sorting, stocking, transporting to dealing along the murky marketing chain.
The FAO's two-year $285,000 project up to 1997 on inventory assessment, mapping, training and standards completes the picture of sectoral reform.
Neighbouring countries are also planning more output, from Senegal, Burkina Faso, and across the arid Sahel desert fringe to strife-torn Central African Republic.
Nigeria is already second only to Sudan in terms of production. India is the main producer outside Africa.
Demands for commodity auction rule changes to stop overbidding for cocoa export contracts will dominate talks in Abidjan next week on progress with Ivorian agriculture reforms, donor and industry delegates say.
"We are now ready to revisit the issue and the possibility of amending rules," a World Bank official told Reuters.
Ivory Coast's Consultative Committee, set up in October to review progress on a World Bank Agricultural Sector Adjustment Credit (ASAC) timetable, meets in Abidjan on February 5-7.
A clear agenda was expected to emerge after intitial meetings between the Ivorian government, industry and international trade officials.
Exporters want immediate changes to the auction, which is aimed at ensuring price competition and market transparency.
"Exporters have to pay too much, sell at a loss and get into (contract) positions they don't really want," one told Reuters.
The World Bank sponsored the auction as part of a $150 million ASAC loan dating back to 1994 on condition that rules and penalties were applied.
"The problem is that the Caistab (Caisse de Stabilisation marketing board) has not given us sales data since September," said one bank official.
Contract allocation was previously handled by the Caistab as a state commodity marketing monopoly.
Donors in September agreed to two modifications but said initial overbidding and concentration of export rights in a few hands had waned since the system was put in place in May 1996.
"We cannot wait until next year (Oct-Sept 1997/98) for changes," one exporter told Reuters. "Two thirds of each year is sold forward so new rules would not bite until 1999."
"Support for the system is disappearing, especially for physicals traders," another said. "There's a lot of forward buying for 1997/98 to ensure smooth debloquage."
Ivorian ministry officials along with International Cocoa Organization, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, European Union, industry and trading representatives will attend talks.
"The market has certainly fallen below the price of some people's contracts," said one exporter. Auction rules were partly the problem but recent low world demand and price could also mean some would hold on to stocks for a March premium.
Warehouses at Ivorian ports are full to normally operating capacity estimated to be at least 380,000 tonnes.
There is also discord over auction penalty rules.
"Penalties are not being applied so the system is really not working," one European-based buyer told Reuters.
Exporters say penalties are unclear. "The rules are too blurred and are being applied when they shouldn't," said one.
Export contracts are auctioned in two daily sessions but exporters are banned for five sessions if they fail to put up a bank guarantee of 25 CFA per kilo within three days of bid confirmation by the Caistab.
"We are still in disageement with the Caistab about the levels of interest rates," said one exporter. Before the reforms, the Caistab put up guarantees on behalf of exporters.
The World Bank in late 1996 agreed to a proposal for an 85-15 percent split between sales to local exporters and by the Caistab directly to international traders.
"If international traders' bids do not at least match the best local exporters' bid they should not be allowed to buy," said one exporter.
The World Bank has not agreed to parts of a GEPEX exporters' forum proposition to spread contracts more widely, between five highest bidders in each session.
"We have agreed the principal of differentiated prices and the 85-15 rule but not the five bidders proposal," said a World Bank official.
The World Bank wants bidders held to the price they bid, rather than winning contracts but at the second highest bid price -- a rule which it says encourages overbidding.
($1=551 CFA francs)
-- Abidjan newsroom + 225 21 90 90
African coffee producers will meet before the end of February to discuss implementation of world export cuts set in Brazil on January 23, Ivory Coast's commodities minister Guy-Alain Gauze told a news conference on Thursday.
"A meeting will be held by the end of February," said Gauze who is also chairman of the Interafrican Coffee Organisation (IACO) producer group.
African and Asian states agreed at the end of emergency talks of the Association of Coffee producing Countries (ACPC) in Rio de Janeiro on Janaury 23 to cut robusta exports by one million 60-kg bags between January and June 1997.
A meeting in Bali on February 6 on sharing out the export cuts between the two regions would follow 10 days of informal discussions since January 23, an ICO spokesman told Reuters.
"We are satisfied by the results at Rio and the idea now is to put together control and verification mechanisms to ensure measures succeed," said OIC chief economist Donald Kaberuka.
Gauze did not specify the basis on which export curbs would be distributed between Asian and African regions, or between individual countries.
Arabica producers at the Rio talks also agreed to cut their output by a total of 300,000 (18,000 tonnes).
African producers had complained that previous export restraints had been ineffective in shoring up sagging coffee prices in late 1996, calling on non-member producers to join the ACPC.
((--Abidjan newsroom + 225 21 90 90))
Ivory Coast's 1996/97 coffee is likely to be well up on last season but rising volumes are bringing quality problems, regional buyers and exporters' agents said.
They expect coffee marketing, sluggish for the time of year, to pick up in February.
"There's a lot of coffee about but quality is poor," said one buyer based in the Man region. "We could see well over 230,000 tonnes but exporters have bought little so far and made large quality adjustments."
Port forwarding agents said they had noted no major quality problems with coffee received for export. One quality inspector suggested that as little as 150,000 tonnes could be shipped out this season.
Ivory Coast opened its 1996/97 coffee season late on November 14 amid plummeting prices, and forecast output at 230,000 tonnes against 180,000 last year.
Farmgate prices were cut by 200 CFA to 500 CFA a kilo.
"Farmers have been waiting for a price rise hoping it will be a sellers' market," said one buyer. "Little care has been taken over sorting as farmers have less time, but exporters want better quality than last year."
Farmers face a higher than normal January cocoa harvest as well.
"This season will be twice a long as usual," said one buyer north of San Pedro, commenting on the slow start.
"We should be busy into April," said a buyer around Soubre.
Buyers expected to be at their busiest in February and March with port forwarders slating peak arrivals in April and May.
Large amounts of coffee could be seen along roadsides around buyers' stores this week with stocks said to be rising.
Buyers in most regions pointed to high percentages of black beans, fragments and bean husks.
"Humidity is around 16 percent," said one buyer in San Pedro, against a 13 percent export standard. "Exporters are rejecting around 10 percent even after sorting," he added.
One buyer in Sassandra in the south said some farmers were delivering sacks with 50 percent of problem beans.
Quality is widely seen as better in more productive northern areas around Man, where weather had been more favourable.
"Farmers are only now getting the message about quality but we have been buying since November," said the manager of a new buying unit in Man opened by a processor.
The unit was advertising 30 CFA above guideline prices for top grades but paid 477 CFA for lower grades. Margins of up to two percent for quality variation applied within each grade.
About one thousand tonnes had been bought by the end of January. Around 420 tonnes had left for Abidjan, with the rest, including 299 tonnes of low grade stocks, in Man warehouses.
Other buyers in the Man area, which is expected to produce 30 percent (corrects from 80 percent) of Ivory Coast's coffee, said they could not match the prices paid by processors.
"They can buy directly and save on transport and lower middleman charges," said one. Farmers had got into the habit of not sorting coffee in the past two years, he added.
Banks have been reluctant to fund exporters' buying operations out of concern that the Caistab would not pay up price support to its clients.
Buyers said some large exporters had not bought any crop.
A French coffee scientist based in Man said coffee bush flowering was good in many areas but dry Harmattan conditions could kill new fruits if rain did not fall.
-- Abidjan newsroom + 225 21 90 90
Ivory Coast's 1996/97 cocoa crop is likely to top one million tonnes after good January harvests and abundant flowering for the mid-crop (April-Sept), crop analysts and buyers say.
"The total crop will be at least one million tonnes," said one crop analyst returning from an upcountry tour of cocoa farms. "The flowers and cherelles (early pods) are there and with a little more rain we could see well over a million."
One source estimated arrivals by January 27 at over 750,000 tonnes. Industry estimates of arrivals up to January 20 from October 1, were in the 710,000 to 720,000-tonne range. This compares with around 800,000 in the previous season.
Attention is now focused on rainfall figures and pod survival rates in coming weeks for a firmer indication of midcrop tonnage.
Ivory Coast posted a record 1.2 million tonnes crop in 1995/96 after an unexpectedly strong 200,000 tonne mid-crop and has forecast 950,000 tonnes for 1996/97.
Crop analysts said pod loads were heaviest in younger hybrid tree farms in southwestern areas where rainfall had also been more favourable for late main crop and mid-crop development.
"Canopies are in reasonable shape and there are plenty of one to four inch cherelles and pods," said one analyst.
Farms north of San Pedro seen by Reuters still bore noticeable late main crop pod loads but older trees, around Daloa and Gagnoa, generally had few flowers and pods.
Upcountry buyers' stores were surrounded by large amounts of drying January cocoa, with more arriving from village farms.
"Cocoa is coming out fast. Farmers have no incentive to stock so we are seeing fresh crop," said one store owner in Meadji. "Exporters are not buying but we expect things to get (cocoa) moving again in February and March." Stocks would rise in some areas for a short period, he added.
"January has been better than last year," said one buyer at in Issia. "Our November estimates were too low." He and others agreed that February and March harvests would be down on 1995/96.
Buyers around Gagnoa and Daloa said most main crop pods had been harvested by mid-January but large amounts of cocoa still up-country would not be seen at ports until mid-February.
Harmattan wind conditions had returned to cocoa areas a week ago making drying of cocoa easier, but farmers said they expected rains to return after a brief wave of showers in mid-January.
A new manager at Ivory Coast's largest plantation near Gagnoa said care of trees would be more determinant for pod and flower survival rates away from hybrid areas.
"Farmers have not kept up maintenance and canopy trimming around here and the results are clear," he said.
He pointed to plantation trees at one side of a bush track with late main crop pods, and plenty of cherelles and flowers.
On the other side of the track, more densely planted and villagers' untrimmed trees on similar soil were largely bare.
Exporters' agents and buyers say cocoa purchasing has dropped off now that Ivory Coast's warehouses are full.
Shipments remain low on weak overseas demand.
"There are no shipments so exporters have cut purchasing," said one exporter. "At San Pedro, arrivals are coming in at 10,000 tonnes a week compared to 30,000 in December."
Exporters said port stocks estimated at upwards of 380,000 tonnes would shrink in February and especially March when they expect export contract deadlines to boost shipment levels.
Cocoa humidity levels of 6-8 percent were being recorded upcountry. Buyers said they would mix new arrivals with 8-10 percent cocoa stored in San Pedro stores waiting for an upswing in demand. Only 15 exporters out of 44 were actively purchasing, one said.
Shipping forwarders at San Pedro said empty warehouse space would rise from February. "Contracts will pick up next month but March will be a boom (for shipments)."
-- Abidjan newsroom + 225 21 90 90
Port arrivals of 1996/97 Ivorian cocoa ranged between 745-755,000 tonnes by January 27 compared to 800,000 tonnes in 1995/96 as exporters cut up-country buying for lack of storage space, industry sources and exporters say.
"There's cocoa all over the place," said one Abidjan exporter. "I have trucks waiting to unload but no space or pallets until I ship 5,000 tonnes next week," he added.
Crop analysts returning from upcountry reported heavy pod loads in southwestern Ivorian hybrid plantations. Upcountry store managers told Reuters their stocks would rise into February.
All eyes are focused on weather data as favourable showers before April could swell mid crop cocoa volumes.
"The trees need about 10 mm a week between now and then," said one plantation owner, giving a rough mid-crop forecast of 150,000-175,000 tonnes. "That of course depends on rain."
Others put the figure at over 100,000 tonnes, with one local crop forecaster more bullish at 200,000 tonnes. Ivory Coast notched up a record 1.2 million tonnes crop in 1995/96 after an unexpectedly strong 200,000 tonne mid-crop. The government has forecast 950,000 tonnes for 1996/97.
This season's arrivals were expected to be more strung out than last season's.
One crop analyst said,"When arrivals figures pick up again and reflect what is out there arrivals could be closer to a million before the mid crop starts."
His estimate was higher than most others.
Exporters in Ivory Coast's two main ports are battling to find warehouse space with many cutting purchasing until shipments leave.
A late February surge is expected at San Pedro.
"Everything will be off the trees by the end of February so a wave of cocoa will leave Ivory Coast against March contracts," said the Abidjan exporter. "San Pedro has been very busy."
Port forwarders and inspectors reported improving bean quality with grain sizes below 100 beans per 100 grammes. Bean humidity levels had dropped to 6-8 percent from 8-10 percent in December and early January.
Export standard is 105 beans and under per 100 grammes and eight percent and under for humidity.
San Pedro exporter Jean-Abile Gal (JAG) has reported two drying plant fires.
Full warehouses were surrounded by drying beans and lines of palleted cocoa fresh from trucks.
A JAG cocoa and coffee plantation manager said a dryer might be sent down from his Gagnoa area site to speed up conditioning.
San Pedro processor SACO has full warehouses and more cocoa under awnings at the front of its plant.
"January is definitely busier than last year but I don't have the figures immediately to hand," said one exporter. Warehouse space at San Pedro is set to rise from 1998 with forwarders SAGA building a 12,000 tonne capacity shed and an Ivorian maritime firm, SIVOM, planning another, smaller unit.
Bulk shipments loading improvements are also set to improve evacuation of cocoa from the port with forwarder SAGA planning to raise loading rates from 40 to 100 tonnes an hour.
One bulk ship, Pantelis K, left Ivory Coast last week with 7,000 tonnes.
Industry sources said upcountry buyers were transporting cocoa to port in 40 tonne loads on trucks designed for 23 tonnes.
Tilting and bent trailers, some being repaired along roadsides, were making their way to port through numerous police and army checkpoints.
-- Abidjan newsroom + 225 21 90 90
French chocolate manufacturer Cantalou will sign a deal by 1998 on building a cocoa processing plant in Ivory Coast, a Cantalou official said on Monday.
"There will be a signature by the end of this year," public relations manager Catherine Poirier told Reuters by telephone.
Cantalou said investment plans had not been finalised despite recent reports that the Perpignan-based manufacturer of "Cemoi" brands was going ahead with plans.
But Poirier added that plans were solid and very likely to be confirmed in coming months.
Speculation about new market entrants had already risen following a decision by Cargill to open an office in Abidjan in late 1996 to explore processing and other options.
Cargill's new Ivory Coast-based representative has already begun negotiations on setting up a processing plant with decisions expected from March, industry sources close to the discussions told Reuters recently.
Talk of new entrants to Ivory Coast's expanding local processing industry intensified in December after an official visit to Ivory Coast by Cantalou representatives in late 1996. Officials from Cantalou, which has European turnover of 2.9 billion French francs and owns 15 other plants, discussed setting up a 160 million French franc cocoa processing plant.
Cantalou's plans for a 60,000 tonne per year capacity processing plant resurfaced last week in the French business daily La Tribune Defosses but Poirier, quoted in the report, told Reuters plans had still not been finalised.
Other aspiring processors are also still in discussion stages.
Ivorian exporter SICC in December outlined to Reuters its own plans for processing up to 50,000 tonnes a year of cocoa. Plans for a $2 million investment were expected to be finalised in early 1997 after talks with potential partners.
SICC, which also has shipping plans, expects to handle a total of 200,000 tonnes of cocoa exports in 1996/97 for clients including Cargill's Netherlands processing subsidiary Gherkens.
Other firms are also said to be in discussions about starting processing. More are waiting on the sidelines.
"We badly want to get into processing," a manager for British development firm Commonwealth Development Corp told Reuters last week.
Cocoa processing in Ivory Coast is dominated by Abidjan-based processor UNICAO and rival Callebaut-Barry. Factory bean processing capacity stands at 180,000 tonnes but Ivory Coast aims to add more value to exports by raising this to 50 percent of annual output - which varies widely each year.
Local industry sources had expected Cargill or Dutch group Cacao De Zaan to buy into UNICAO in December. But minority 30 percent shareholder U.S-based W.R. Grace then sold its stake in UNICAO's parent, SIFCA, to rival Archer Daniels Midland (ADM).
A UNICAO spokesman said plans to add 21,500 tonnes of processing capacity to take production potential to 86,000 tonnes by late 1997 were unchanged by the deal.
"They (ADM) have still not visited companies with a shareholding (in UNICAO)," UNICAO factory production director Kanga N'Ze told Reuters on Monday. "There has been no contact."
UNICAO's only main rival Callebaut-Barry has three plants grinding up to 80,000 tonnes of beans a year.
Ivory Coast posted a record 1.2 million tonne crop in 1995/96 but has forecast closer to a million tonnes for 1996/97. It expects cheaper energy from offshore gas to encourage investment in cocoa processing but critics have said investors are more interested in winning short-term government incentives gains than long-term commitment.
-- Abidjan newsroom + 225 21 90 90
Ivory Coast opened three days of cocoa sector reform talks on Wednesday aimed at fine-tuning donor-sponsored liberalisation policies, with bean quality high on the agenda.
"Liberalisation is about reducing the role of the state. We need less state but a better state," said Philippe Mian, president of Ivory Coast's Consultative Committee, which is hosting the talks which end on Friday.
Dutch Cocoa Association president Louis Bensdorp told Reuters two issues would dominate the talks.
"The main issues are the quality of the cocoa and the assurance of contracts," he said before going into talks.
Ivory Coast's Consultative Committee, grouping Ivorian officials, loan donors and international cocoa industry bodies, was set up in October under the terms of a World Bank Agricultural Sector Adjustment Credit (ASAC).
Ivory Coast has liberalised internal and some external cocoa marketing functions since 1990 but there have been industry concerns over cocoa quality and the functioning of a new commodities auction system in place since May 1996.
Other agenda items include an overall review of reforms, cocoa quality issues, local processing of cocoa and policy revision recommendations.
Ivory Coast's commodities minister, Guy-Alain Gauze, said reform revisions would help Ivory Coast's competitiveness.
"A problem remains with importers about quality," Gauze told reporters before going into the private talks.
"The proposals forming part of the sector reforms deal with quality and security of supplies for European and American importers," he added, referring to complaints by exporters that some firms were overbidding on the auction system to win contracts.
Revisions to the auction system would be discussed but were not officially on the agenda, Mian told Reuters.
"Nothing is perfect and the auction system could well have weak points which could be corrected and for which proposals could be made," he said during a midday break in talks.
Further cuts in the role of the Caistab marketing board would also be discussed, he added.
Dutch Cocoa Association president Bensdorp said industry would argue for changes to the auction system and seek better quality controls.
"What we do not like is the 85 to 15 percent rule as there is too little chance for foreign companies to buy cocoa directly," he added.
Under auction rules 85 percent of Ivorian cocoa export rights are auctioned to local exporters, with the remaining 15 percent reserved by the Caistab for direct sale to traders abroad.
"The problem is that, of the 15 percent, 10 percent is sold to Phibro so only five percent is available for the rest of international trade," he added.
U.S.-based trader Phibro has a long-standing cocoa contract with the Caisab which is due to expire this year.
Bensdorp also referred to concerns over cocoa quality.
"Usually we see a deterioration of quality after the main months, in fact about now. The main problem is a lack of proper quality checks," he said.
World Bank, International Monetary Fund, European Union, International Cocoa Organization, France's development agency and Ivorian officials will issue their findings on Friday. -- Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
Europe's cocoa industry will shortly issue a draft contract document for increasingly popular loose-bean bulk cocoa shipment techniques, according to the head of the Dutch cocoa industry.
"We will put forward very shortly Netherlands Cocoa Association ideas on a bulk contract," Association Managing Director Louis Bensdorp told Reuters on the sidelines of a cocoa conference in Ivory Coast which began on Wednesday.
"We are in discussions with the AFCC (the French cocoa and coffee industry body) and the Cocoa Association of London," said Bensdorp. "It (bulk) requires changes in the contract conditions. We are thinking about how to write a new bulk cocoa contract for mega-bulk." he added. The contract would be on cost, insurance and freight (CIF) terms.
Mega-bulk, an industry term for the recent trend of loading cocoa ships with loose beans rather than 60 kilo jute bag-loads, gained favour after trial shipments from the Ivory Coast in 1996.
Another bulk technique involves pouring beans into containers packed with drying agents to prevent water condensation damage as ships steam from tropical origin to consumer country climates.
"It has revolutionised the industry," Bensdorp told Reuters. "We will receive 250,000 tonnes to 300,000 tonnes of cocoa at Amsterdam this year but next year we expect 350,000," he added. Amsterdam is Europe's cocoa processing hub.
Labour and time savings, as well as better quality, favoured the growth of bulk techniques.
"There is a struggle to keep costs down and bulk means everything is cheaper," said Bensdorp. Quality was better because of tighter origin port quality checks than for bagged cargo and selection of quality ships, he added.
One problem was that bulk ships could not get close enough to some Amsterdam receivers unloading facilities, meaning costly road transport by container trucks.
"I think containers are an intermediate step," said Bensdorp. "In future it will be done by transhipment to barges," he told Reuters at cocoa sector reform talks ending on Friday.
Bensdorp said large Amsterdam-based industry processors, including Cargill subsidiary Gherkens and Dutch processor Cacao de Zaan, still dominated demand for bulk.
"Soon you will see more bulk going into Hamburg and Hull " said Bensdorp. British trader E D and F Man has a new processing plant in Hull.
Bulk cocoa is not tenderable on London's LIFFE terminal market.
"It is useless to set up a separate exchange in Amsterdam so we have to find a way of doing it through LIFFE," said Bensdorp.
Cocoa exporters and receivers in Ivory Coast have put in place bulk loading facilities at both Abidjan, and the second Ivorian port, San Pedro port.
Ivory Coast's largest cargo forwarder, SAGA, told Reuters it plans raise bulk loading rates from 40 tonnes an hour to 100 tonnes to match rising demand for the technique.
Local exporters and European industry officials expect Ivory Coast to ship 270,000 tonnes in bulk in the 1996/97 (Oct-Sept) season, mainly to Amsterdam. West African shipments could reach well over 300,000 tonnes.
Ivory Coast exported aboput 120,000 tonnes of bulk cocoa in its record 1.2 million tonne output 1995/96 season.
-- Abidjan newsroom + 225 21 90 90
Delegates to Ivory Coast's cocoa Consultative Committee focused on bean quality and marketing on Thursday, the mid-point of their review of industry reforms.
"I would prefer to get down to talking about cocoa quality and continuity of supply," Cacao Barry managing director Alain Leblond said before the second day of the talks, which end on Friday.
Ivory Coast's Consultative Committee, a tripartite group of Ivorian, industry and donor officials, was set up in 1996 to monitor cocoa sector reforms since 1990.
After opening the talks on Wednesday, International Cocoa Organization Chief Executive Edouard Kouame said changes must benefit farmers and other local players.
"At the same time the legitimate interests of others in the sector must be safeguarded," he added, referring to foreign traders, cocoa butter manufacturers, and chocolate and confectionary industries.
An electronic export contract auction set up in May 1996 to increase market transparency is widely seen as encouraging overbidding and concentrating export contracts in a few hands.
Local exporters, allocated 85 percent of contracts, and foreign traders, allocated 15 percent, have complained they cannot win export contracts at favourable prices.
"The question needs to be asked how some people can bid as much as they have (been bidding)," Cocoa Association of London Chief Executive Philip Sigley told Reuters.
Industry concerns have been voiced about quality since the state marketing monopoly was ended.
"Quality has to do with liberalisation and the auction system," Netherlands Cocoa Association Managing Director Louis Bensdorp told Reuters. "The lack of quality checks is the major problem. That and the second thing, the education of farmers."
Industry watchers are wondering whether strong arrivals so far in 1996/97 means that output will rival the 1995/96 (Oct-Sept) record of 1.2 million tonnes.
"There is a very good crop coming in which suggests that last year was not a fluke of nature," said Bensdorp.
Commodities Minister Guy-Alain Gauze declined to confirm whether buoyant cocoa arrivals would mean an adjustment of the Caistab state marketing board's 1996/97 production forecast of 950,000 tonnes. Industry forecasts are increasingly putting total output at more than one million tonnes.
Industry delegates said mid-crop forecasts for April to September had not yet been finalised.
"It is still too early to talk about the mid-crop but it tends to be bigger and bigger," said Bensdorp.
Ivory Coast wants to process 50 percent of its output by 2000 to shore up world prices and add value the cocoa sector's output.
At least two cocoa processors have expressed interest in building factories in Ivory Coast.
-- Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
Ivory Coast must boost quality controls, improve farmer training and market different grades of cocoa separately, to retain its quality image, Netherlands Cocoa Association (NCV) head Louis Bensdorp said on Friday.
"Ivory Coast produces extremely good cocoa but somewhere along the line the bad 10 percent is bringing down the quality of the rest," NCV Managing Director Bensdorp told Reuters in an interview.
"Quality is the name of the game but it is easily lost."
Amsterdam, Europe's cocoa processing hub, imports cocoa mainly from Ivory Coast and increasingly in bulk form.
Bensdorp was speaking as Ivorian Consultative Committee cocoa sector reform talks continued. Cocoa quality and teething problems with a new export contract auction system have topped the agenda.
"There is a total lack of quality control," Bensdorp said, outlining three corrective measures he put before International Cocoa Organization, industry, donor and Ivorian government committee delegates.
He cited an urgent need for quality checks at all stages of the marketing chain and an increased role for farmers' cooperatives in training and quality checks.
"The third quality issue is what I call government interference," said Bensdorp. "The government has in the past said the mid-crop (April-Sept) would be kept off the market. In practice that means it is kept in upcountry stores."
Poor storage meant a risk of middlemen mixing deteriorated cocoa and smaller beans usually seen in midcrops with the larger main crop (Oct-Mar) beans preferred by industry for its higher fat content.
"About 15 to 17 percent of chocolate is cocoa butter so it is very important for the shelf life of products," Bensdorp said, adding that long storage and poor quality bean pushed free fatty acid levels above the European legal food standard of 1.75 percent.
"There is no specific trade condition on free fatty acids so we as an industry are thinking about what to do with existing cocoa bean contracts (to change that)," he said.
"That does not necessarily mean a free fatty acid clause but we need better checks on quality than we have today," he added.
"Good cocoa should be separated from bad cocoa and sold separately. There is a market for everything."
Ivory Coast has in the past announced it would withold mid-crop cocoa and process it at home to add value to its cocoa exports.
"Usually it is mixed in with main crop cocoa," said Bensdorp. He said poor quality at the end of the 1995/96 season had partly been due to a flow of cocoa from farmers in the southwest who were using a new hybrid tree but who lack the expertise of farmers in the less productive but long-standing eastern plantations.
Bensdorp said buyers of bulk cocoa, increasingly favoured by some processors over cocoa in jute bags, had put in place their own origin port quality checks. Most of these buyers were Dutch.
Consultative Committee president Philippe Mian, technical advisor to Ivorian Prime Minister Daniel Kablan Ducan, told Reuters more checks from village level downwards were needed.
"The only administrative control is at the port of loading," he said. "We are now preoccupied with quality and there have been discussions with who should be responsible for contracts, the industry or the state."
Other delegates feared that cocoa in Ivory Coast's full-to-capacity warehouses could deteriorate if not shipped by March.
Stocks have risen as exporters who bid too high for export contracts wait for better prices.
"I do not see the auction as the cause of quality problem but the rules have been discussed," said Bensdorp.
Ivory Coast's Caistab marketing board has pulled back from a monopoly internal and external marketing role and closed upcountry buying centres and quality checkpoints.
Export contracts are now allocated by auction as part of a donor-sponsored market liberalisation policy.
--Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
African robusta producers will meet discuss to export limit quotas on February 26-27 after a January world agreement in Rio de Janeiro to shore up prices, Ivory Coast's Commodities Minister told Reuters on Friday.
Gauze, who is also chairman of the Interafrican Coffee Organisation, gave no venue details but said African robusta exporters would afterwards seek to meet other producers.
"There will be a meeting to decide how to divide export limits between African producers," said Gauze. "The meeting will be for two days, on February 26 and February 27," he added.
"We will then call on other producers for a meeting," he said without giving agenda details.
Gauze on February 5 called off talks in Bali with Asian robusta producers.
The world Association of Coffee Producing Countries (ACPC) decided on January 23 to cut robusta exports by one million bags (60 kg) after low prices seen in late 1996.
The limitation was expected to be shared between African and Asian producers.
"The talks have been postponed," Gauze said after returning to Ivory Coast to attend cocoa sector reform with International Cocoa Organisation and donor officials.
Indonesian officials told Reuters export cut sharing between Africa and Asia had not been discussed as the Bali meeting.
Gauze said African producers would discuss how to divide Africa's export limitation share, which he said was 850,000 bags, between exporting countries.
IACO chief economist this week delined to comment on African sharing arrangements saying the decision was an internal IACO matter.
Indonesia has decided to reduce its exports by 150,000 bags in the January to June 1997 period covered by the volutary export restraint.
ACPC members are concerned that rising production from non-ACPC member such as Vietnam will undermine their own export restraint policy.
Indonesia's ACPC representative Paian Nainggolan said informal discussions had taken place after Gauze cancelled his trip. No ACPC export cut sharing cut talks took place, he said.
Ivory Coast, Africa's largest exporter, expects to produce 230,000 tonnes in 1996/97 but local quality inspectors say quality problems mean not all of it will be exportable.
--Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
Ivory Coast will only market its midcrop cocoa (April-Sept) if world price levels are right, Ivory Coast Commodities Minister Guy-Alain Gauze said on Friday after a three-day cocoa sector review.
"We will market the midcrop if prices are right," he told Reuters at the end of a Consultative Committee cocoa review with International Cocoa Organisation, industry, donor and Ivorian officials.  
Cocoa stocks around Ivorian ports in January filled warehouses to a capacity estimated by trade sources to be close to 400,000 tonnes.
Cocoa futures in London LIFFE terminal market trading slumped to 18-month lows on February 6. May contracts were trading at 871 stg but by Friday's close had edged up to 886 stg after an afternoon high of 893 stg.
Traders noted slowing origin selling activity.
Ivory Coast's midcrop is usually of poorer quality than main crop cocoa, tempting some buyers to mix it in with main crop cocoa to get a better price. Industry buyers say this undermines quality.
The meeting of Ivory Coast's cocoa Consultative Committee reviewed sector reforms ranging from quality, export contract auction rules, security of supply for buyers and farmgate prices paid to farmers.
Industry delegates said they wanted better quality controls put in place after market liberalisation, separate marketing of good and bad grades of cocoa and rules to prevent overbidding at auctioning of export contracts.
Ivory Coast aims by the year 2000 to process 50 percent of an annual cocoa output at home and wants to stabilise its production at 900,000 tonnes.
Midcrop forecasts for 1996/97 are still not clear as flower survival rates after dry weather have not been assessed.
Pod counters said initial prospects seemed good after early pod setting on hybrid trees in south-west Ivorian plantations around San Pedro.
Ivory Coast produced an unexpectedly large 200,000 tonne midcrop in a record 1995/96 season of 1.2 million tonnes.
"It would be unwise for the government to interfere in a crop of this size," said one industry delegate. "The government has said in the past it would withold midcrop and has then used it."
-- Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90 (c) Reuters Limited 1997
