New Corp. Ltd. said Tuesday that its Fox News division will file suit Wednesday in U.S. District Court here against Time Warner Inc., Turner Broadcasting System Inc. and its Chairman Ted Turner, alleging antitrust violations.
News Corp., which is led by media mogul Rupert Murdoch, said the suit will allege that an antitrust conspiracy to block Fox News Channel in New York City has taken place prior to the still-to-be consummated merger.
"The suit will allege that the conspiracy has taken place prior to the still-to-be-consummated merger," Arthur Siskind, News Corp. Group General Counsel, said in a brief statement. "The suit also charges Time Warner with breach of contract and fraud in reneging on its agreement to carry Fox News in New York City."
Locked in a bitter campaign to win New York channel space for its Fox News service, News Corp. on Monday urged city officials to void cable-TV franchises with Time Warner Inc.
News Corp. executives told city officials at a hearing that the pending merger of Time Warner and Turner constituted a change of control of Time Warner's cable systems in New York City and allowed early rebidding for the valuable franchises.
Time Warner holds city cable-television franchises serving 1.2 millions New Yorkers that are due to expire in 1998.
Time Warner, which denies the merger constitutes a change in management control, has refused to carry the 24-hour Fox News service and instead carries two Cable News Network services owned by Turner, and MSNBC, a joint venture of General Electric Co.'s NBC and Microsoft Corp.
Turner and Time Warner are expected to merge on Thursday, creating the world's biggest media organisation. Turner Chairman Ted Turner will become vice chairman of the new company and will be the company's biggest shareholder.
Time Warner is also opposing a proposal backed by New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani that Fox News be carried on a city-owned channel known as CrossWalks.
Giulani has said that wide dissemination of Fox News throughout New York was important since it was the only all-news channel based within the city and was the source of hundreds of jobs.
The city's Franchise Concession and Review Committee is scheduled to vote Wednesday on whether or not the Turner-Time Warner deal should prompt a review of the Time Warner franchises.
Time Warner executive Richard Aurelio said Monday that 90 percent of the regulators overseeing Time Warner's cable operations, the second largest in the United States, had passed without objection on the Turner-Time Warner merger.
With the dark cloud of high raw material costs now clearing, large U.S. newspapers companies are expected to report good third-quarter earnings despite weak growth in advertising.
"I keep hearing good news out of these guys, and they're all smiling about newsprint," said Prudential Securities newspaper industry analyst James Marsh.
Newsprint for newspapers now costs an average $550 a ton, much less than the average forecast of $600 a ton at the start of 1996, he said. Per ton prices peaked at $743 last January.  
"Trends in advertising have been a little sluggish, but with lower newsprint costs, most newspapers should have a strong quarter," said newspaper industry analyst Edward Atorino at Oppenheimer &amp; Co.
Retail advertising were tepid through late summer, after rising only about one percent during the first half of the year, compared with the first six months of 1995, analysts said.
Classified advertising rose 10 percent in the first half but likely cooled in the third quarter, Atorino said.  
Times Mirror Co will enjoy an especially strong lift from newsprint savings because of its inventory accounting methods and a sharp decline in its consumption of newsprint this year after shutting two big city papers, Marsh said.
"The fall in newsprint prices coupled with ongoing cost reduction efforts will result in strong second-half earnings for newspaper publishing companies this year and provide further benefit into 1997," Atorino said in a written report.
Debt reduction, largely through rejigging its vast cable holdings, is the central task of top managers at Time Warner Inc after the $7.5 billion Turner deal, senior executives said on Wednesday.
The company, which last week took control of Turner Broadcasting System Inc, is in active discussions aimed at restructuring its troubled cable-television partnership with U S West Media Group, the executives said.
One Time Warner executive said the talks with U S West are likely to quicken and could yield a deal within months.  
"We want to delever the company, lighten up on cable, and simplify the corporate capital structure," said one executive, speaking on a promise of anonymity.
The executives echoed Ted Turner, founder of Turner Broadcasting and now vice chairman of the combined company as well as its biggest individual shareholder. He has said he wants Time Warner's $17.5 billion debt halved.
Partners since 1992, when regional phone group U S West bought 25 percent of most of Time Warner's cable systems, its film studios and the HBO pay-TV service, the two companies have recently been preoccupied with major acquisitions.  
Time Warner last week completed its takeover of Turner, a deal unsuccessfully opposed in court by U S West. And U S West is expected to close next month its $5.3 billion acqusition of Continental Cablevision, the third-ranked U.S. cable operator.
Time Warner now sees itself with the acquisition of Turner, producer of Cable News Network, The Cartoon Network and two studios, as primarily a programming group, the executives said.
Capital-intensive cable operations are less important and ripe for partial divestment, the executives said. Investment capital can be better used outside cable, the executives said.  
"We look at the opportunities and, hey, we can't do everything," one executive said.
Time Warner earlier reported very strong operational earnings from its cable operations, largely on rate increases, but the company has also committed to spending at least $4 billion to improve its systems through 2000.
The executives declined to discuss possible terms of a U S West agreement but analysts have speculated Time Warner might swap selected cable properties for U S West's equity in HBO and the studios. A key question in such a deal would be how much debt would be taken off Time Warner's books.  
Spin-off of properties is also possible, analysts have said. Time Warner is also said to be considering the sale of Castle Rock, one of the studios owned by Turner Broadcasting.
The executives said a deal with U S West was very important but failure to reach one would not stop the debt-reduction campaign.
A little-noticed deal earlier this year, in which Time Warner swapped some cable properties for a minority interest in a joint venture with Fanch Cablevision of Indiana and the Blackstone Group, could be a model for other cable transactions, the executives said.
"The objective of deleveraging is larger than U S West. The objective of lightening up on cable is larger than U S West," one of the Time Warner executives said.
Shares of Time Warner closed up 1-1/8 at 42.
-- New York Newsdesk 212-859-1713
Riding rising U.S. cable TV fees, Time Warner Inc said on Wednesday its earnings before heavy debt payments shot up 32 percent in the third quarter, compared with the same three months last year.
Covering the quarter before last Thursday's completion of its $7.5 billion acquisition of Turner Broadcasting System, the entertainment group said three hit movies, strong magazine advertising sales helped by the Olympic Games, and good HBO results lifted cash flow to $964 million.
Revenues for the three months ended Sept. 30 were $4.877 billion, up from $4.344 billion a year ago.
Last year's third-quarter cash flow, defined as earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or EBITDA, was $729 million, the company said.
Time Warner, many of whose cable TV and other businesses are co-owned with 25 percent partner U S West Inc. , reported a net loss of $167 million, or 43 cents a share, for the quarter.
Net losses in last year's quarter were $160 million, or 41 cents a share, on 1.5 million more shares outstanding.
Net interest costs were $276 million, up from $259 million in last year's third quarter. Preferred dividends rose to $76 million in the third quarter from $16 million.
Time Warner's stock showed no gain after the results but rose smartly later in the day after top executives told institutional investors that debt reduction was centre stage at the company.
The executives said Time Warner is in active discussions aimed at restructuring its troubled cable-television partnership with U S West Media Group.
One Time Warner executive said the talks with regional phone group U S West, 25 percent owner of most of Time Warner's cable systems, studios and the HBO pay-TV service, are likely to quicken and could yield a deal within months.
"We want to delever the company, lighten up on cable, and simplify the corporate capital structure," said the executive, speaking on a promise of anonymity.
The executives echoed Ted Turner, founder of Turner Broadcasting and now vice chairman of the combined company as well as its biggest individual shareholder. He has said he wants Time Warner's $17.5 billion debt halved.
Time Warner now sees itself with the acquisition of Turner, producer of Cable News Network, The Cartoon Network and two studios, as primarily a programming group, the executives said.
Capital-intensive cable operations are less important and ripe for partial divestment, the executives said. Investment capital can be better used outside cable, the executives said.
EBITDA at Time Warner's cable operations, including those shared with with U S West, rose 14 percent to $512 million, the company said in its earnings report.
Basic cable revenues rose sharply and advertising sales in cable also increased, the company said. With some 12.1 million customers, Time Warner is the nation's second-largest cable operator.
Time Warner also had three summer movies grossing more than $100 million in U.S. ticket sales -- "Twister," "Eraser" and "A Time To Kill" -- and its filmed entertainment unit had an EBITDA rise of 13 percent to $146 million.
HBO's EBITDA rose 23 percent to $91 million. Sales to subscribers to satellite-television services led HBO's strong growth, senior executives said.
The publishing unit's EBITDA was $99 million, or 15 percent more than the $86 million posted in the year-ago quarter. Sports Illustrated, which produced a daily, limited-circulation version of its weekly magazine during the Atlanta Olympics, had particularly strong advertising sales.
The recorded music unit's EBITDA rose $1 million to $143 million from last year's quarter, when the division took an $85 million charge. Small gains in foreign sales were offset by drops in U.S. music sales, the company said.
Time Warner shares rose $1.125 to $42 in New York Stock Exchange Trading.
BellSouth Corp will expand by a third its network of wireless-telephony shops in a campaign to cut the nearly $400 it spends acquiring each new customer, chief financial officer Ronald Dykes said on Thursday.
The company operates 200 or more of its own outlets selling BellSouth Mobility cellular-telephone services and finds it saves about $100 on each customer signed up by its own representatives.
"I wouldn't be surprised if the number grew by a third," Dykes told Reuters.  
BellSouth has 3.3 million U.S. cellular customers, a total rising at the rate of 31 percent a year. It also has more than one million cellular customers in 11 other nations.
Dykes said BellSouth, a leading regional telephone group, expects the share of wireless customers secured through its directly owned shops to rise but never to replace its direct-sales force or third-party vendors.
"We want to have a very broad distribution system and drive the costs down," he said.  
BellSouth also sells in select markets personal communications services (PCS), a new generation of wireless telephony which uses spectra other than the 800 megahertz reserved for cellular, but intends to keep the BellSouth Mobility brand for both PCS and cellular.
"The customer doesn't care," he said. "We are using PCS to fill out our footprint", or areas in its region where it does not have cellular rights.  
Marketing, he said, also played an important role in the 43 percent spurt in quarterly revenues from convenience telephone features BellSouth sells to traditional wired telephone customers.
Quarterly revenues for such services rose to $281 million in the third quarter, when net income rose 12.9 percent to $631 million.
Selling such services as Call Waiting, a feature which signals a customer using a telephone that a second caller is ringing, in discounted bundles or on a per-use basis had lifted sales mightily.
"Those two methods are very strong drivers of our success," Dykes said.
Per-use sales of such services totalled $53 million in the first nine months of 1996, he said.
-- New York Newsdesk 212-859-1713
Riding rising U.S. cable TV fees, Time Warner Inc said its earnings before heavy debt payments shot up 32 percent in the third quarter, compared with the same three months last year.
Covering the quarter before last Thursday's completion of its $7.5 billion acquisition of Turner Broadcasting System, the entertainment group said three hit movies, strong magazine advertising sales helped by the Olympic Games, and good HBO results lifted cash flow to $964 million.
Revenues for the three months ended Sept. 30 were $4.877 billion, up from $4.344 billion a year ago.
Last year's third-quarter cash flow, defined as earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or EBITDA, was $729 million, the company said on Wednesday.
Time Warner, many of whose cable TV and other businesses are co-owned with 25 percent partner U S West Inc. , reported a net loss of $167 million, or 43 cents a share, for the quarter.
Net losses in last year's quarter were $160 million, or 41 cents a share, on 1.5 million more shares outstanding.
Net interest costs were $276 million, up from $259 million in last year's third quarter. Preferred dividends rose to $76 million in the third quarter from $16 million.
Time Warner's stock showed no gain after the results but rose smartly later in the day after top executives told institutional investors that debt reduction was centre stage at the company.
The executives said Time Warner is in active discussions aimed at restructuring its troubled cable-television partnership with U S West Media Group.
One Time Warner executive said the talks with regional phone group U S West, 25 percent owner of most of Time Warner's cable systems, studios and the HBO pay-TV service, are likely to quicken and could yield a deal within months.
"We want to delever the company, lighten up on cable, and simplify the corporate capital structure," said the executive, speaking on a promise of anonymity.
The executives echoed Ted Turner, founder of Turner Broadcasting and now vice chairman of the combined company as well as its biggest individual shareholder. He has said he wants Time Warner's $17.5 billion debt halved.
Time Warner now sees itself with the acquisition of Turner, producer of Cable News Network, The Cartoon Network and two studios, as primarily a programming group, the executives said.
Capital-intensive cable operations are less important and ripe for partial divestment, the executives said. Investment capital can be better used outside cable, the executives said.
EBITDA at Time Warner's cable operations, including those shared with with U S West, rose 14 percent to $512 million, the company said in its earnings report.
Basic cable revenues rose sharply and advertising sales in cable also increased, the company said. With some 12.1 million customers, Time Warner is the nation's second-largest cable operator.
Time Warner also had three summer movies grossing more than $100 million in U.S. ticket sales -- "Twister," "Eraser" and "A Time To Kill".
Time Warner shares rose $1.125 to $42 in New York Stock Exchange Trading.
Silver King Communications Inc. agreed Monday to buy the Home Shopping Network (HSN) for about $1.3 billion in stock, feeding speculation that Barry Diller was getting set to launch another major television network.
Diller, who is chairman of both Silver King and Home Shopping, could be positioning his companies to compete head on with ABC, NBC, CBS and Fox, whose launch Diller spearheaded in the 1980s, industry analysts said.
The deal would reunite Silver King, which owns 12 TV stations spun off in 1992 by HSN, with its old parent.
Diller, widely known in Hollywood for leading the launch of Fox, which is owned by Rupert Murdoch's News Corp., had already announced plans to drop HSN programming from Silver King's stations and replace it with a traditional mix of locally oriented news, sports and other shows.
"We have a long agenda," Diller said in an interview. "By putting these companies under a common roof, we will get there quicker."
Diller said speculation that he would start a new national network was premature but he said cash generated by HSN would help Silver King pay for programming and other costs in developing its stations.
Diller declined to discuss details of Silver King's programming, saying plans will be unveiled in November or December. A Silver King spokesman said the programming would emphasise local news and sports and would appear in some markets starting in about a year.
Some executives have said Silver King, with stations in New York, Los Angeles, Miami and other leading markets, would initially target late-night and daytime slots with its own programmes. Start-up networks usually start building their programming with evening fare.
HSN, which pays fees to Silver King to broadcast its retailing shows, will seek to win more slots on cable systems as Silver King's stations convert to traditional television programming, an HSN spokesman said.
Silver King said the stock-swap merger was worth about $1.27 billion based on Friday's closing stock prices. The deal calls for each HSN shareholder to receive 0.45 of a share of Silver King common for each share of HSN stock owned.
"I think it's a very viable deal," said analyst Alvin Mirman of Commonwealth Associates. "Diller reduces Home Shopping's distribution costs immediately. That could be a much as $40 million a year."
Mirman said he expects Diller to establish another network once he has overhauled the Silver King stations, which together comprise the sixth largest TV company in the United States.
Diller is also buying Savoy Pictures, a money-losing studio that owns other television stations, for about $117 million in stock.
Although HSN, based in St. Petersburg, Fla., invented television shopping in the early 1980s and was once a favourite on Wall Street, it has fallen to number two behind QVC Inc. as its sales have stagnated at about $1 billion annually.
Still, its 24-hour programming reaches some 69 million households via cable television, broadcast station affiliates and satellite dish receivers.
Diller, a highly successful television programmer credited with the Fox network's racy and successful shows, is also expected to revive Home Shopping Network's fortunes, analysts said.
Under the terms of the deal, each share of HSN Class B stock, which has 10 votes per share and is held solely by Liberty Media Corp., will be converted into 0.54 of a share of Silver King Class B Stock.
Silver King said Liberty Media, in order to stay within rules on television-station ownership, will retain a 19.9 percent stake in HSN, under the 21 percent allowed by regulators. Liberty Media already owns a stake in Silver King.
Home Shopping Network stock rose 12.5 cents to $11.375 on the New York Stock Exchange and Silver King fell $1.50 to $28 on Nasdaq.
Silver King Communications Inc chairman Barry Diller said on Monday that the $1.27 billion stock-swap acqusition of Home Shopping Network would help fund Silver King's ambitious broadcasting plans.
"We have a long agenda and this helps certainly in developing the stations. We will get there quicker by combining the two companies," Diller told Reuters in a telephone interview.
Silver King agreed earlier to acquire HSN, a limping number two in U.S. TV retailing, for $1.27 billion in stock.  
The deal reunites Silver King, owner of 12 U.S. television stations spun off in 1992 by HSN, with its old parent and feeds speculation that Diller is close to launching a seventh U.S. television network.
Diller described as premature the speculation he would start a new national network, but said the cash flow from HSN would help Silver King pay for programming and other costs in developing its stations.  
Diller, a celebrated Hollywood executive credited with leading the 1980s launch of the FOX network, had already announced plans to drop HSN programming now carried on Silver King's stations in order to replace it with a traditional mix of locally oriented news, sports and other shows.
The stations in major markets such as Miami, New York and Los Angeles could attract significant audiences eagerly sought by advertisers, become much more valuable and form the nucleus of a national television network, industry analysts said.
"Silver King will use Home Shopping's cash flow. That will be the start of the benefits," Diller said.
"For Home Shopping, it adds businesses it is not now in," he said, adding the combined companies would be financially vigorous and poised to exploit new forms of electronic retailing.
"I am thrilled with the combination," Diller said.
"As to its more expansive possibilities, I believe the combination will allow the companies the very best way to pursue their very aggressive individual agendas with clarity and without conflict."
-- New York Newsdesk 212-859-1713.
Silver King Communication's $1.27 billion stock-swap acquistion of Home Shopping Network hastens Silver King's plans to become a conventional broadcast-TV powerhouse, Silver King said on Monday.
The deal re-uniting Silver King, spun off by Home Shopping five years ago, with its former parent also feeds speculation that Silver King chairman Barry Diller is closer to launching a seventh U.S. television network.
Veteran entertainment-industry executive Diller led the 1980s launch of News Corp Ltd's Fox network.  
Silver King spokesman Jason Stewart said Diller had no firm plans to launch a network and intended for now to reprogram Silver King's 12 stations carrying Home Shopping Network with conventional, locally oriented shows.
"With most stations emphasizing national and syndicated programs, there's room for local," Stewart said.
Stewart said some Silver King stations, located in top markets such as New York, Los Angeles and Miami, would be converted in about a year and others would follow.  
He declined to detail Diller's programming plans but said the stations would cover local news and sports with a format common on all Silver King stations. Some entertainment executives have speculated the Silver King stations would program daytime and late-night slots initially.
Silver King, which is paid by Home Shopping Network to broadcast its television retailing service, intends to seek cable-system carriage of Home Shopping as its stations convert to traditional television programming.
A Home Shopping spokesman declined to say whether or not the company had reached carriage deals with any cable systems.  
Diller said last spring that Silver King, which is partly owned by Tele-Communications Inc subsidiary Liberty Media, as is Home Shopping Network, intended to break away from Home Shopping but that the conversion would take two or three years.
Diller also has a stake in SF Broadcasting, owner of four stations, that could be woven into a new U.S. network.
"I think it's a very viable deal," said analyst Alvin Mirman of Commonwealth Associates. "Diller reduces Home Shopping's distribution costs immediately. That could be a much as $40 million a year."
Diller, a highly successful television programmer credited with the FOX network's racy and successful shows, is also expected to revive Home Shopping Network's fortunes. Home Shopping's sales have been flat for several years.
Home Shopping Network's shares were up 1/4 to 11-1/2, while Silver King's shares were down 1-7/8 to 27-5/8.
-- New York Newsdesk 212-859-1713.
Two leading international satellite-television groups said on Wednesday they will overcome regulatory hurdles and enter Argentina, a country already heavily penetrated by pay-television and whose satellite-TV rights are held by a smaller rival.
"We intend to be there; it's key to our strategy," said Mark Goldman, a vice president of News Corp Ltd, at a Latin American investors conference sponsored by Kagan Seminars International.  
Kagan analyst Jimena Urquijo said Nahuelsat, a smaller direct-to-home (DTH) service owned in part by Argentine investors and Daimler-Benz AG of Germany, already sells satellite-TV services in Argentina and holds exclusive satellite-TV rights for the country.
"Both will have to deal with Nahuelsat," Urquijo said, referring to Galaxy Latin America and Sky Entertainment Latin America.  
Galaxy, owned by Hughes Electronics Corp of the United States, the Cisneros Group of Venezuela, Multivision of Mexico and TVA Abril of Brazil, and Sky Entertainment have satellite-TV services in other parts of Latin America and plan to expand.  Sky Entertainment is owned by multi-national News Corp, Tele-Communications Inc of the United States, Mexico's Grupo Televisa SA de CV and TV Globo of Brazil.
Erik Moe, vice president of Galaxy Latin America, said he expected his company would eventually enter Argentina.  
"We recognize that there's a regulatory environment which does not encourage DTH," Goldman said. "We are lobbying the (Argentine) government."  Neither executive gave a target date for entering Argentina, and Nauhelsat chief executive Eckart Schober declined to answer when asked if he expected DTH rivals to appear in Argentina.
Nahuelsat already sells a stripped-down, relatively low-cost DTH service in rural areas of Argentina outside Buenos Aires, a metropolitan area with more than one-quarter of the country's pay-television subscribers and served by such cable-television giants as Tele-Communications.  
Nahuelsat tailors its services to national and regional tastes, Schober said at the Kagan conference.
Urquijo said business fundamentals in the country are also daunting for the two big DTH groups, given that 52 percent, or more than four million, of Argentina's television homes already subscribe to pay television.  Nahuelsat itself is primarily targeting Argentine regions without cable or microwave television services.
"I'm not sure there's room for three competitors," Urquijo said.
By contrast, other parts of Latin America are much more open to DTH.   Only some 13.3 percent of Latin America's 80
million television homes now take any type of pay television, a much smaller share than in western Europe or the United States, according to the Kagan organization.
Satellite-television in the United States, the most heavily penetrated pay-television market in the world, with some two thirds of homes subscribing to cable, has been a huge success in just two years.  Millions of subscribers in both cities and areas without cable have paid $500 or more for receivers during the past two years.
-- 212-859-1713
"Chainsaw Al" Albert Dunlap, the chief executive of Sunbeam Corp aiming to halve his workforce and add $1 billion in sales, ran into Wall Street skepticism.
The company's shares have been riding high, up more than 100 percent since Dunlap's appointment as Sunbeam CEO last summer, but dropped 1/2 to 25-1/4 on Tuesday after Dunlap said he would cut 6,000 jobs in restructuring the appliance group.
"He's pulled off some amazing turnarounds," said Chapman Co analyst Daniel Noll. "But I'm a little skeptical."  
"I think the stock's a little ahead of itself," Noll said.
Dunlap, author of a current best-selling book, "Mean Business: How I Save Bad Companies And Make Good Companies Great", is credited with turning around Scott Paper Co and Lily-Tulip Co. He fiercely cuts staff and lifts stock values.
In addition to the "Chainsaw Al" moniker, the 59-year-old executive has also been dubbed "Darth Vader".
On Tuesday, Dunlap said he would halve to 6,000 the worldwide staff of Sunbeam, eliminate dozens of factories, regional adminstrative offices and warehouses, and stop making more than 85 percent of Sunbeam's 11,500 products.  
He also promised to sell Sunbeam's furniture business, open fresh sales avenues such as outlet stores, strike overseas marketing alliances, and eliminate all debt by next year. The company might launch share buybacks or make acquisitions once debt is paid off, he said.
Sales will double by 1999 to $2 billion, he said.
"It will be vintage Dunlap," Dunlap said in a conference call with institutional investors and analysts.
Analysts pressed Dunlap on specifics for doubling sales and when and with whom Sunbeam would align itself.  
Dunlap declined to identify potential deal partners but said new products, including many designed for non-U.S. markets, would along with other steps yield 20 percent or better year-over-year revenue growth.
"It takes some length of faith from us," analyst Scott Grant of Oppenheimer said during the conference call.
Other analysts questioned whether Dunlap's reliance on outsourcing -- hiring other manufacturers to make Sunbeam and Oster products -- was feasible as the company will have only eight factories to make its 1,500 remaining products.
The restructuring was very ambitious, involving deeper staff cuts, consolidation and tougher goals than had been expected since Dunlap began firing Sunbeam executives last July, analysts said.
"'Chainsaw Al' is a pussycat name for you," analyst Andrew Shore of Paine Webber told Dunlap. "If you pull this off, you should be called 'Nuclear Al'."
-- New York Newsdesk 212-859-1713
Sunbeam Corp., the struggling appliance maker led by corporate turnaround specialist Albert Dunlap, said Tuesday it would cut 6,000 jobs -- half its work force -- and eliminate 87 percent of its product lines.
The drastic measures, even more severe than Wall Street had expected, were announced just four months after Dunlap -- known as "Chainsaw Al" for his deep cost-cutting at troubled companies -- became chairman.
The maker of Sunbeam and Oster appliances, patio furniture and gas grills, which just reported its first quarterly loss since 1992, said it would also reduce the number of its facilities to 14 from 53 and take a charge of $300 million for one-time costs associated with the moves.
The Fort Lauderdale, Fla.-based firm, which lost $28.7 million in the third quarter as sales fell 2 percent, did not specify when the charge would be taken.
It did say, however, that only $75 million of the charge would be in cash -- for the payment of severance and other employee costs, lease obligations and other plant costs.
Sunbeam also announced ambitious plans for the future. It said it plans to double revenues to $2 billion by 1999 and lift operating margins to 20 percent of sales from the 2.5 percent posted for the first nine months of 1996.
Sunbeam also wants its return on equity to grow to 25 percent from 1 percent in the past year.
Shrinking profit margins and high manufacturing and administrative costs have depressed the company's profits in recent years. Sunbeam earned $50.5 million in 1995, less than half its 1994 profits.
Sunbeam said it will sell or shut 39 of 53 facilities, including 18 of its 26 factories, leaving it just four factories in the United States and four overseas. In addition, warehouses will be cut to 24 from 61.
The company said it will sell several businesses, including those that make furniture, time and temperature devices, scales and decorative bedding.
Sunbeam said its remaining businesses will be centered on kitchen appliances, personal care products, health care items, outdoor cooking equipment and professional care products.
"Our goal is to essentially complete the restructuring initiatives within the next 45 days. Therefore, the company has every intention of meeting its previously stated goal of beginning 1997 as a new company," Dunlap said in a statement.
Sales will double by 1999 to $2 billion, he said.
"It will be vintage Dunlap," Dunlap said in a conference call with institutional investors and analysts.
Dunlap declined to identify potential deal partners but said new products, including many designed for non-U.S. markets, and other steps would yield 20 percent or better year-over-year revenue growth.
Dunlap, who was named chairman and chief executive officer in July, is credited with turning around Scott Paper Co., which was later sold to Kimberly-Clark. At Scott Paper, Dunlap fired 10,000 workers and sold more than $2 billion in assets.
While his turnaround campaigns have helped stockholders, they have been criticized by community activists, unions and other groups as insensitive to workers.
Within months of joining Sunbeam, Dunlap -- also nicknamed "Darth Vader" after the villain of the "Star Wars" films -- replaced several top executives and brought in people who had worked for him in the past.
Although restructuring annoucements usually boost a company's stock price, Sunbeam stock lost 75 cents to $25 in late trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
"He's pulled off some amazing turnarounds," Chapman Co. analyst Daniel Noll said of Dunlap. "But I'm a little skeptical. I think the stock's a little ahead of itself."
"'Chainsaw Al' is a pussycat name for you," analyst Andrew Shore of PaineWebber told Dunlap. "If you pull this off, you should be called 'Nuclear Al.'"
Time Warner Inc. said Wednesday it will launch its CNN/SI sports news service on Dec. 12, more than a month after the debut of another sports news television channel from rival media conglomerate Walt Disney Co.
Time Warner executives meeting reporters said CNN/SI would combine the television apparatus of the Cable News Network and the sports expertise of Sports Illustrated, a weekly sports magazine published by Time Warner since 1954.
In a bid to reach wider audiences when various all-news services are scrambling to secure channel slots on America's crowded cable-television systems, the executives said CNN would simultaneously carry a nightly sports news programme being delivered to CNN/SI subscribers. CNN reaches some 70 million U.S. homes.
General Motors Corp., LCI International and Delta Airlines were among 13 advertisers that have signed on with CNN/SI, the executives said.
ESPNEWS, majority owned by Disney, began service on Nov. 1.
Both services compete against NewSport, a 24-hour sports news service owned by General Electric Co. unit NBC, Rainbow Programming, and a subsidiary of Tele-Communications Inc.
NBC, in alliance with Microsoft Corp., last summer launched the all-news service MSNBC to compete against CNN, part of Time Warner since the October takeover of Turner Broadcasting System Inc. News Corp. also recently launched a general news TV service and is fighting in court to secure a channel slot on Time Warner's New York cable systems delivering television to 1.1 million homes and Madison Avenue.
All business news channels are also about to increase in the United States. Dow Jones &amp; Co. and ITT Corp. is scheduled to launch a business news and sports channel in New York City. NBC and Time Warner already operate all-business-news services throughout the United States.
Sunbeam Corp., the struggling appliance maker led by corporate turnaround specialist Albert Dunlap, said Tuesday it would cut 6,000 jobs -- half its work force -- and eliminate 87 percent of its product lines.
The drastic measures, even more severe than Wall Street had expected, were announced just four months after Dunlap -- known as "Chainsaw Al" for his deep cost-cutting at troubled companies -- became chairman.
The maker of Sunbeam and Oster appliances, patio furniture and gas grills, which just reported its first quarterly loss since 1992, said it would also reduce the number of its facilities to 14 from 53 and take a charge of $300 million for one-time costs associated with the moves.
The Fort Lauderdale, Fla.-based firm, which lost $28.7 million in the third quarter as sales fell 2 percent, did not specify when the charge would be taken.
It did say, however, that only $75 million of the charge would be in cash -- for the payment of severance and other employee costs, lease obligations and other plant costs.
Sunbeam also announced ambitious plans for the future. It said it plans to double revenues to $2 billion by 1999 and lift operating margins to 20 percent of sales from the 2.5 percent posted for the first nine months of 1996.
Sunbeam also wants its return on equity to grow to 25 percent from 1 percent in the past year.
Shrinking profit margins and high manufacturing and administrative costs have depressed the company's profits in recent years. Sunbeam earned $50.5 million in 1995, less than half its 1994 profits.
Sunbeam said it will sell or shut 39 of 53 facilities, including 18 of its 26 factories, leaving it just four factories in the United States and four overseas. In addition, warehouses will be cut to 24 from 61.
The company said it will sell several businesses, including those that make furniture, time and temperature devices, scales and decorative bedding.
Asked in an interview later on CNN whether Sunbeam itself is for sale, Dunlap replied, "Everything is for sale." He did not elaborate.
Sunbeam said earlier its remaining businesses will be centred on kitchen appliances, personal care products, health care items, outdoor cooking equipment and professional care products.
"Our goal is to essentially complete the restructuring initiatives within the next 45 days. Therefore, the company has every intention of meeting its previously stated goal of beginning 1997 as a new company," Dunlap said in a statement.
Sales will double by 1999 to $2 billion, he said.
"It will be vintage Dunlap," Dunlap said in a conference call with institutional investors and analysts.
Dunlap declined to identify potential deal partners but said new products, including many designed for non-U.S. markets, and other steps would yield 20 percent or better year-over-year revenue growth.
Dunlap, who was named chairman and chief executive officer in July, is credited with turning around Scott Paper Co., which was later sold to Kimberly-Clark. At Scott Paper, Dunlap fired 10,000 workers and sold more than $2 billion in assets.
While his turnaround campaigns have helped stockholders, they have been criticised by community activists, unions and other groups as insensitive to workers.
Within months of joining Sunbeam, Dunlap -- also nicknamed "Darth Vader" after the villain of the "Star Wars" films -- replaced several top executives and brought in people who had worked for him in the past.
Although restructuring annoucements usually boost a company's stock price, Sunbeam stock lost 75 cents to $25 in late trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
"He's pulled off some amazing turnarounds," Chapman Co. analyst Daniel Noll said of Dunlap. "But I'm a little sceptical. I think the stock's a little ahead of itself."
"'Chainsaw Al' is a pussycat name for you," analyst Andrew Shore of PaineWebber told Dunlap. "If you pull this off, you should be called 'Nuclear Al.'"
The head of Walt Disney Co's international television business said on Thursday talks with Latin America satellite-television companies could at any moment yield a deal on The Disney Channel.
"The talks are ongoing," Herbert Granath, chairman of Disney/International Television, told Reuters. "We would be capable of reaching a deal in Latin America very quickly."  
Granath said such a deal for carriage of a Spanish version of The Disney Channel would likely be exclusive to one of two big media consortia active in Latin American direct-to-home (DTH) television.
An international group led by DirecTV of Hughes Electronics Corp, prominent in U.S., DTH is competing with another led by News Corp Ltd in offering multi-channel television delivered by high-power satellites.
Granath declined to detail the Latin American DTH talks, other than to say they were at a stage where a deal could come together on short notice. No agreement was imminent, he said.  
Disney earlier announced a 10-year film deal with KirchGroup of Germany which includes an option to distribute a German version of The Disney Channel on Kirch's DF1 satellite-television system.
Kirch will have pay-television and subscriber-television rights to all Disney's live-action movies for a decade.
The companies declined to put a value on the Kirsch deal, but industry executives said the transaction was likely in line with other recent Hollywood deals with Kirsch valued at about $1 billion.
Disney now produces tailored versions of The Disney Channel, a family-oriented entertainment service popular in the United States which draws heavily on Disney's film library, in Taiwan, Australia and Britain. A French version is due in 1997.
"We're concentrating on The Disney Channel," Granath said.
Spain and Italy were other markets where Disney deals might come soon, Granath said.
-- New York Newsdesk 212-859-1713
Born as the world's first airborne crop-dusting service, Delta Air Lines Inc. may be on the verge of an alliance that would make it the industry's top gun.
The New York Times and Wall Street Journal, both quoting sources familiar with the discussions, reported that Delta and Continental Airlines have been talking about a merger for several months. The Times said a deal was not imminent.
Should Atlanta-based Delta merge with Continental, the new company would be the world's largest carrier.
The newspaper reports contained few financial details, but Standard and Poor's Corp. said it may change its ratings on Continental and Delta debt based on the reports of the talks.
A merger would fill gaps in each carrier's routes and create a powerhouse that would be certain to draw attention of regulators in Washington.
Both companies declined to comment on the reported talks.
Delta, the nation's No. 3 carrier, had a historic summer. Atlanta, where Delta has a major hub, hosted the Summer Olympics attended by tens of thousands who flew on the airline, which posted its best earnings for a quarter, $238 million, on revenues of $3.43 billion.
But Delta, which moved to Atlanta in 1941 and helped transform the sleepy Southern city into a business center after World War II, still faces stiff competition.
In addition to its traditional rivals such as United Airlines, the nation's largest carrier, and No. 2 American Airlines, it also faces newer, low-cost rivals such as ValuJet Inc..
In the talks with Houston-based Continental, Delta may be trying to get a headstart on another possible round of mergers in the industry. Carriers flush with cash from two years of solid earnings could seek mergers in a slow-growth business.
Delta itself has long been a buyer of rivals.
Started 72 years ago as Huff-Daland Dusters to combat the boll weevil, the company bought Chicago and Southern Airlines in 1952 and spread its routes into the South, Midwest, Texas and the Caribbean.
Nearly two decades later, in 1961, Delta moved into New England and Canada by acquiring Northeast Airlines. Its first trans-Atlantic flights, to London, began in 1978. It bought Western Air Lines in 1986.
By the late 1980s, international routes accounted for more than 10 percent of Delta's revenues and the company formed alliances with Swissair and Singapore Airlines.
In 1990, it launched a computer-reservation service, Worldspan, in a venture with Trans World Airlines and Northwest Airlines, to compete with Sabre, the dominant reservations system 84-percent owned by American Airlines parent AMR Corp. .
The following year Delta cherry-picked planes, airport gates, routes and other properties from troubled Eastern Airlines and Pan American World Airways as the economy weakened, concluding a troubled $1.2 billion purchase of Pan Am in 1991.
Like most of the industry, Delta posted losses in the four years through 1994.
VTR Galaxy Chile SA won government permission to offer direct-to-home (DTH) television and will start selling the DIRECTV service in Chile by March 31, the head of DIRECTV's Latin American operations said on Wednesday.
The approval by the Transportation and Telecommunications Ministry gives DIRECTV, a consortium of a Hughes Electronics unit and three Latin American companies, a lead over rival DTH services in Chile, Galaxy Latin America chief executive Jose Antonio Rios said.  
"We will begin with advertising about the middle of December, telling people about the number of channels. From then we won't let up," Rios said.
Billboards, newspaper advertising and television will all be used to promote the multi-channel TV service. In addition, the campaign will rely heavily on in-store demonstrations, Rios said.
VTR, a partnership of Luksic and Southwestern Bell Corp and DIRECTV will spend the next months training retail clerks in presenting the receivers, he said. Full availability in Chile will come by March 31, he said.  
DIRECTV is sold in Latin America and the Caribbean by Galaxy Latin America, a venture of Hughes, The Cisneros Group of Venezuela, Televisao Abril of Brazil and MVS Multivision of Mexico. It offers subscribers who buy a receiver about 100 channels of video, music and extra-fee film channels. Several companies, including the Sky venture involving News Corp, are offering satellite television in Latin America, a fast-growing region lightly penetrated by cable television.  
DIRECTV has been a huge hit in the United States, hailed as the fastest selling consumer electronics item ever since its 1994 launch and credited by some industry analysts with eating into the dominant cable industry's audiences.
Rios said DIRECTV has some 16,000 vendors throughout the region selling its receivers and expects that number to nearly double to 30,000 by the end  of 1997.
The company expects soon to launch in Trinidad and Barbados and in Ecuador, Colombia, Guatemala, Costa Rico, Panama and Argentina by June 30.
Rios said DIRECTV would be available in 23 nations in Latin America and the Caribbean by the end of 1997.
The service is now available in Mexico, Brazil and Venezuela.
-- Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013
Florida is set to challenge the tobacco industry on Friday using a tough anti-racketeering law that could mean bigger damages against cigarette makers if the state prevails.
The new claim under the state's Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organisations Act, tacked onto Florida's existing lawsuit that seeks at least $1 billion for treating smokers' illnesses, could mean more losses for the tobacco makers, tobacco-litigation expert Christopher Mueller of the University of Colorado School of Law said.
"Florida has a good law (for winning damage claims) but it only goes back to 1994. Using RICO may give the state a deeper reach," Mueller said.
The state's RICO law, similar to a federal statute and laws on the books in other states, would allow Florida officials to seek damages from before 1994, when a state law was passed that opened the way for Florida to try to recoup money spent on treating poor smokers.
Florida is one of 16 states and several big cities, including New York, San Francisco and Los Angeles, that have sued tobacco companies to recoup costs of health care for poor smokers.
Texas and now Florida are among a handful of states that are also using RICO laws to bolster their claims against Philip Morris Cos. Inc., the world's biggest cigarette maker, and other tobacco companies. Florida filed the added claims under RICO laws on Nov 4.
Mueller said use of RICO could add to the industry's potential financial losses by allowing Florida to make claims to recoup costs of treating smokers from before 1994.
Florida Attorney General Bob Butterworth is set to appear on Friday in county court in West Palm Beach, a spokesman said. He and attorneys for tobacco companies will argue over the industry's request that the RICO claim be dismissed.
It was unclear when a ruling would be made, a court official said.
Presiding Palm Beach County Circuit Judge Harold Cohen recently dismissed 15 counts of the state's 18-count lawsuit that claims the industry was liable for state-paid hospital costs from lung cancer and other smoking-related diseases. The full case is expected to come to trial next year.
A Jacksonville, Fla., jury last summer handed the tobacco industry its biggest loss in a court case yet when it awarded $750,000 to a lung cancer sufferer who had smoked for half a century. The defendant was the Brown &amp; Williamson unit of Britain's B.A.T Industries Plc.
In Washington, anti-smoking groups said divesting tobacco investments was being actively considered by a growing number of institutional investors concerned by both the ethics and the financial outlook for the industry.
Anti-tobacco lawsuits brought by Florida and other state governments under anti-racketeering laws are meant to demonize cigarette manufacturers and turn Americans against a legitimate industry, a tobacco-industry lawyer said on Friday.
At a pre-trial hearing of a high-stakes tobacco lawsuit, attorney Irvin Nathan held up a newspaper article quoting Florida state government lawyers and said such publicity was meant solely "to demonize the industry."  
The article, published in the Tampa Tribune of Florida, quoted state lawyers as saying they want to show that cigarette makers had misled Americans for decades about the health risks of smoking and prove the industry was liable for potentially billions of dollars in medical procedures covered by a Florida insurance program.
Nathan spoke on behalf of Philip Morris Cos Inc, one of several big tobacco companies that asked the judge to throw out a Florida claim that they were liable under Florida's Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO).  
He argued the law did not apply to the tobacco companies, which are also being sued in Florida under a separate 1994 law that may leave them liable to penalties of $1.0 billion or more.
In claims under RICO -- a type of law also on the federal books and those of many other U.S. states -- Philip Morris and the other tobacco defendents would be liable to triple damages. RICO laws are usually used to prosecute organized criminals.  
Robert Blakey, a law professor at Notre Dame University, said on behalf of Florida that the RICO claim against the tobacco companies fell easily within the scope of the law. In the 1970s, Blakey was an author of several RICO laws, including the federal legislation.
"This, your honor, is a good RICO case," Blakey said.
Presiding Judge Harold Cohen of the Palm Beach County Circuit Court is not expected to rule for weeks on the tobacco defendents' request that the RICO claims be dismissed.  
Still, in opening remarks before lawyers for both sides presented their arguments, he said he was inclined to allow the Florida state lawyers to go ahead with the RICO-based claims.
A jury trial of the suit is tentatively scheduled for August 1997, the judge said.
Florida Attorney General Bob Butterworth said in an interview that Florida's RICO claims, if successful, could open a new battle front against the tobacco industry. Attorney generals from two other states that are pressing similar lawsuits agreed with that view.  
Mississippi Attorney General Mike Moore, who accompanied Butterworth to the hearing along with Arizona Attorney General Grant Woods, said the lawsuits filed by 19 states and several cities concerned more than just monetary damages. The lawsuits were needed to alert people to the dangers of smoking and help curb smoking among teenagers.
"That helps me sell the litigation more than the money," Moore said.
Moore said Florida, Arizona, Mississippi and several other state governments had allied themselves to press their tobacco cases. With several cases coming to trial next year, 1997 could prove crucial in determining whether the tobacco industry is liable for some of the hundreds of billions of dollars in health-care costs arising from smoking-related diseases.
A trial on Moore's suit begins in March in Mississippi, with Florida's set for the summer and a Texas lawsuit expected to go to trial in the fall.
"I think we will know the answer in 1997," Moore said.
-- Miami Newsroom 1-305-374-5013
A Florida judge said Friday that he was inclined to let stand civil claims filed under state anti-racketeering laws against the tobacco industry.
Speaking from the bench at the start of a preliminary hearing, Palm Beach County Circuit Judge Harold Cohen said he was inclined to let stand claims filed by the state using Florida's Racketeer Influenced and Corrupts Organisations Act, which could mean more losses for cigarette makers.
"It would seem that the state can maintain the RICO actions," Cohen said.
The claims under state RICO laws were added last month to the state's existing lawsuit that seeks at least $1 billion compensation for treating smokers' illnesses.
The judge said he would not make up his mind until the end of oral arguments on Friday.
He gave no timetable for making public his decision on a request by Philip Morris Cos. and other cigarette makers that the claims made by the state under RICO laws be thrown out.
Florida State Attorney General Bob Butterworth said before the hearing that a victory against tobacco companies using the RICO law would allow the court to triple the more than $1 billion dollars in damages claimed by the state.
He also said a victory in Florida using its RICO law would widen the war against the tobbaco industry by possibly allowing other states to sue under their own RICO laws.
Lawyer Irving Nathan, representing the tobacco industry, said that lawsuits brought by state governments under anti-racketeering laws were meant to demonise cigarette manufacturers and turn Americans against a legitimate industry.
Nathan argued that the RICO laws did not apply to the tobacco companies that are also being sued in Florida.
The state of Florida in 1995 filed a lawsuit against the tobacco industry, seeking $1 billion or more for health care costs paid for poor people afflicted with smoking-related ailments.
Last month the state amended the suit using the RICO law and claiming that the tobacco companies had conspired with one another to confuse Americans about the dangers of smoking.
Cohen is not expected to rule for weeks on the tobacco defendents' request that the RICO claims be dismissed but he said in opening remarks that he was inclined to allow the Florida state lawyers to go ahead with the RICO-based claims.
A jury trial of the suit is tentatively scheduled for August 1997, the judge said.
Mississippi Attorney General Mike Moore, who accompanied Butterworth to the hearing along with Arizona Attorney General Grant Woods, said the lawsuits filed by 19 states and several cities were about much more than mere money. The lawsuits were needed to alert people to the dangers of smoking and help curb smoking among teenagers.
"That helps me sell the litigation more than the money," Moore said.
Grand Metropolitan Plc's Burger King is benefitting from a sales recovery in Europe, as well as strong U.S. expansion, and should post $10 billion in sales in the fiscal year ending September 30, Burger King chief executive Robert Lowes said on Tuesday.
"There's no question that my goal for this year is $10 billion, to add a billion in sales," Lowes told Reuters.  
Burger King's worldwide sales through some 8,700 restaurants, including 756 added during the fiscal year, totalled $9 billion in fiscal 1996, or nine percent more than in the previous 12 months.
Burger King also said in a brief year-end summary that its market share rose, touching 16.2 percent of all fast-food hamburger restaurant sales.  The company competes against sector-leading McDonald's Corp and Wendy's International Inc.  
Comparable store sales, meaning those restaurants open at lease one year, rose 2.3 percent worldwide and 2.6 percent in the United States, Lowes said.
Grand Met, the British branded-goods conglomerate, said last week operating profits at Burger King declined in the last fiscal year because of a European beef scare and a planned turndown in sales of restaurants to franchisees.
European sales last spring were hit by an outbreak of a disease attributed to contaminated British beef, especially hurting the company's hamburger outlets in Britain, France and Germany.  
Lowes said Burger King had responded by substituting for beef some chicken and other foods, including a vegetarian hamburger in Britain, to sustain sales in Europe.
"Our sales volumes are back where they were," Lowes said, referring to existing stores.
The executive said new stores to be added, including 75 to be built along British motorways in a deal with Granada Group Plc, would lift sales.
Burger King was also negotiating other deals in Europe similar to the one with Granada, Lowes said.  He gave no details.
-- Miami newsroom, 1-305-374-5013
A Florida judge said on Monday that tobacco-company lawyers fighting a massive secondhand- smoking suit brought by sick flight attendants were unlikely to win separate trials for each of as many as 300,000 claims.
Tobacco-company lawyers arguing during an informal hearing in the run-up to a June 2 class-action trial said lung cancer, cardiac ailments and 21 other illnesses attributed by rival lawyers to secondhand smoke inhalation were too complicated to lump together in one trial.  
"There is no way a jury can be asked to weed out these complications," said Hugh Whiting, an attorney for the RJ Reynolds Tobacco Co, a unit of RJR Nabisco Holdings.
Whiting and lawyers for other tobacco companies such as the Brown &amp; Williamson unit of B.A.T Industries Plc said each case was different and the connection between a malady and secondhand smoke would have to individually proven.
But Dade County Circuit Court Judge Robert Kaye said so many trials would be impossible to hold and he expects a two-part trial process for the class-action suit brought by two Miami lawyers to begin June 2.  
In the first, a jury will determine whether or not tobacco companies conspired to keep evidence of dangers from secondhand smoke from the public and if scientific evidence is strong enough to legally blame the illnesses incurred by non-smoking flight attendants on the cigarette smoke they inhaled while working.
A second trial will set money damages, if the tobacco companies lose in the first. But he said that, while he had made no final decision, he believed the claims by the flight attendants could be grouped by category and be handled by just one jury.  
"There's no reason this trial cannot be tried by one jury," Kaye said.
The judge also said he was near deciding the particulars of a campaign to reach the estimated 160,000 to 300,000 U.S. flight attendants who would be eligible for compensation if the class-action suit is lost by the tobacco industry.
Whiting pressed for a national media campaign, in addition to an agreed mailing to about 160,000 current and former flight attendants. He also proposed establishing a toll-free contact number. Such costs would be borne by the flight-attendants lawyers.
Flight-attendants attorneys Stanley and Susan Rosenblatt said such a campaign was wasteful and very expensive and that word-of-mouth spurred by the mail campaign would lift the number of people joining in the class-action suit.
The flight-attendants suit is one of several high-stakes anti-tobacco suits scheduled to come to trial in Florida and elswhere in the United States during 1997. On Friday, another Florida judge overseeing a case brought by the State of Florida ruled tobacco companies can be sued under Florida's anti-racketeering law.
-- Miami newsroom 305-374-5013.
Carnival Corp is shopping around Europe and elsewhere for acquisitions and partners to boost the number of passengers on its cruise ships, industry analysts said on Tuesday.
The company -- the leader of the pleasure cruise market with 28 percent -- is said to be in talks to acquire Italy's Costa Crociere Spa.
Trading in Costa Corciere shares was suspended on Monday by Italian regulators until detailed information on the reported talks between the companies was revealed.  
"The Carnival people are the most natural buyers," said industry analyst Edward Tavlin of Fahnestock &amp; Co. "They are willing go worldwide."
A spokesman for Miami-based Carnival declined to comment.
Last month, Carnival Chairman Micky Arison said in a Reuters interview that he saw industry consolidation continuing and that markets outside North America warranted attention.  
Arison did not comment directly on the possibility of acquiring Costa Crociere, a relatively small and heavily indebted line, which had been in meger talks with Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd.
Carnival has formed a joint venture with Hyundai Corp of South Korea to provide Asian cruises and bought a stake in British travel group Airtours Plc as part of its global expansion.
"They are trying to better exploit overseas markets," analyst Jill Krutick of Smith Barney said. "The North American market has lots of capacity and pricing pressure."  
Carnival, which runs three cruise lines, is profitable in a sector burdened with a declining customer base and the prospect of expanded capacity. The company has said it expects to post record profits for the fiscal year ended November 30.
To be sure, Carnival, founded 24 years ago, has miscalculated in overseas ventures in the past. The company two years ago shut down its start-up FiestaMarina line aimed at Latin Americans and exited a Bermuda hotel operation with substanial losses, Tavlin said.
"The overseas markets are not as developed, but they have different dynamics," Krutick said. "Each has its own features and characteristics.
-- Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013.
H.J. Heinz Co chairman Tony O'Reilly said on Friday the U.S. food group was in deal talks with prospective buyers and would sell substantial businesses by April 30.
"By the end of the fiscal year, the businesses will have a leaner focus," O'Reilly said in a telephone interview.  
O'Reilly declined to identify the businesses on the auction block or estimate how much cash the properties would bring Heinz, a leading U.S. food products group which dominates several lines, such as canned tuna fish.
"If I tell you, that's where the bargaining will start," O'Reilly said.
He said Heinz was in contact with four or five potential buyers.  
The executive said Heinz will trim down to six business clusters: food-service products, pet food, infant formula outside the United States, condiments such as ketchup, and weight-loss services and products.
A third to a fourth of Heinz businesses are estimated to be outside those areas.
"The buzz word now is focus," O'Reilly said.
Heinz, based in Pittsburgh, has scheduled a Wall Street analysts' meeting in March on the asset sales.
O'Reilly repeated that Heinz should post a double-digit percentage profit increase in the fiscal year ending April 30.
The company 10 days ago repeated quarterly share profits of $0.47, up from $0.42 a year earlier, and said most businesses performed well.  An exception was U.S. Weight Watchers diet classes and foods.
Heinz shares were up 1/2 to 36-1/4.
-- Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013
International businessman Tony O'Reilly said on Friday acquisitions by his Independent Newspapers Plc will slow considerably next year after the takeover of New Zealand's leading newspaper and other deals.
"I consider next year a year of consolidation," Independent Newspapers Chairman O'Reilly told Reuters in a telephone interview.  
But O'Reilly's name came up just this week in London markets as the rumored buyer of Mirror Group Newspapers Plc's 46 percent stake in Britain's Independent Newspapers Plc.
Both Mirror Group and O'Reilly, whose separate, Dublin-based firm also owns a 46 percent stake in the British title, denied a deal was in the works.
O'Reilly, best known in the United States as chairman of H.J. Heinz Co, also acknowledged his company was keeping a close eye on Australian media group John Fairfax Holdings Ltd.  
Conrad Black, the Canadian media tycoon who runs Hollinger International Inc, sold a 20 percent stake in Fairfax this week after complaining about Australian limits on foreign ownership of newspaper companies.
Some press reports suggest Fairfax might sell a top newspaper or become an acquisition target.
"The situation there is fluid, very interesting," O'Reilly said. "You can just say the O'Reillys are looking on with interest."  
News Corp Ltd chairman Rupert Murdoch last month sold his five percent stake in Fairfax and on Wednesday said he had lost interest in the company because of the foreign ownership ceilings. A native Australian, Murdoch is now a U.S. citizen.
Independent Newspapers owns a 25 percent stake in the Australian regional newspaper company APN, and this year acquired a controlling 85 percent stake in Wilson &amp; Horton in a deal valuing the leading New Zealand newspaper company at NZ$1.32 billion.  
"Wilson &amp; Horton will be an important springboard for us," O'Reilly said.
The executive said the New Zealand company would help Independent expand its commercial printing and educational businesses in the region.
O'Reilly said his executives next year would be working primarily on increasing results and efficiencies in Independent properties. Deals, in part because his family wishes to maintain its 28 percent equity stake in Independent, would be secondary.
Company results should be strong in 1997, he said.  
The company's South African properties will have to produce better than normal profit gains to offset currency losses expected from a drop in the South African rand, he said.
Independent's newspapers in Ireland, Britain, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and elsewhere will benefit from a sharp drop in newsprint. Costs for the raw material of newspapers has dropped from an average $520 a ton within the past year to around $400 currently, he said.  
O'Reilly described as reasonable profit forecasts by Dublin's Davey Stockbrokers that Independent would post a 15 percent profit rise to 18.6 pence per share in 1997 and an 18 percent rise to 21.4 pence per share in 1998.
-- Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013.
Tony O'Reilly, best known in America as H.J. Heinz chairman, has the U.S. food group slimming down while beefing up his family's Independent Newspapers Plc of Ireland.
Independent, an acquisitive, fast-growing company that is 28 percent owned by O'Reilly and his family, competes in deals and markets with such international media figures as Rupert Murdoch of News Corp. Ltd.
O'Reilly's name came up just this week in London markets as the rumoured buyer of Mirror Group Newspapers Plc's 46 percent stake in Britain's Independent Newspapers Plc for $100 million.
While O'Reilly knocked down deal speculation on the Independent, a leading British daily in which his firm already has a 46 percent holding, he hinted in an interview that he has an eye on buying into leading Australian publisher John Fairfax Holdings Ltd.
"The situation there is fluid, very interesting," O'Reilly said. "You can just say the O'Reillys are looking on with interest."
Since the early 1970s, when the former rugby star and food industry executive bought into Independent, the company has steadily expanded and sells 80 percent of Ireland's nationally distributed newspapers.
Independent also has radio partnerships and controlling shares of leading newspaper businesses in New Zealand and South Africa and a French billboard company.
Financial performance has been very strong, with the stock market value of Independent rising a heady sixfold in five years.
In Pittsburgh, the headquarters of Heinz, the drill is largely different.
O'Reilly, in the telephone interview from Dublin, said the food company he has run since 1979 was in deal talks with prospective buyers and would sell substantial businesses by April 30.
"By the end of the fiscal year, the businesses will have a leaner focus," he said.
O'Reilly declined to identify the businesses on the auction block or estimate how much cash the properties would bring Heinz, which dominates in canned tuna, ketchup and other segments.
"If I tell you, that's where the bargaining will start," O'Reilly said. He said Heinz was in contact with four or five potential buyers.
The executive said Heinz will trim down to six business clusters: food-service products, pet food, infant formula outside the United States, condiments, ketchup, and weight-loss services and products.
One-third to one-quarter of Heinz businesses covering thousands of products are estimated to be outside those areas.
"The buzz word now is focus," O'Reilly said.
Acquisitions at Heinz, known for its Weight Watchers services and brands such as 9 Lives pet food, are not ruled out. The company, in fact, just broke off talks aimed at acquiring some assets of Bumble Bee, a competitor to its StarKist line of canned tuna. Heinz is also digesting a large pet-food acquisition it made from Quaker Oats.
Beyond being known as a newspaper baron outside North America, O'Reilly has interests in other Irish firms. Another he leads as chairman, Irish crystal and china firm Waterford Wedgwood, Thursday agreed to buy 9.1 percent of a German porcelain group Rosenthal AG.
O'Reilly, 60, is widely regarded as Ireland's richest man and appears close to being, if not already, Ireland's only billionaire, associates said.
International businessman Tony O'Reilly said on Friday acquisitions by his Independent Newspapers Plc will slow considerably next year after the takeover of New Zealand's leading newspaper and other deals.
"I consider next year a year of consolidation," Independent Newspapers Chairman O'Reilly told Reuters in a telephone interview.
But O'Reilly's name came up just this week in London markets as the rumored buyer of Mirror Group Newspapers Plc's 46 percent stake in Britain's Independent Newspapers Plc.
Both Mirror Group and O'Reilly, whose separate, Dublin-based firm also owns a 46 percent stake in the British title, denied a deal was in the works.
O'Reilly, best known in the United States as chairman of H.J. Heinz Co , also acknowledged his company was keeping a close eye on Australian media group John Fairfax Holdings Ltd .
Conrad Black, the Canadian media tycoon who runs Hollinger International Inc , sold a 20 percent stake in Fairfax this week after complaining about Australian limits on foreign ownership of newspaper companies.
Some press reports suggest Fairfax might sell a top newspaper or become an acquisition target.
"The situation there is fluid, very interesting," O'Reilly said. "You can just say the O'Reillys are looking on with interest."
News Corp Ltd chairman Rupert Murdoch last month sold his five percent stake in Fairfax and on Wednesday said he had lost interest in the company because of the foreign ownership ceilings. A native Australian, Murdoch is now a U.S. citizen.
Independent Newspapers owns a 25 percent stake in the Australian regional newspaper company APN, and this year acquired a controlling 85 percent stake in Wilson &amp; Horton in a deal valuing the leading New Zealand newspaper company at NZ$1.32 billion.
RJR Tobacco, a unit of RJR Nabisco Holdings, said on Friday that documents it turned over to Minnesota in a lawsuit may suggest its executives considered using additives to enhance the nicotine kick of its cigarettes.
The company also said in a brief summary of some of the papers delivered to Minnesota state lawyers that its executives also considered beefing up marketing in 1980 to reverse a loss in market share among U.S. teenagers to rival Philip Morris Cos.  
RJR, along with other tobacco companies, is being sued by Minnesota and 17 other states to recover billions of dollars spent treating smoking-related illnesses of people through governmental medical programs. Trials in state lawsuits are scheduled this year in Mississippi, Florida and Texas.
RJR said it expected anti-tobacco information to be leaked selectively to news organizations by opposing lawyers and was releasing three potentially damaging short excerpts from the 4.5 million pages of documents with its own explantions.
The company said it would not release the full documents.  
RJR said two documents it turned over to Minnesota lawyers under court order suggested the company studied during the 1970s adding ammonia compounds to increase the effects of nicotine from cigarette smoking.
If ammonia, RJR quoted from one 1973 company document, were "found to make desirable contributions to the physiological satisfactions derived from smoking, we will want to optimize this effect in existing and/or new products."
RJR said research was carried out in an era when industry and popular thinking held low-tar cigarettes with heightened nicotine kicks would be less harmful to smokers.  
RJR deputy general counsel Daniel Donohue expects the Minnesota lawyers to use the documents to bolster claims the company was manipulating nicotine to hook smokers.
Anti-tobacco activists have repeatedly accused the industry of tarting up nicotine levels. Philip Morris won a large settlement and an on-air apology from the ABC television network owned by Walt Disney Co for a news story suggesting it manipulated nicotine content in its cigarettes. RJR also quoted from a 1980 memo sent by a marketing executive to the company chairman saying RJR's market share among smokers 14-17 was falling, but Philip Morris's was growing.  
"Hopefully our various planned activities that will be implemented this fall will aid in some way in reducing or correcting those trends," RJR's then-head of marketing wrote.
Donohue described the memorandum as shorthand and said it in no way suggested RJR worked to sell cigarettes to teenagers.
He also said company data on underage smokers was collected as a by-product of market research among adults.
The company said it was releasing the excerpts because it expected the memos and studies to be leaked and reported by rushed journalists without full context.  
"Cherry picked, leaked documents do not reflect the totality of our company's positions, strategies and marketplace efforts," RJR spokeswoman Peggy Carter said in a news release. But Minnesota Attorney General Hubert Humphrey III said RJR was misleading the public by complaining of selective leaks by anti-tobacco lawyers.
"The vast majority of documents cannot be made public due to a protective order demanded by the tobacco industry," Humprhey said in a news release. "If the tobacco industry truly wanted the public to know the whole truth, it would waive this protective order...I challenge them to do so."
A trial in the Minnesota lawsuit is set for 1998, Humphrey spokesman Joe Loveland said.
-- Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013.
R.J. Reynolds executives considered using additives to enhance the nicotine kick of cigarettes and also considered beefing up marketing to teenagers, according to a summary of documents that the company's parent turned over in a Minnesota lawsuit.
R.J. Reynolds, a unit of RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp., said Friday it turned over the documents to Minnesota state lawyers in connection with a lawsuit the state has filed against tobacco companies to recover state money spent on treating smoking-related illnesses.
Along with other tobacco companies, R.J. Reynolds is being sued by Minnesota and 17 other states to recover billions of dollars spent treating smoking-related illnesses. Trials those lawsuits are scheduled this year in Mississippi, Florida and Texas.
R.J. Reynolds said it expected anti-tobacco information to be leaked selectively to news organisations by opposing lawyers and was releasing three potentially damaging short excerpts from the 4.5 million pages of documents with its own explantions.
The company said it would not release the full documents.
It said two documents it turned over to Minnesota lawyers under court order suggested that the company in the 1970s studied adding ammonia compounds to increase the effects of nicotine from cigarette smoking.
If ammonia were "found to make desirable contributions to the physiological satisfactions derived from smoking, we will want to optimize this effect in existing and/or new products," the company quoted one 1973 company document as saying.
Cigarette makers have long denied that they tried to manipulate the nicotine effects from their products.
R.J. Reynolds said the research was carried out when the industry and others thought low-tar cigarettes with heightened nicotine kicks would be less harmful to smokers.
R.J. Reynolds deputy general counsel Daniel Donohue said he expected the Minnesota lawyers to use the documents to try to bolster claims that the company was manipulating nicotine to hook smokers.
Anti-tobacco activists have repeatedly accused the industry of manipulating nicotine levels.
Philip Morris Cos. Inc., the world's biggest cigarette maker and producer of Marlboro and other brands, won a large settlement and an on-air apology from the ABC television network for a news story suggesting it manipulated nicotine content in its cigarettes.
R.J. Reynolds also quoted from a 1980 memo sent by a marketing executive to the chairman stating that market share among smokers aged 14 to 17 was falling while Philip Morris' share was growing.
"Hopefully our various planned activities that will be implemented this fall will aid in some way in reducing or correcting those trends," the official wrote.
Donohue described the memo as shorthand and said it in no way suggested Reynolds worked to sell cigarettes to teenagers. He said company data on young smokers was collected as a by-product of market research on adults.
The Food and Drug Administration issued new rules last summer meant to curb sales to underage smokers, but the industry is challenging the rules.
R.J. Reynolds said it was releasing the excerpts because it expected the memos and studies to be leaked and reported by journalists without full context.
"Cherry picked, leaked documents do not reflect the totality of our company's positions, strategies and marketplace efforts," Peggy Carter, a spokeswoman for RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp., said in a statement.
Minnesota Attorney General Hubert Humphrey III said the company was misleading the public by complaining of alleged selective leaks by anti-tobacco lawyers.
"The vast majority of documents cannot be made public due to a protective order demanded by the tobacco industry," he said in a news release.
"If the tobacco industry truly wanted the public to know the whole truth, it would waive this protective order .... I challenge them to do so."
A trial in the Minnesota lawsuit is set for 1998, Humphrey spokesman Joe Loveland said.
Republic Industries Inc. Monday agreed to buy National Car Rental System Inc. for about $600 million in stock, another step into auto rentals that will also feed its growing used car business.
Republic, a diversified, Fort Lauderdale, Fla.-based company controlled by Florida billionaire Wayne Huizenga, said it would offer stock for Minneapolis-based National, owned by an investor group led by the former chief executive of Thrifty Car Rental.
Republic, which also owns waste management, electronic security and media assets, bought Alamo Rent-a-Car in November for $625 million in stock. The acquisitions would give it car-rental agencies with 230,000 cars in their fleets.
Industry analysts said the National deal would bolster Republic in the competitive car rental business and provide its AutoNation chain a steady supply of used cars for sale.
"The deals give Republic steady inventory," said analyst Jordan Hymowitz at Montgomery Securities in San Francisco.
The fledgling AutoNation chain and its rivals in the growing business for used cars just a few years old need big supplies of second-hand cars. AutoNation aims to have 80 outlets in place by 2000.
But the main source for used cars is the rental market, analysts said. Leased cars coming back from consumers for resale are usually streered by automakers' financing arms to dealers the automakers do business with.
National will also give Republic another avenue for growth in car rentals, analysts said. While Alamo rents mostly to vacationers and other consumers, National's target market is business customers.
National is owned by an investor group led by William Lobeck, the former chief executive officer of Thrifty Car Rental, who along with other National executives will sign employment agreements with Republic and manage National's daily operations, the companies said.
National has about 800 locations in North America with a fleet of about 100,000 vehicles in the United States.
Huizenga, who also owns the Florida Marlins baseball team and the Miami Dolphins football team, is seeking to build yet another fortune.
He is one of the few executives to have built two giant corporations -- he was a co-founder of Waste Management, now known as WMX Technologies Inc., and Blockbuster Video, which was sold to Viacom in 1994.
Meanwhile, transactions for rental car companies have picked up in recent months. Before Republic bought Alamo, HFS Inc. bought Avis for about $800 million.
Analysts said few big independent car-rental agencies remained, adding that neither Drivers Mart nor Car Max appeared interested in buying a rent-a-car business for their used-car outlets.
While the National deal would help ensure car supplies for AutoNation, the fledgling chain would not get much more muscle in dealings with Detroit automakers, analysts said.
"There's no such thing as a volume discount," said analyst Maryann Keller at Furman Selz in New York. "It makes no difference whether you're buying 1 million cars or 20."
Keller said Detroit automakers give discounts to big buyers such as car rental agencies but that the terms have grown more stringent. Agreements by automakers to buy back rental cars have also been drying up, she said.
"The fleet market is lower profit" for automakers, she said.
Republic stock jumped $1.875 to $32.75 on the New York Stock Exchange.
The $600 million acquisition of National Car Rental would give Republic Industries Inc inventory for its fledgling AutoNation used-car chain but little added purchasing power in Detroit.
"There's no such thing as a volume discount," said automobile-industry analyst Maryann Keller at Furman Selz in New York. "It makes no difference whether you're buying one million cars or 20."
Keller said the big Detroit manufacturers do give fleet discounts to buyers but the terms have been getting tougher.
Florida Attorney General Bob Butterworth said on Friday U.S. cigarette makers had delayed harsh revelations about the industry with a surprising decision to end pre-trial opposition to punitive damages in the state's multi-billion dollar anti-tobacco lawsuit.
Butterworth told Reuters a court hearing set for January 24 on the punitive claims to be added to any other jury awards would have made public information he alleged would have been highly damaging about the industry's marketing and medical research, contained in 27,000 pages of court-sealed documents.  
"I liken it to a criminal trial in which the defendant tries to suppress evidence that would prove him guilty," Butterworth said.  "They want to delay.  It's their best short-term ploy."
Florida is one of 18 states suing U.S. cigarette companies to recoup billions of dollars spent through government healthcare programs on treating people made ill by smoking.  A trial in the Florida lawsuit filed by Butterworth is set for August 4.  
Philip Morris Cos Inc and other cigarette companies, complaining of likely bad publicity, earlier dropped pre-trial opposition to punitive claims by the State of Florida.  The state is seeking to recoup $1 billion or more for treating Medicaid costs from 1994.
Philip Morris Cos Inc lawyer Gregory Little said in a news release that the industry's decision had no legal effect and that the industry had never paid punitive damages in any lawsuit.  
Little said a key reason for the industry's decision was a worry that the state's lawyers would present evidence against cigarette makers during a public, pre-trial hearing.  Tobacco lawyers would be severly restricted in defending against the evidence during the hearing, he said.
"The lawyers for the state of Florida have demonstrated a remarkable propensity for trying their case in the media," Little said.
He accused anti-tobacco lawyers in Florida of leaking documents to reporters.  
"... The January 24 hearing -- which was already window dressed for media consumption with a 442-page brief and 12 boxes of documents -- would have done nothing other than provide a platform for the plaintiffs' lawyers to once again trumpet their case making it difficult for all parties to seat an unbiased jury," Little said.
Other tobacco companies, including RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp, have accused anti-tobacco lawyers of selective and unfair leaks to the media.  
Butterworth said he was forbidden by court order from detailing the damaging information in the documents but said 90 percent of the material came from industry internal documents. Much of the material was gathered by other attorneys general, many of whom are cooperating in their anti-tobacco lawsuits.
"It's nearly all their documents, all about their marketing practices, their science ... and they are giving up everything to avoid publicity," Butterworth said.
"This is a 100 percent victory for the state," he said of the industry's decision.
"The only downside is that disclosure of the documents is delayed."
A trial in the lawsuit is scheduled to begin on August 4 in West Palm Beach, Florida.
-- Miami bureau, 305-373-5014
Cigarette companies, complaining of likely bad publicity, Friday dropped pre-trial opposition to punitive claims by the state of Florida in a multi-billion dollar anti-tobacco lawsuit.
Florida is seeking $1 billion or more from U.S. cigarette makers for actual costs incurred in its Medicaid healthcare programme for treating people afflicted with smoking-related ailments. Punitive damages, assuming a victory for the state, raise the potential losses to the industry substantially.
The state last month won the right to claim even further damages under Florida's anti-racketeering laws, a legal precedent in the spreading courtroom battle against tobacco companies. State lawyers have said the racketeering claims could cost cigarette makers tens of billions of dollars.
A lawyer for Philip Morris Cos Inc., one of the defending tobacco companies, said in a news release that ending pre-trial opposition had no legal effect and that the industry had never paid punitive damages in any lawsuit.
Florida Attorney General Bob Butterworth hailed the action as victory and said the industry had made a major legal concession to delay harsh disclosures during a scheduled Jan. 24 hearing about industry marketing and medical research practices.
"I liken it to a criminal trial in which the defendant tries to suppress evidence that would prove him guilty," Butterworth said in an interview. "They want to delay. It's their best short-term ploy."
Butterworth said he was forbidden by court order from detailing the damaging information in 27,000 pages of documents to have been presented on Jan. 24 but said 90 percent of the material came from industry internal documents. Much of the material was gathered by other attorneys general, many of whom are cooperating in anti-tobacco lawsuits filed by 18 states.
"It's nearly all their documents, all about their marketing practices, their science ... and they are giving up everything to avoid publicity," Butterworth said.
Philip Morris lawyer Gregory Little said a key reason for the industry's decision was a worry that the state lawyers would present evidence against cigarette makers during the hearing open to journalists. Tobacco lawyers would be severly restricted in defending against the evidence during the hearing, he said.
"... The January 24 hearing -- which was already window dressed for media consumption with a 442-page brief and 12 boxes of documents -- would have done nothing other than provide a platform for the plaintiffs lawyers to once again trumpet their case ...," Little said.
He accused anti-tobacco lawyers in Florida of leaking documents to reporters and polluting the pool of unbiased potential jurors needed for a fair trial.
The judge in the Florida trial, which is scheduled to begin Aug. 4 in West Palm Beach, Florida, last fall threw out 15 of the state government's original 18 claims.
Defendants in the case, one of several such lawsuits brought by state governments scheduled to go to trial this year, include RJR Nabisco Holdings and the Brown &amp; Williamson unit of B.A.T Industries of Britain.
The industry may receive another legal blow if a reported campaign by Brooke Group, parent of cigarette maker Ligget Group Inc., to settle Medicaid claims in a deal that could involve the exchange of confidential documents.
Liggett was last year the first tobacco company to ever settle cigarette lawsuits in an accord with five states which had sued the industry to recoup health-care costs of smokers.
Billionaire Wayne Huizenga's Republic Industries Inc. added another sales outlet to its mushrooming auto-retailing business with the $200 million acquisition Tuesday of a leading Florida car dealer.
Republic said in a news release it was issuing stock to acquire Maroone Automotive Group, the owner and operator of seven new and used car dealerships, six in southern Florida. It also operates a showroom in Buffalo, N.Y.
Republic just last week agreed to pay $600 million for the National Car Rental Agency, the fourth largest rental car group in the United States, and this week is scheduled to complete acquisition of AutoNation USA.
AutoNation is a private company owned by Huizenga and is pioneering, with other competitors, the consolidation of the highly fragmented second-hand car business in the United States. AutoNation is building sprawling superstores of lightly used cars with set prices and warranties.
Both the acquisition of National and the takeover last November of Alamo Rent-A-Car, the fifth largest car-rental company, are meant to feed AutoNation. Republic has said it wants to open between 80 and 100 AutoNation stores by 2000.
"We plan to have new vehicle stores in markets where we are developing AutoNation USA. Maroone Automotive will enable us to add more major automotive brands as a complement to our used car megastores in south Florida," Huizenga said.
Maroone, now run by the son of the founder, owns the fourth largest Chevrolet store, third largest Dodge location and largest Isuzu franchise in the United States. The group also owns Ford and Oldsmobile franchises.
Michael Maroone, who heads the chain, will become president of Republic's new-car division.
In a continuing buying spree, Republic and Huizenga have acquired Mullinax Inc., the largest Ford dealer in the United States, Magic Ford and Magic Lincoln-Mercury in southern California, and leading southwestern Dodge dealer Bell Dodge.
Tuesday's deal came just a day after Republic said it would pay about $100 million to acquire Grubb Automotive Inc., which owns and operates six new and used vehicle dealerships in Arizona and Texas.
"Republic is now one of the largest purchasers of new vehicles ...," Montgomery Securities analyst Jordan Hymowitz said in a recent report. "As such, we believe they have an increased ability to request vehicles (makes, models, etc.), as well as rental terms to meet its retailing terms."
Other participants in the consolidating auto-retailing business are the CarMax superstore chain of electronics merchant Circuit City and United Auto Group of New York, which has grown to be the fourth largest new-car dealer in the country since 1992.
In still another deal reflecting auto-retailing consolidation, the largest single franchisee of Budget Rent a Car Corp., Team Rental Group Inc. of Daytona Beach, Fla., agreed Tuesday to acquire Ford Motor Co.'s interest in Budget in a deal valued at around $350 million. Ford does not own Budget outright, but controls it through a stock purchase option.
Republic Industries, based in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., also operates in the solid waste and electronic security services industries.
Republic's stock gained $1.125 to $37 in afternoon trading on the Nasdaq market.
Lawyers battling cigarette companies on behalf of flight attendants exposed for decades to second-hand smoke on Wednesday began notifying potential claimants of a historic tobacco trial set to begin in June.
A mass mailing to some 120,000 former and current flight attendants on U.S. airlines seeks to identify non-smokers who suffer ailments such as lung cancer.  
Print advertisements in union and trade magazines, an Internet site and follow-up mailings seeking claimaints are to follow during the next two months.
The class-action suit claims that the illnesses were caused by second-hand smoke from cigarettes aboard airliners and seeks unspecificed damages likely to total billions of dollars.
It accuses Philip Morris Cos Inc and other leading tobacco companies of hiding the dangers of second-hand, or environmental, smoke from Americans.  
"This is clearly a milestone," said Richard Daynard, chairman of the Tobacco Liability Law Project at Northeastern University in Boston. "This is the first time a class-action case has gotten to notificiation," he said, referring to actions taken in the tobacco industry.
A separate suit in Louisiana seeking to represent as many as 50 million ill smokers was thrown out last year. Daynard said two other class-action suits, another in Miami and the second in Pennsylvania, were also scheduled to go to trial this year.
"This is a significant stage," said University of Colorado School of Law professor Christopher Mueller.  
Flight attendants lawyer Stanley Rosenblatt of Miami said 25,000 to 60,000 flight attendants would likely be included in the suit out of an estimated 300,000 who worked for U.S. airlines before in-flight smoking was banned.
The suit alleges that second-hand smoke causes cardiac conditions, cancer and 21 other ailments. Rosenblatt and Daynard said scientific findings had established links between those ailments and second-hand smoke that were strong enough to stand up in a jury trial.  
"That's a very big if," said Michael York, an attorney for the tobacco industry. "If he were successful in that, he has to come back and prove that second-hand smoke caused individual injuries."
Rosenblatt said damages, if any, would be set in follow-up trials after the completion of the June 2 trial, which he estimated would run two to three months in Dade County Court. Categories of claims, such as those of people suffering with emphysma, would likely be determined separately, he said.  
Tobacco attorneys had in recent months pressed Rosenblatt to spend heavily on a national media campaign, using television and popular magazines, but Dade County Circuit Judge Robert Kaye ruled that mail notification was sufficient.
Daynard and Mueller said the tobacco industry, in expectations it would beat Rosenblatt, wanted as many potential claimaints involved in the class-action suit since those people then would not be able to sue independently.
"We think the entire case is meritless," York said.
Rosenblatt said any claimants who did not write and ask to be excluded from the class-action lawsuit would be included. Typically, no more than five to 10 percent of class-action claimants drop out, legal experts said.
((-- Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013))
Lawyers battling cigarette companies on behalf of flight attendants exposed for decades to second-hand smoke began notifying potential claimants Wednesday of the first broad class-action tobacco suit to go to trial.
The mass mailing to some 120,000 former and current flight attendants on U.S. airlines was meant to find non-smoking stewards and stewardesses who have ailments such as lung cancer, attorneys for the plaintiffs said.
Print advertisements, notices on an Internet site and additional mailings will follow. The trial is to begin on June 2 in Miami's Dade County Court.
The class-action claims the illnesses among non-smoking flight attendants were caused by second-hand smoke from cigarettes aboard airliners and seeks unspecificed damages likely to total billions of dollars.
It accuses Philip Morris Cos. Inc., the world's biggest cigarette company and maker of the Marlboro brand, and other leading U.S. tobacco companies of hiding the dangers of second-hand, or environmental, smoke from Americans.
"This is clearly a milestone," said Richard Daynard, chairman of the Tobacco Liability Law Project at Northeastern University in Boston.
"This is the first time a class-action case (against tobacco companies) has gotten to notificiation," Daynard said.
Another suit in Louisiana seeking to represent as many as 50 million ill smokers was thrown out last year. Daynard said two other class-action suits, another in Miami and the second in Pennsylvania, are also scheduled to go to trial this year.
"This is a signicant stage," said University of Colorado School of Law professor Christopher Mueller.
Flight attendants' lawyer Stanley Rosenblatt of Miami said 25,000 to 60,000 sick people would likely be included in the suit out of an estimated 300,000 or more flight attendants who worked for U.S. airlines before in-flight smoking was banned.
The suit alleges that second-hand smoke causes cardiac ailments, cancer and 21 other ailments. Rosenblatt and Daynard said scientific findings do establish links strong enough to stand up in a jury trial.
"That's a very big 'if'," said Michael York, an attorney for the tobacco industry. "If he were successful in that, he has to come back and prove that second-hand smoke caused individual injuries."
Rosenblatt said damages, if any, would be set in follow-up trials after the finish of the June 2 trial, which he estimated would run two to three months. Categories of claims, such as those of people suffering with emphysema, would likely be determined separately, he said.
Tobacco attorneys had in recent months pressed Rosenblatt to spend heavily on a national media campaign, using television and popular magazines, but Dade County Circuit Judge Robert Kaye ruled that mail notification was sufficient.
The mass mailing costs about $1 a letter, Rosenblatt said.
Daynard and Mueller said the tobacco industry, in expectations it would beat Rosenblatt, wanted as many potential claimaints involved in the class-action suit since those people then would not be able to sue independently.
"We think the entire case is meritless," York said.
Rosenblatt said any claimants who did not write and ask to be excluded from the class-action lawsuit would be included. Typically, no more than five to 10 percent of class-action claimants drop out, legal experts said.
Taking mortgage-backed securities as a model, trucking giant Ryder System Inc is bargaining with a half dozen banks on possibly creating securitized financial offerings on as many as 15,000 leased trucks a year.
A first offering of securitized truck leases could come as early as March and all offerings could total as much as $700 million by year-end 1997, Ryder chief financial officer Ed Huston told Reuters.  
"We're thinking of taking a package of leases and selling them," Huston said. "It's a variation of mortgage-backed securities."
Huston said no deal, which would be an innovation among trucking services groups, had been agreed and warned an unforseeen issue could block the plan.
"We've talked to a number of banks and we are on the verge of selecting one," he said.
He declined to identify which banks Ryder was considering. Citicorp is currently a leading finance source for Ryder, Huston said.  
Ryder late Monday announced it would take a $215 million pre-tax charge against fourth-quarter and full-1996 results to pay for a restructuring, early-retirment and layoffs. The moves affect some 2,100 people and should yield savings in 1997 of $75 million for Ryder and $150 million annually afterwards, Huston said.
The charge was bigger than Wall Street expected, Merrill Lynch analyst Jeff Kauffman said.
"It reflects a conviction by management to change things .... Shareholders really want to see some changes and some of them are losing faith in the story. The onus has been put on management to deliver results," he said.
"We are encouraged by their conviction. They seem to be in earnest," Kauffman said.  
Ryder, which last year agreed to sell its consumer-truck rental operations, now buys about 25,000 each year. Some 15,000 of those would be suitable for lease-backed securitization, Huston said.
Ryder, he said, may be able to free equity by the lease-backed offerings and get lower costs because lease-backed offerings typically get better ratings than company debt instruments.
Ryder now has single A and A- ratings on its debt and might secure a triple A rating on its lease-back offerings, Huston said.
Shares of Ryder were up 3/4 to 29-1/8.
-- Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013.
Quick &amp; Reilly Group Inc sees revenues possibly doubling to as much as $120 million by early 1998 at the OTC market-maker, Nash, Weiss &amp; Co, the pioneering discount broker is buying, top Quick executives said on Wednesday.
The firm also plans to move Nash, Weiss, now largely a market maker for retail brokerages, into the institutional side of the business by adding 1,000 or more issues to its current 2,500 roster, Quick President Thomas Quick told Reuters.  
"This gives us another major leg," said Leslie Quick III, the president's brother and head of the discount-brokerage's U.S. Clearing Corp subsidiary. "We expect this Nasdaq market maker business to be a fourth leg for us."
Best known as a retail broker, Quick &amp; Reilly is also a significant force in backroom processing of Wall Street trading and owner of the JCC Specialist Corp, the second largest market-maker, or specialist firm, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Earlier, the firm agreed to acquire Nash Weiss, a market maker of 2,500 Nasdaq issues, for an undisclosed amount.  
"That number will probably go to 3,500 to 4,000," Leslie Quick III said.
The brothers, whose father, chairman Leslie Quick Jr, co-founded the firm in the early 1970s, said the mightily improved  capitalization of Nash, Weiss after the merger with Quick &amp; Reilly will make it much more attractive to large institutional clients.
"Right now, they are on the retail side," said Leslie Quick III. "They are probably the fifth or sixth largest. We think we can take the business into the top three. With our balance sheet, we can go after institutions."  
Thomas Quick said the leading market-maker for institutional clients had capitalization of about $80 million, or 20 times or more that of Nash Weiss.
The brothers said they expect revenues at Nash, Weiss, to rise dramatically as long as stock trading remains robust and may even double by the end of fiscal year 1998. The company's fiscal year ends on the last day of February.
Nash, Weiss will be run as a separate subsidiary remaining in Jersey City, New Jersey, and no job cuts or restructurings were planned, the brothers said.
Shares of Quick &amp; Reilly were up 1/8 to 331/4.
-- Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013.
Quick &amp; Reilly Group Inc.  agreed Wednesday to buy over-the-counter market-maker Nash, Weiss Inc., another step by the pioneering discount broker into low-profile but lucrative financial-services businesses.
Terms were not disclosed, but two sons of co-founder Leslie Quick Jr. said in an interview that the acquisition of the New Jersey firm was by far the biggest deal Quick &amp; Reilly has done.
Nash, Weiss buys and sells on behalf of retail brokerages some 2,500 stocks listed on the Nasdaq over-the-counter electronic market.
Among the top six independent Nasdaq market makers, Nash, Weiss profits on the spread, or difference between prices the seller and buyer get. It employs about 60 people, Quick &amp; Reilly said.
The biggest Nasdaq market makers are subsidaries of big financial firms.
"This gives us another major leg," said Leslie Quick III, head of the company's U.S. Clearing Corp. subsidiary. "We expect this Nasdaq market maker business to be a fourth leg for us."
Best known as a retail broker, Quick &amp; Reilly is also a significant force through U.S. Clearing in backroom processing of Wall Street trading and owner of the JCC Specialist Corp., the second-largest market-maker, or specialist firm, on the New York Stock Exchange.
"The deal really plays well with The Quick &amp; Reilly Group as whole," said Salomon Brothers analyst Michael Sears. "With U.S. Clearing it gives Nash, Weiss a lot of potential for going after instutitional clients."
Sears said the acquisition may be the start of a flurry of deals involving market-makers in Nasdaq stocks as reforms in pricing threaten to narrow the often wide spreads on Nasdaq stocks. Investors have complained that the price differences can amount to as much as 10 percent or more of a stock price.
Thomas Quick, president of the firm, said Quick &amp; Reilly with Nash, Weiss would court institutional clients by adding to its roster of 2,500 securities in which it makes markets.
"That number will probably go to 3,500 to 4,000," Leslie Quick III said.
The brothers, whose father, chairman Leslie Quick Jr., co-founded the firm in the early 1970s, said the mightily improved  capitalisation of Nash, Weiss after the merger with Quick &amp; Reilly will make it much more attractive to large institutional clients.
Thomas Quick said the leading market-maker for institutional clients had capitalisation of about $80 million, or 20 times or more that of Nash, Weiss. Sears said Quick &amp; Reilly had capitalisation of about $350 million.
The brothers said they expect revenues at Nash, Weiss to rise dramatically as long as stock trading remains robust, and may even double by early 1998.
Nash, Weiss will be run as a separate subsidiary remaining in Jersey City, N.J., and no job cuts or restructurings were planned, the brothers said.
Co-founder Leslie Quick Jr. serves as chairman and chief executive of the firm, which was the first to offer discounted commissions on New York Stock Exchange-listed stocks after fixed trading commissions were abolished in 1975.
Based in Palm Beach, Fla., the firm is still largely controlled by the Quicks and has more than 100 brokerage offices across the United States.
Quick &amp; Reilly Group Inc agreed on Wednesday to buy over-the-counter market-maker  Nash, Weiss Inc, another step by the pioneering discount broker into low-profile, but lucrative financial services businesses.
Terms were not disclosed, but two sons of co-founder Leslie Quick Jr said in an interview that the acquisition of the New Jersey firm was by far the biggest deal Quick &amp; Reilly has done.
Nash, Weiss buys and sells on behalf of retail brokerages some 2,500 stocks listed on the Nasda.  
Salomon Brothers analyst Michael Sears said the acquisition may be the start of a flurry of deals involving market-makers in Nasdaq stocks as reforms in pricing threaten to narrow the often wide spreads on Nasdaq stocks.
Investors have complained that the price differences can amount to as much as 10 percent or more of a stock price.
"Going for market share through acquisitions is one way to make up for narrowing spreads," Sears said.
He said he knew of no pending deals.  
Among the top six independent Nasdaq market makers, Nash, Weiss profits on the spread, or difference between prices the seller and buyer get. It employs about 60 people, Quick &amp; Reilly said.
The biggest Nasdaq market makers are subsidaries of big financial firms.
"This gives us another major leg," said Leslie Quick III, head of the company's U.S. Clearing Corp subsidiary. "We expect this Nasdaq market maker business to be a fourth leg for us."  
Best known as a retail broker, Quick &amp; Reilly is also a significant force through U.S. Clearing in backroom processing of Wall Street trading and owner of the JCC Specialist Corp., the second-largest market-maker, or specialist firm, on the New York Stock Exchange.
"The deal really plays well with The Quick &amp; Reilly Group as whole," said Salomon Brothers analyst Michael Sears. "With U.S. Clearing it gives Nash, Weiss a lot of potential for going after instutitional clients."  
Thomas Quick, president of the firm, said Quick &amp; Reilly with Nash, Weiss would court institutional clients by adding to its roster of 2,500 securities in which it makes markets.
"That number will probably go to 3,500 to 4,000," Leslie Quick III said.
The brothers, whose father, chairman Leslie Quick Jr., co-founded the firm in the early 1970s, said the mightily improved  capitalization of Nash, Weiss after the merger with Quick &amp; Reilly will make it much more attractive to large institutional clients.  
Thomas Quick said the leading market-maker for institutional clients had capitalization of about $80 million, or 20 times or more that of Nash, Weiss. Sears said Quick &amp; Reilly had capitalization of about $350 million.
The brothers said they expect revenues at Nash, Weiss to rise dramatically as long as stock trading remains robust and may even double to $120 million by early 1998.
Business has been strong in December and in January and should yield a strong fiscal fourth-quarter, Thomas Quick said. He declined to comment on analysts forecasts of earnings. Sears expects Quick &amp; Reilly to report $0.77 a share for the period ending February 28. Last year, the company reported a normalized $0.91.
Co-founder Leslie Quick Jr serves as chairman and chief executive of the firm, which was the first to offer discounted commissions on New York Stock Exchange-listed stocks after fixed trading commissions were abolished in 1975.
The head of America's most popular cable television service said on Tuesday that Latin American television will continue booming into the 21st century and that pan-regional advertising would shoot up to $1 billion within a decade.
Kay Koplovitz, chief executive of U.S.A. Networks, told an industry conference that cross-boarder advertising on Latin American cable television and Direct-to-Home (DTH) was about $50 million to $75 million in 1996 but was poised for spectacular growth as new DTH services penetrate Latin America's 80 million television households.  
"I really believe it will reach $1 billion in the next decade," Koplovitz said.
Audiences for cable and DTH in Latin American were affluent and younger than those in North America, characteristics that should appeal to advertisers.
"This audience is younger and vibrant for consumer goods," she said.  
Some industry analysts and executives have questioned the appeal of pan-regional programming and advertising in Latin America saying Argentine and Mexican and other national audiences have varying taste and a much more pronounced hunger for local programming.
Koplovitz likened the state of multiple-channel television in Latin America to the early days of U.S. cable television in the 1970s, when advertisers shunned the new medium because audience measurements were crude or nonexistent.  
"We need a reliable, standardized amd pan-regional measuring system," she told an audience of entertainment industry executives at a conference sponsored by the Variety trade newspaper.
She also predicted that the governmental restrictions on DTH in some countries would melt away before the force of illegal satellite-dish sales and as taxing authorities realized that growing revenues streams were going untapped.  
According to Kagan Associates, a consulting group, cable television and DTH revenues in Latin America will grow to $8.1 billion by 2001. Industry revenues were about $2.5 billion last year in Latin America.
Kagan has also estimated that only a bit more than 13 percent of Latin America's television homes subscribe to some form of multiple-channel television. By contrast, multiple-channel television penetration in the United States is more than 60 percent.  
"Latin America is one of the fastest growing and underdeveloped TV markets in the world," Koplovitz said.
The expansion of DTH services by big international media ventures will be key in expanding pan-regional advertising, she said.  
One Latin American DTH service, called Galaxy is owned by GM Hughes of the United States, Cisneros Group of Venezuela, Multivision of Mexico and TVA Abril of Brazil. Its main competitor is Sky Entertainment, owned by multinational News Corp Ltd, Tele-Communications Inc of the United States, Mexico's Televisa and TV Globo of Brazil.
"This is a market destine to grow, and grow it will," Koplovitz said.
-- Miami Newsroom, 305-374-5013.
In a move to end "shock at the dock," six top cruise-ship lines agreed Wednesday to include all fees in the advertised price, and make booking a cruise as simple as buying an airline ticket.
Add-on fees as high as $150 a person will be included in advertised prices so consumers will not be surprised when the final tally is made.
"You won't have any more shock at the dock," Florida Attorney General Bob Butterworth said in an interview.
Separately negotiated deals with Butterworth's staff, including one with industry-leader Carnival Corp., cover only lines operating out of Florida ports but should be felt all over the United States, Butterworth said.
Florida has two million cruise passengers each year, or about 60 percent of the North American market, and shapes national television ad campaigns by an industry courting customers throughout the continent.
Two other lines, Princess and Holland America, operating mainly out of California, Washington state and Alaska, are also likely to adopt the full-price policies, Butterworth said. Smaller lines are also likely to take up full-price advertising, he said.
"Combining port charges with the cruise fare will not change the total price paid by the consumer," said Adam Goldstein, marketing chief for Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd another of the lines adopting the full-price policy.
Butterworth said cruise lines had over the years begun adding many operating costs to port fees, which most passengers believed were government taxes. The fees can add as much as 30 percent to a basic trip price. Now, only minor fees such as head taxes and port pilot fees actually paid to governments can be added.
Some lines, Butterworth said, were charging as port fees the salaries of cruise crew while their ships were docked and other operating costs in no way connected with any government.
"Anything could have been expensed in this way. It could be the food put on for the trip; it could be the water," Butterworth said.
Butterworth also said the lines -- including Norwegian Cruise Line Ltd., Celebrity Cruises Inc., Dolphin Cruise Line and Majesty Cruise Line -- would pay Florida $295,000 as part of the agreements.
Carnival said in a news release that the $295,000 in fees were neither fines nor penalties but payments to cover the costs of an 18-month state investigation. The company also said its brochures had always included a notice that extra port fees were required of Carnival passengers.
Carnival President Bob Dickinson said his company had been merely following an industry norm, in which port fees were added on to the advertised prices.
Advertising rates for Carnival and Royal Caribbean trips would be changed beginning later this month, the companies said.
Butterworth said the pricing changes may prove a boon to the cruise-ship industry, since passengers will not be startled by higher prices when they book. "We want just one price, just like the airlines," he said.
Last summer, one-day cruise ship lines in Port Everglades, a major cruise venue near Fort Lauderdale, agreed to stop calling passenger charges as high as $19 "port fees" because only about $3 was being passed on to governments.
"Government gets blamed for enough already," Butterworth said.
The Florida judge in a class-action suit against tobacco groups Thursday allowed one of the pioneering case's lead smokers to take a back seat in the upcoming trial after he complained of intimidation.
Stanley Rosenblatt, the lawyer pursuing the class-action suit on behalf of all ill and addicted smokers in Florida, said in Dade County Court that Arthur Reeves had been one of the original six smokers in the suit filed three years ago but did not want to take a prominent role as a witness in a trial scheduled for Sept. 8.
"He feels he has been greatly embarrassed and humiliated by investigators going out and asking neighbours and relatives and people he hasn't seen in 30 years about him," Rosenblatt said.
The lawyer gave no details in court, but said at a news conference Wednesday that private investigators working for tobacco companies routinely checked the backgrounds of people opposing them in court and potential trial jurors.
Rosenblatt asked Dade County Circuit Court Judge Alan Postman to allow another smoker, throat-cancer victim Frank Amodeo of Orlando, Fla., to be substituted for Reeves.
Amodeo said Wednesday he began smoking at 14, more than a decade before the health dangers of smoking were known, and that he has tried to stop smoking repeatedly. He still smokes and takes liquid nourishment through a feeding tube, since he can neither eat nor drink.
Rosenblatt said Reeves was not withdrawing from the suit, an option any ill smoker in Florida can choose, but would not act as a representive of the 500,000 potential claimants Rosenblatt has estimated his suit covers.
Reeves would share in money awards, if any, secured through the trial. The case appears likely to be the first to come to trial of a dozen or more class-action suits filed by smokers against tobacco companies.
Rosenblatt claims that tobacco companies such as Liggett Group, RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp., Loews Corp. and the Brown &amp; Williamson unit of B.A.T Industries conspired for decades to hide medical evidence damaging to their businesses and mislead Americans about the dangers of smoking.
A lawyer for Philip Morris Cos. Inc. said that allowing the switch just months before trial was unfair.
The lawyer, Philip Heim, said he had no knowledge of Reeves' complaints. "I don't know anything about him being allegedly harassed," Heim said.
The Florida judge in a class-action suit against tobacco groups Thursday allowed one of the pioneering case's lead smokers to take a back seat in the upcoming trial after he complained of intimidation.
Stanley Rosenblatt, the lawyer pursuing the class-action suit on behalf of all ill and addicted smokers in Florida, said in Dade County Court that Arthur Reeves had been one of the original six smokers in the suit filed three years ago but did not want to take a prominent role as a witness in a trial scheduled for Sept. 8.
"He feels he has been greatly embarrassed and humiliated by investigators going out and asking neighbors and relatives and people he hasn't seen in 30 years about him," Rosenblatt said.
The lawyer gave no details in court, but said at a news conference Wednesday that private investigators working for tobacco companies routinely checked the backgrounds of people opposing them in court and potential trial jurors.
Rosenblatt asked Dade County Circuit Court Judge Alan Postman to allow another smoker, throat-cancer victim Frank Amodeo of Orlando, Fla., to be substituted for Reeves.
Amodeo said Wednesday he began smoking at 14, more than a decade before the health dangers of smoking were known, and that he has tried to stop smoking repeatedly. He still smokes and takes liquid nourishment through a feeding tube, since he can neither eat nor drink.
Rosenblatt said Reeves was not withdrawing from the suit, an option any ill smoker in Florida can choose, but would not act as a representive of the 500,000 potential claimants Rosenblatt has estimated his suit covers.
Reeves would share in money awards, if any, secured through the trial. The case appears likely to be the first to come to trial of a dozen or more class-action suits filed by smokers against tobacco companies.
Rosenblatt claims that tobacco companies such as Liggett Group, RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp., Loews Corp. and the Brown &amp; Williamson unit of B.A.T Industries conspired for decades to hide medical evidence damaging to their businesses and mislead Americans about the dangers of smoking.
A lawyer for Philip Morris Cos. Inc. said that allowing the switch just months before trial was unfair.
The lawyer, Philip Heim, said he had no knowledge of Reeves' complaints. "I don't know anything about him being allegedly harassed," Heim said.
Florida is stepping up anti-smoking efforts by barring cigarette promotions on state roads, forcing Marlboro to drop its name from thousands of banners promoting the Marlboro Grand Prix of Miami motor race.
New rules detailing limits on using banners to promote sports events, to be published on Friday, are due to take effect in early March, a Florida Department of Transportation official said.
Banners for beer, tobacco and other products meant for adults are covered by the new rules. Promoters can place a product name on the banners but cannot use type faces, logos and colours associated with the banned products.
"Most sporting events have a corporate name attached to them and that name would be allowed," said department spokeswoman Lynn Holschuh. "But if it's a product that can't be sold to minors, the banner can't contain logos or significant advertising promoting the product."
Advertising on billboards, often located on private property, will not be affected by the new rules covering state roadways, the official said. The rules do not affect municipal, Interstate and other roads maintained by other governments.
In Miami, an IndyCar-class grand prix site since 1983, thousands of coloured banners no longer bear the Marlboro name, even though the Feb. 4 to March 2 competition is officially called the Marlboro Miami Grand Prix presented by Toyota.
Banners for the event say simply, Grand Prix of Miami presented by Toyota.
Last year's banners carried the distinctive red colour and bold typface of Marlboro, the most popular cigarette in the United States.
A spokeswoman for Philip Morris Cos. Inc., maker of Marlboro cigarettes, said the company had chosen to drop the Marlboro name from the banners as a courtesy. State officials, including anti-tobacco activist Gov. Lawton Chiles, complained about the Marlboro signs last year.
"We will have signage and merchandise and cigarettes for sale to people 21 and over at the site," said Philip Morris spokeswoman Tara Carraro. "We really want to reach smokers choosing brands."
Marlboro, which along with RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. is a major sponsor of motorsports events, will back other IndyCar events this year in California, Ohio, New Hampshire, Wisconsin and elsewhere.
Such sponsorships are major promotional outlets for the U.S. tobacco industry, with the top two producers spending $50 million or more each year on motorsports sponsorships, according to the IEG Sponsorship Report newsletter.
Marlboro spent about $19 million on motorsport sponsorships and likely as much again on related advertising and promotion during 1996, according to David Jacobsen, senior editor at IEG.
Cigarette advertising has been banned since the 1960s from U.S. television and steadily driven from sponsoring many other sports. The industry now faces still stricter federal government limits on promoting its products.
The federal rules, the first of which are to take effect on Feb. 28, sharply curtail cigarette advertising near schools and playgrounds and in publications favoured by people under 18.
A spokesman for the National Centre for Tobacco Free Kids, an anti-smoking group, said Florida's roadway ban was unusual. Some local transit systems, in San Francisco and elsewhere, have dropped tobacco advertising, he said.
A spokesman for Chiles, who is spearheading a billion-dollar lawsuit against the tobacco industry and advocating new state taxes on cigarettes, described him as pleased by the Marlboro's decision to take its name off the Miami race banners.
Any walkout by American Airlines pilots would hit tourist-dependent Caribbean islands like a hurricane, while Latin America's diversified economies should easily weather a service-stoppage.
"A hurricane hits only one island, and this will hurt all the islands," said Antonio Colorado, executive director of the Caribbean/Latin America Action economic organisation.
A halt by American Airlines, a unit of AMR Corp., which dominates U.S. service to the Caribbean and Latin America, would come just at the height of the Caribbean tourist season and cause economic havoc, regional industry, political and economic offcials and analysts said.
The roughly 160,000 hotel rooms in Barbados, St. Lucia, Aruba and other Caribbean islands are 90 percent occupied on average and losses from a strike could total $15 million each day of the North American winter, Colorado said.
"Few hoteliers in the Caribbean could be expected to sustain the loss of such revenue for more than a few days without terminal effect," said Caribbean Hotel Association executive vice president John Bell.
American, now in labour talks with its pilots, and its American Eagle subsidiary account for as much as 70 percent of the flights between the Caribbean and North America. Some 7.2 million North Americans travel to the Caribbean each year.
Some Caribbean economies are 50 percent or more tourist reliant, and region-wide tourist spending adds up to some $11 billion each year.
Grenada, Martinique, St. Kitts and St. Lucia are among the islands most reliant on American services.
"An American Airlines strike would be devastating to us at this time," St. Lucia's Prime Minister Dr. Vaughn Lewis said.
Some manufacturers and shippers of perishable goods from Latin America and the Caribbean would be hurt by a stoppage at American but the interruption in passenger traffic to Latin America would be short-lived, economists said.
"I think it would be little more than a blip," said Terry McCoy of the University of Florida in Gainesville.
Much of the travel between North America and the bigger countries in South America such as Argentina and Chile is by business people and much commerce can be carried out by telephone and otherwise.
"A lot of people who would take trips can use faxes," said Jerry Haar at the North-South Centre, a think tank at the University of Miami. "There would be a disruption but it's not anything which can't be recouped."
Cut-flower exporters from Ecuador and Colombia and seafood or horticultural shippers could also be hurt, Haar said. Some shippers of other goods might also face higher transport rates.
But overall the manufacturing and services businesses throughout Latin America were unlikely to feel many effects from a strike, economists said.
Aviation consultant Stuart Klaskin of Miami said a strike running a week or more might be a boon to U.S. rivals of American Airlines such as Delta, United Airlines and Continental Airlines. Each would likely seek to increase flights or add destinations.
Tobacco companies are countersuing Florida, saying the state government should be held liable for manufacturing cigarettes in its prisons if the state wins a billion-dollar lawsuit against cigarette makers.
Tobacco industry lawyers filed the suit on Wednesday, a Philip Morris Cos spokeswoman said and comes a week after a Florida judge blocked the industry from using Florida's history of cigarette-making in a trial scheduled to begin in August.  
Tobacco legal papers filed in Palm Beach County Court said the Florida Department of Corrections for decades made high-nicotine, high-tar cigarettes and other tobacco products and sold or distributed them to inmates.
State officials believed the cigarettes were "particularly unhealthful "but still distributed them to inmates."
"The state believed that its cigarettes were cancer-causing and addictive," the court papers said.
The tobacco countersuit asked that Florida pay some damages along with the tobacco industry if it should win its lawsuit to be tried in August.  
Florida, the countersuit said, should be liable "for the portion of damages that is attributable to its own conduct, or for its presumptive share of the market."
State officials have said the tobacco used in the cigarettes was bought from one of the defendants, American Tobacco Co, and it no longer makes cigarettes in its prisons.
Spearheaded by Gov. Lawton Chiles, Florida is suing cigarette makers for $1 billion, or more in costs incurred from treating smokers through the state's Medicaid healthcare program.  
The state has also won the right to press for punitive damages under a state racketeering law if it can prove tobacco companies such as RJR Nabisco and the Brown &amp; Williamson unit of B.A.T Industries of Britain conspired to hide the health risks of tobacco from customers.
The governor is also pressing to raise cigarette taxes and backed restrictions made public this week on tobacco-related advertising on Florida's state roads.
Some two dozen state governments and other local governments are suing tobacco companies to recover monies spent on treating tobacco-related illnesses.
"It's ironic," said April Herrle, spokeswoman for the governor. "This is a backdoor admission by the industry that nicotine is addictive, something it denies."
She said the state expects the countersuit to be dismissed.
Last week, the tobacco companies were rebuffed by the trial judge in the case when they sought to use the state's cigarette-making record as a partial defense in the approaching trial.
-- Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013.
Eastman Kodak Co secured only a partial exit from the bruising copier wars with the $684 million sale on Monday of its copier-marketing and service operations to Britain's Danka Business Systems Plc.
Prompted by chronic financial weakness, highlighted by the fact Kodak's copier sales of $1.8 billion yield only $20 million in annual operating profits, the sale prompted segment leader Xerox Corp to throw down the gauntlet to Danka.
"They're on our turf now and are going to have to chase us to win business," said Xerox executive Gill Hatch.  
Hatch predicted the Danka-Kodak deal will bring pricing pressures to the copier business. "Suffice to say that Danka has been aggressive, and will continue to be aggressive," Hatch said.
According to Danka chief executive Dan Doyle, the acquisition and a 10-year alliance with Kodak will give high-flying Danka a full line of copiers to offer low, middle and upmarket customers around the world.
Kodak is retaining its manufacturing and development operations in copiers, as well as some key technology.  
The remaining Kodak businesses will have about $600 million a year in sales, or a third of its former turnover. Danka will be its main customer as the primary distributor of Kodak copiers and printers.
"Danka's growth will be our growth," said Kodak co-chief operating officer Carl Kohrt.
Kohrt predicted Kodak's rump copier businesses would be profitable by the end of 1997 and that the transaction, netting Kodak about $600 million in cash, would be immediately accretive to earnings. The deal should close by December 31.  
Analyst Gary Schneider of Bear Stearns said he had hoped Kodak would have quit copiers entirely and will have to prove to Wall Street it can turn around the financial performance of the remaining copier businesses.
"The question is what kind of normalized earnings can you get out of those," he said.
Monday's deal is just the latest bit of corporate trimming at Kodak, which has spun off and sold businesses, generating some $8 billion. The company has in the 1990s exited pharmaceuticals, household goods and chemicals.  
The company said last winter it wanted to exit or reposition its copier businesses because its financial performance was subpar and promised little hope for a turnaround as it stood.
Kohrt said the deal with Danka will stimulate sales of Kodak copiers. "What we've really needed is pull-through from the market," he said.
Danka chief executive Dan Doyle said Kodak's strong focus on big customers needing high-volume copiers and services dovetailed with Danka's traditional presence among low and middle-market customers.
News of the deal boosted Danka's American Depositary Receipts, which closed up 6-5/8 at 36-1/2. Kodak closed down 1/2 at 71-3/4.
-- New York Newsdesk 212-859-1713.
Lawyers in a class-action suit against cigarette makers won the right to question and videotape the chief executives of several top tobacco companies, lawyers said on Thursday.
The chief executives of Brown &amp; Williamson, a subsidiary of B.A.T Industries Plc; the tobacco unit of Philip Morris Cos Inc; the RJ Reynolds Tobacco unit of RJR Nabisco, and Loews Corp's Lorillard were covered in an order issued by Dade County Judge Robert Kaye, according to Edward Moss, a lawyer for Brown &amp; Williamson.  
Stanley Rosenblatt, one of the lawyers bringing the class-action suit on behalf of U.S. flight attendants allegedly sickened by second-hand smoke, said he may use the videotapes at a trial in Dade County Court scheduled to begin in June.
Rosenblatt alleges in his lawsuit that tobacco company scientists and executives conspired to hide the dangers of smoking, even when the industry's own research backed up scores of independent studies that found smoking was unhealthy.  
The suit covers an estimated 60,000 flight attendants who never smoked and who suffer from lung ailments or other sicknesses and worked for U.S. airlines before in-flight smoking was banned.
Moss and other tobacco company lawyers had argued that Rosenblatt questioned tobacco industry chief executives several years ago.
Rosenblatt argued that many of the executives he questioned had retired and that scores of industry documents allegedly backing his claims had since become public.  
Moss said he and other tobacco company lawyers were considering appealing Kaye's order.
Kaye said in a separate order that he would privately review some 1,500 industry documents for possible use by Rosenblatt in the trial.
The tobacco lawyers say the documents, many of them made public by a legal assistant in a law firm representing a tobacco company, are privilged communications. They say the documents should not be used as evidence because the assistant had no right to the documents.
Anti-tobacco activists have described the documents as evidence that the industry for decades knew the risks of smoking while aggressively selling cigarettes and denying the dangers.
((--Miami Newsroom, 305-374-5013))
Florida Panthers Holdings Inc's cash flow losses are narrowing because of strong professional hockey revenues and a lift from newly acquired leisure properties, President Richard Evans said Tuesday .
"The games are sold out, and advertising and sponsorship revenue is better than expected," Evans told Reuters after a presentation to investors at a conference sponsored by Raymond James &amp; Associates Inc. "We also are benefitting for part of the year from the hotel and Incredible Ice properties."  
He predicted the company would have a cash flow loss, defined as earnings before taxes, interest, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA), of about $3.1 million for the 12 months ending June 30.
The Fort Lauderdale-based company forecast last November, when it made a 7.0 million share initial offering, that EBIDTA losses would total about $15 million in the fiscal year through June.
Evans said EBITDA should turn positive and total $3.1 million or more in the fiscal year ending June 30, 1998.  
EBITDA should total $22.5 million in the following fiscal year, when the Panthers hockey team will have 12 months' occupancy of a new, $185-million arena being built in Broward County north of Miami.
The arena will seat 19,000 during hockey games, stimulate ticket, souvenir and food revenues, and draw from three South Florida counties with four million residents, Evans said.
The Panthers, which now play in the Miami Arena, will also get a bigger share of concession profits than under the current deal, he said.  
He declined to predict when Panthers Holdings would turn profitable.
Evans said he spent two-thirds of his time working on possible acquisitions, under the direction of majority shareholder and Chairman Wayne Huizenga, and that deals were likely this year. He said leisure properties, particularly involving golf, were of keen interest to Panther Holdings.
Since November, Panthers Holdings has bought two marina hotels in Fort Lauderdale, in stock deals, and paid $15.5 million for Incredible Ice, an ice rink offering a spectrum of entertainments. Evans said Incredible Ice sites were likely to be opened elsewhere in the United States.
"The market has given us an incredible currency, and we intend to use it," he said.
Panthers Holdings shares have nearly tripled from their $10 offering price in November.
Evans said all acquisitions would be accretive to cash flow and were very likely to be stock transactions
Huizenga said in a speech at the Raymond James conference Monday night that deals for the Panthers were likely.
((--Miami Newsroom 305-374-5013))
