China on Tuesday accused Japan of taking an irresponsible approach to a bitter sovereignty dispute over a group of uninhabited East China Sea islands, saying Tokyo must take action to avoid further damaging ties.
A festering row over the islands, known in China as the Diaoyus and in Japan as the Senkakus, has flared in recent months after Japanese rightwingers moved to buttress Tokyo's claim by building a lighthouse on one of the group.
"The Japanese government has taken very irresponsible actions, particularly by encouraging illegal landings on the Diaoyu islands by rightwing groups, hurting Sino-Japanese relations," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang said.
Tokyo should take action to prevent further damage to ties, Shen told a news briefing in Beijing.
Tension over the potentially resource-rich islands soared on Monday when Hong Kong and Taiwan activists pierced a Japanese cordon and planted Chinese and Taiwan flags on one of the islets, claimed by Tokyo and by both Beijing and its arch-rival Taipei.
The brief landings by a handful of the around 300 Hong Kong and Taiwan protesters aboard a 50-boat flotilla were the first time activists had managed to break Japan's maritime blockade.
An earlier attempt ended in failure when Hong Kong activist David Chan drowned after leaping into stormy waters to protest Tokyo's control of the group. A Japanese coastguard medical team failed to revive Chan but saved the life of a fellow protester.
Japan has lamented what it calls the illegal landings and has not ruled out arresting future landing parties. A foreign ministry spokesman said on Tuesday that Tokyo had asked China and Taiwan to prevent further attempts to land on the islands.
Chinese spokesman Shen said Japan was responsible for the revival of the row over ownership of the islands, which Beijing says it has claimed for centuries.
Tokyo's claim dates to 1895 when it defeated imperial China in a war and seized control of a number of Chinese territories.
"The Japanese government didn't take any action to stop the damaging of Sino-Japanese ties by rightwing groups who offended against Chinese sovereignty," Shen said. "This has aroused the strong anger of the Chinese people.
"The will of the people cannot be bullied," he said.
Gains by Japanese rightwing forces would force victims of past Japanese aggression in Asia to question the future role Tokyo would play in the region, he said.
Outrage over the Japanese rightwingers' construction of the makeshift lighthouse on the islands has united nationalist sentiment in China, political rival Taiwan and the British colony of Hong Kong, which reverts to Beijing rule next year.
Shen's accusations of Japanese irresponsibility represented some of China's strongest diplomatic language yet in a dispute that both Beijing and Tokyo have sought to put behind them.
Analysts say China has been forced to walk a diplomatic fine line between retaining its nationalist credentials and damaging ties with a vital economic partner.
Shen said China would strengthen security to protect its citizens after Beijing's de facto embassy in Hong Kong reported receiving a threatening letter from Japanese righwingers.
"The Chinese side will take action at home to strengthen our security," he said, adding that he hoped other "relevant" countries would also protect Chinese citizens.
A senior U.S. official on Wednesday praised Beijing's approach to international arms control but hinted at continuing concerns over the possible proliferation of Chinese nuclear and missile technology.
The rebirth of an arms control dialogue stalled by Sino-U.S. disagreements over Taiwan over the last year was a major step to bridging differences between Washington and Beijing, said John Holum, director of the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency.
"Chinese positions have evolved in a very constructive direction," Holum told a news conference in Beijing on the third day of a five-day visit to China.
"China genuinely has been playing a much more active and very constructive role in arms control negotiations," he said, citing Beijing's role in negotiations towards a global nuclear test ban and for a cut-off of production of nuclear fissile material.
Holum's meetings with Chinese officials are part of a series of high-level talks intended to buttress Sino-U.S. ties, chilled by a 1995 visit to the United States by Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui and by rows over copyright, trade and human rights.
Cross-Pacific relations hit a new low last March when China carried out missile tests and military exercises in the seas near Taiwan, which Beijing considers a rebel province, prompting Washington to send two aircraft carriers to the area.
A July visit to Beijing by U.S. national security adviser Anthony Lake was seen by analysts as a vital step to restoring some sense of stability to a vital diplomatic relationship.
The Sino-U.S. disputes had restricted talks on arms control and proliferation issues, Holum told reporters.
"We've obviously had an interruption of our dialogue in these areas as a result of the Lee visit and the missile activities and so on," he said. "We are starting to get past that and to renew the strategic dialogue."
Talks with Vice Foreign Minister Li Zhaoxing and other officials had touched on alleged sales of Chinese missile technology to Pakistan and Beijing's civil nuclear cooperation with Iran, he said.
The Washington Post in August said U.S. intelligence officials had concluded Pakistan was secretly building a factory to make medium-range missiles using Chinese blueprints and equipment.
The report was the latest allegation of Sino-Pakistan military cooperation to raise hackles in Washington, which has in the past imposed sanctions on both for alleged missile transfers.
"There have been reports in the press and elsewhere of further missile transfers of technology," Holum said.
"We have not made the determination, based on the information that we have, that any further sanctions are warranted, but we routinely raise our concerns about these issues with the Chinese," he said.
U.S. concerns over nuclear exports to Pakistan had been much relieved by Beijing's commitment in May not to provide assistance to unsafeguarded nuclear facilities, he said.
Washington continued to believe that no country should share nuclear technology with Iran, a view China did not share, he said, adding that his talks had brought progress in harmonising Chinese and U.S. positions but no concrete deals.
"I didn't come here expecting any specific agreements, I was expecting we would close the gap," he said. "The contact and the discussion is important because it creates a venue and an opportunity for resolving the issues."
China on Thursday said it was willing to cooperate with other countries to maintain peace on the troubled Korean peninsula, where tensions are high as South Korean troops hunt for infiltrators from the rival North.
"We are paying great attention to the situation on the Korean peninsula," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang told a briefing in Beijing.
"China is willing to cooperate with other countries to bring into play positive and constructive action to uphold the peninsula's peace and stability," Shen said.
Frosty relations between Seoul and Pyongyang worsened last month when 26 North Koreans landed in the south from a stranded submarine.
Southern troops have since killed or found dead 22 of the infiltrators, have captured one and are carrying out a huge hunt for the remaining three.
Pyongyang has threatened "merciless retaliation" for the deaths of its soldiers and demanded Seoul return the submarine along with any survivors and bodies of the dead crew.
Seoul says any provocation will meet "stern punishment" and has raised security at airports, ports, diplomatic missions and five vulnerable west coast islands.
China backed the north in the 1950-53 Korean War and remains one of communist Pyongyang's few diplomatic allies, but also considers Seoul an important trading partner.
Shen gave no details of what kind of cooperation China hoped would bolster peace on the heavily-militarised peninsula, where southern forces face a hostile north suffering near-famine after disastrous floods.
South Korea and the United States in April called for four-nation peace talks with the north and China to replace a truce that ended the Korean conflict but left Seoul and Pyongyang technically still at war.
Pyongyang has insisted on bilateral talks with Washington to seek an accord, saying Seoul was not a party to the 1953 truce. China has yet to take a clear stance on the four-way talks.
Beijing had no private interest in the Korean peninsula and only wanted peace and stability, Shen said.
Both North and South should take action to ensure peace, he said but gave no details.
The family of detained Chinese dissident Wang Dan have found a lawyer willing to defend the leader of 1989 student protests in Beijing's Tiananmen Square at an expected trial, a close relative said on Friday.
Chinese court officials on Thursday informed Wang's mother, Wang Lingyun, she had one day to find him a lawyer, a signal that the dissident had been indicted and a trial was imminent.
"We've already found one," a family member said when asked if a lawyer had been hired.
The lawyer had visited the court dealing with Wang's case to begin legal formalities, but there was still no news of when the trial of the former student leader, who has been in detention since May 1995, would begin, the relative said by telephone.
"The next thing is for the lawyer to join in the law case, to understand the testimony and to understand the evidence," he said, adding it was not clear when the lawyer would be permitted to meet Wang.
Wang Lingyun said on Thursday that officials of the Beijing People's Intermediate Court had declined to say if the dissident had been indicted, but Chinese legal experts said lawyers are unnecessary in China unless a suspect has been charged.
Wang's relative said the family was concerned about the situation of the 26-year-old dissident, who has been lost in a security limbo since his detention more than 16 months ago.
"We feel pretty anxious. We are just waiting for new developments," he said.
Chinese sources have said Wang faces a sentence of up to seven years in prison if convicted of counter-revolutionary incitement, or subversion.
The outspoken activist attracted the ire of China's communist authorities in 1989 when he shot to prominence as a leader of student protests for more democracy centred on Tiananmen Square in the heart of the Chinese capital.
The demonstrations were crushed by the army on June 3-4 with heavy loss of life and Wang, a Beijing University student, served four years in jail for his role.
Wang appears likely to be the next victim of a rash of convictions and detentions of members of China's tiny and struggling pro-democracy movement.
On Tuesday, prominent dissident Liu Xiaobo was ordered to serve three years in a labour camp after he joined veteran activist Wang Xizhe in calling for the impeachment and dismissal of Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin.
Wang Xizhe's whereabouts are unknown.
Hopes that the award of the 1996 Nobel Peace Prize to jailed veteran dissident Wei Jingsheng could revitalise the faltering democracy movement were dashed on Friday when the prize went to campaigners for the former Portuguese territory of East Timor.
Beijing has long dismissed appeals from foreign countries and human rights campaigners for softer treatment of dissidents as interference in China's internal affairs.
Wang Dan had been expected to face new charges since last December, when the court that convicted Wei Jingsheng of plotting to overthrow the government also implicated Wang.
The court's verdict said Wei, who was jailed for 14 years, had links with people "convicted of counter-revolutionary crimes, including Wang Dan". It also referred to a tape-recorded conversation between Wang and Wei, but gave no details.
Wang had been active since his release from jail, defying persistent police surveillance and harassment to join in a daring appeal to Communist leaders for the release of all those still in prison for their part in the 1989 protests.
Australia said on Friday it was determined not to let India's veto kill a worldwide nuclear test ban treaty and vowed to lead a push for a United Nations resolution to keep the dream of a global pact alive.
Foreign Minister Alexander Downer said Canberra had launched a campaign at the United Nations to revive the draft Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT), after a disarmament conference failed to agree on a text in the face of Indian opposition.
"What we don't want to do is let the CTBT die," Downer told a news conference during a visit to Beijing on Friday. "An enormous amount of effort has gone into it, there has been a very wide measure of agreement on the text.
"We think the best way to take it forward is for us to ... take a resolution to the United Nations General Assembly in support of that text," he added.
Government officials in Canberra said Australia would lead the charge to win agreement for the treaty and would look for co-sponsors for a U.N. resolution to allow it to be opened for signing despite the failure to reach a consensus.
"We will work to achieve the treaty's endorsement during the current session of the U.N. General Assembly and its opening for signature at the earliest possible date," Downer said in a statement released in Canberra.
The 61-nation Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, which needed a unanimous stance to allow it to approve a draft text, on Thursday decided it could not even agree to report its failure to the General Assembly.
New Delhi, which had demanded nuclear powers commit themselves to move towards total disarmament, was able to block the treaty's progress singlehandedly -- prompting calls for a new way to be found to keep it alive.
Diplomats have said there is little time left for the 51st General Assembly to open the pact for signature at a ceremony in late September.
Australian ambassador for disarmament Richard Starr told Reuters in Geneva that Canberra still believed the treaty could be salvaged after nearly three years of negotiation and "decades of expectations".
"There is a clear need for friends of the CTBT to consider action so that the whole international community will be able to consider, endorse and sign this valuable treaty," Starr said.
"We would not want to see a treaty text die in a pigeonhole in Geneva," he said.
Australia, using its standing as a middle-ranking, non-nuclear power, has sought to play a leading role in the campaign to end nuclear testing.
Diplomats in Geneva said earlier this week the five declared nuclear powers -- Britain, China, France, Russia and the United States -- considered Australia best placed to present the draft treaty to the UN general assembly in the form of a resolution calling for a swift signing ceremony.
Downer said there was still some way to go to ensure the treaty's survival but expressed optimism a resolution would find widespread support.
"This is just the beginning of a process," he said. "I think there will be very strong support for our move."
Australia's Foreign Minister Alexander Downer announced on Friday an agreement with China to expand their security dialogue, saying recent frictions had failed to spoil growing ties between the two Pacific powers.
Disagreement over Taiwan, a coming meeting with the Dalai Lama and Chinese concerns over a Canberra-Washington security pact had not spoiled the atmosphere during meetings with his Chinese counterparts, Downer told a news conference in Beijing.
"I have been able to develop a security dialogue between Australia and China," he said. "What I would like to see happen is us holding, on an annual basis, senior officials' talks about regional security issues."
Downer said an Australian proposal for broadening existing annual bilateral disarmament talks into such a dialogue had been accepted by Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, but he gave no details of how they were likely to be organised.
"It's symbolically important because it reaffirms ... that the Australian government does not support a policy of containment of China," he said.
Downer's coming meeting with the Dalai Lama, Beijing's arch-rival for the loyalties of the Tibetan people, had not been a sticking point in talks with Premier Li Peng, he said.
Beijing regards the Dalai Lama as an anti-China "splittist", and condemns all attempts by Tibet's supreme spiritual leader to gather international support for autonomy in the restive Himalayan region.
Downer said he would meet the Dalai Lama when he arrived in Australia next month, but said the Chinese premier had made no direct mention of the visit.
A defence pact in July between Washington and Canberra that raised hackles in Beijing had not been brought up as a Chinese concern, while a proposal to supply uranium to Beijing's rival Taiwan was far from becoming a reality that could disrupt growing ties, he said.
Australian officials said Downer had fulfilled a pledge made last month in Hong Kong to raise the case of jailed Chinese-born Australian businessman James Peng during his Beijing trip.
Peng, 36, was sentenced to 18 years in a Chinese prison last September after being convicted of embezzling about A$240,000 (US$180,000) in the southern city Shenzhen. He has insisted he was framed by powerful commercial rivals.
Downer had requested that China deport Peng before the end of his scheduled term, but had been told the prisoner's sentence was a matter for the judiciary to decide, officials said.
China's rising foreign debt should not cause anxiety because the economy is booming and foreign exchange reserves are bulging, financial analysts and economists said on Tuesday.
Beijing was being cautious about raising the level of its foreign debt despite strong demand for capital, they said.
Foreign debt rose 6.3 percent to $109.57 billion at the end of June from a year earlier, the State Administration of Exchange Control said on Thursday.
Total foreign debt was up by 2.8 percent, or $2.98 billion, compared with end-1996.
The growth in debt was lagging well behind the expansion of the economy in a sign that Beijing was retaining its tight grip on overseas borrowing, said a foreign analyst in Beijing.
"(The debt increase) is not out of line with the size of the economy... I wouldn't think it is an alarming number," he said.
The need to restrain companies hungry for capital and the traditional reluctance of China's communist leadership to be indebted to foreigners were partly responsible for Beijing's tight limits on debt, said a Hong Kong-based financial analyst.
"Basically, the growth in the debt has been very moderate over the last couple of years," he said.
Demand for foreign loans and investment has soared as China's economy has boomed and officials and businessmen have pursued ambitious infrastructure and development plans, but Beijing was reluctant to depend too much on foreign finance, the analyst said.
Healthy foreign exchange reserves that reached a record $95.0 billion by the end of September had given Beijing the ability to boost debt levels without damaging lender confidence, but also enabled it to limit borrowing by providing a separate foreign currency source, said the Beijing analyst.
"China tends to be more conservative in borrowing, that's the culture, and this is more on the conservative side," he said.
"There is capacity for them to borrow more...without worrying about the underlying fundamentals," he said.
A senior Chinese economist under the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation said the rise in total debt was a response to a slight reduction in foreign direct investment and the continuing demand for capital.
He welcomed the exchange administration's report that the proportion of debt held by foreign-funded enterprises had risen to 18.6 percent, compared with the 30.2 percent accounted for by government debt and a 39.1 percent share for financial institutions.
"It is difficult for foreign-invested companies to raise money in China, so it is normal for them to raise funds overseas," the economist said. "China is not responsible for the debts of foreign-invested companies."
State media said in June that China intended to borrow more abroad, but would also adjust the foreign currency structure of its debt to make it match exchange income and reserves.
The decision to expand the scale of the national debt had not weakened Beijing's administrative vetting of the quality of overseas loans, which remained strict, the analysts said.
The birth in 1970 of what would become one of China's top computer firms could hardly have been less auspicious.
Communist cultural revolutionaries roamed the land, schools and universities were in ferment and the computing breakthroughs of the West were locked far away on the other side of China's ideologically-sealed borders.
But for the Nantian Electronic Information Group Corp. the accidental timing of its birth was as much an opportunity as a stumbling block, senior company officials say.
The group, then known as the Yunnan Electronic Equipment Factory, was cradled in the white heat of the late Chairman Mao Zedong's ultra-leftist 1966-1976 Cultural Revolution but found its fortune in the economic reforms that followed Mao's death.
Nantian now makes healthy profits supplying computer systems to state banks struggling to adapt to the booming market economy built by Mao's successors, said group president Zheng Zhigang.
"Nantian's development has been pretty fast," Zheng said in an interview at Nantian's head office in Kunming city, capital of southwestern China's Yunnan province.
Profits in 1995 hit 42.07 million yuan ($5.07 million) on sales that had soared to 927 million yuan from 510 million the year before and from just 100 million yuan in 1990, he said.
Nantian hoped to boost revenues to 1.2 billion yuan in 1996, he said, crediting nimble market footwork and early international cooperation for paving the group's road to national success from a remote frontier province.
"We needed something special to succeed from Kunming," he said. "In 1974 we started to make computers... Even though that was the time of the Cultural Revolution and China was fairly chaotic, we still felt (computers) were important."
Nantian began building contacts abroad in 1978, just two years after Mao's death and in the earliest days of China's opening to the outside world.
The experience helped to inform a crucial choice in the mid-1980s, when the firm decided to narrow its market focus.
"In 1985, we used our expertise to analyse the Chinese market... and we chose banks," Zheng said. "We chose an excellent market target."
Computerisation had become essential for China's staid state banks, which for decades had had little need to hustle for business and were still ill-equipped to supply the financial needs of the new market economy.
It was also a market sector in which little competition existed and where there was a strong demand for computer solutions that would match foreign technology with local knowledge, Zheng said.
Nantian had established cooperation with Italian technology group Olivetti and Unisys Corp of the United States in the 1980s, and in 1993 started working with U.S. computer firm Hewlett Packard Co, he said.
"We have a joint venture with Silicon Graphics to sell and service their graphic workstation in China," he said.
A vital ingredient in Nantian's growth recipe was the company's ability to focus tightly on its chosen market sector.
"Our main market is state banks and other national financial institutions," said Zheng.
"We develop the software with our partners. For the hardware we integrate different companies' equipment with our own for a total solution," said Special Project Manager Chen Deying.
Nantian had established a firm presence in the capital Beijing and in China's financial hotspots of Shanghai, southern Guangzhou and booming Shenzhen near the border with Hong Kong, company officials said.
Dozens of joint-venture subsidiaries in major cities gave Nantian a local presence in its key markets, but the state-owned group remained headquartered in scenic Kunming, they said.
Comprehensive support to ease the difficult transition from pen-pushing to terminal-tapping was essential in the financial world, where customers could become hugely reliant on their new technology, Zheng said.
"We established a support system for computerisation," he said. "This is very important for banks, which need good after-sales service."
Nantian was reported to be keen to issue shares on the Hong Kong stock exchange as early as 1994, but Zheng said the group still had no firm plans and said subsidiaries could float first.
"We have considered (listing) and made some preparations. We will need investment to develop," he said. "We don't have a fixed plan, we will analyse our subsidiaries and choose some of the better ones to consider listing."
No matter how the group found the funding it needed, it planned to remain firmly in the market niche carved in the nation's banking system, company officials said.
"We already have 10 years of history with the banks," said Zheng. "We feel that bank computerisation has just started."
An estimated 50,000 to 100,000 people in China are infected with the HIV virus but many Chinese still know little about the deadly AIDS disease it can cause, health officials said on Wednesday.
China was at a critical stage in its fight against AIDS, but a campaign launched by Beijing's communist leadership to promote "spiritual civilisation" -- or puritan Marxism values -- would help cut the cases caused by unsafe sex and drug use, the Xinhua news agency said.
Officials said they also planned to strengthen publicity to promote condom use.
China's official total for the number of people infected with the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) remained around 3,400.-- up from 3,341 at the end of 1995.
But tens of thousands of other cases went uncounted, a Ministry of Public Health official said.
Experts estimated the actual number of HIV infections at between 50,000 and 100,000 people, she told Reuters by telephone.
China was continuing to clamp down on drug abuse, strengthen controls on blood for medical transfusions and boost anti-AIDS education and was currently holding a three-day national meeting on the disease in Beijing, another ministry official said.
Officials would launch a series of activities in December to promote awareness and knowledge of AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome), he said.
"Many people do not even know how AIDS is transmitted," he said in a telephone interview.
The HIV virus is transmitted through direct contact with the body fluids of an infected person and can be spread through sexual contact, transfusions of infected blood or the use of dirty needles by drug addicts.
AIDS would not spread rapidly in China, although infection by all these routes was already occurring, the official Xinhua news agency quoted Professor Dai Zhicheng, vice president of the National Aids Committee, as saying.
"AIDS is spreading very fast in some neighbouring countries of China, and it is being transmitted through every possible method in our country," Dai said.
"China is at a critical point in its AIDS control, but some new measures will be adopted to slow down the spread of the disease," he said.
Xinhua said the official count of people infected with HIV was expected to approach 5,000 by the end of 1996, but doctors have warned widespread misdiagnosis amd insufficient reporting mean the real total may have long since passed 100,000.
Officials planned to set up a national AIDS control centre and improve monitoring networks. Regulations or laws on blood administration would also be published, Dai said.
Beijing's campaign to promote ethical progress, regarded by analysts as a bid to bolster the authority of the ruling Communist Party and boost socialist values weakened by economic reforms, would help in China's fight against AIDS, Dai said.
Overseas experience had shown that condoms were an effective way to prevent AIDS and China had launched an experimental campaign to promote condom use in Shanghai in 1994, said the health ministry official.
"The result was not very good," he said. "Many people feel willing to use condoms if they are free... but not if they are sold."
Chinese officials have called for a war on AIDS, warning that the nation is in danger of losing its last chance to slow the invasion and spread of the disease, state media said on Thursday.
Time was running out to strengthen safeguards against AIDS spreading rapidly through the populations of China's neighbours, minister of the State Family Planning Commission Peng Peiyun told a national meeting on AIDS in Beijing.
"From now until the end of the century is a crucial time for our nation to prevent the spread of AIDS," the official Health News quoted Peng as saying.
"If we do not pay close attention to prevention, the AIDS infection will increase geometrically," she said.
The spread of drug abuse, prostitution and illegal blood supplies could combine with a drastic increase in sexual disease to speed the AIDS epidemic in China, Health Minister Chen Minzhang told the conference, which closed on Thursday.
Many Chinese still knew little about AIDS or the HIV (Human Immunodeficiency Virus) that causes it, Chen said.
"Now is the prime time for prevention and control of HIV infection," the Xinhua news agency quoted him as saying. "It could be the last chance. We have no time to waste."
China's official total for the number of people infected with HIV had hit 4,305, up from 3,341 at the end of 1995, and 131 had developed AIDS, the People's Daily newspaper said.
Officials say tens of thousands of cases go uncounted, and quote experts as estimating the actual number of HIV infections at between 50,000 and 100,000.
China has blamed much of the rapid spread of AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome) in recent years on infection via drug addicts in southwestern provinces close to the "Golden Triangle" opium and heroin production area that includes parts of Thailand, Laos and Burma.
"Serious HIV/AIDS epidemics in neighbouring countries may have an impact on the domestic HIV epidemic," said Health Minister Chen. "A large number of migrants provide the opportunity for the spread of HIV infection."
Chinese health departments would continue to crack down on illegal blood banks to try to ensure the safety of blood transfusions, and would join with educational organisations and the media to spread knowledge of AIDS, Xinhua said.
Law enforcement agencies would clamp down on drug abuse and prostitution to try to cut HIV transmission through contaminated needles and sexual contact, it said.
Prostitution and narcotics abuse have both boomed in recent years as nearly two decades of economic reform weaken China's once-strict social controls.
Officials expect a campaign launched by China's communist leaders to promote puritan Marxist values to help cut infection caused by unsafe sex and drug use, but a Beijing AIDS activist said it was still unclear if the effort would really help.
Authorities should put more emphasis on education and health support for high-risk groups instead of relying on official disaproval and the police to curb their activities, activist Wan Yanhui said in a telephone interview.
China had largely failed to reach out to groups such as sex workers, drug addicts and homosexuals, many of whom still considered AIDS a foreigners' affliction, he said.
"There is not much public understanding (of AIDS)...the work done on the social side has been very weak," he said. "There needs to be a change in thinking."
China must make real changes to its economy if it wants to join the World Trade Organisation and should replace anti-U.S. rhetoric with international cooperation, a leading U.S. businessman said on Friday.
Beijing should take growing dissatisfaction among foreign investors seriously, said James McGregor, chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce in China. A recent crackdown on dissidents could only harm vital ties with Washington, he said.
"China is always telling foreign investors that we must show sincerity in our business dealings in China," McGregor told a meeting of the Beijing Foreign Correspondents Club.
"Perhaps the time has come for China to show some sincerity in getting into WTO (World Trade Organisation)," he said.
Chinese officials have blamed the United States for blocking their accession to the global trade group, but no other country wanted to ease entry requirements to a point at which they were not commercially viable, he said.
"There is room for compromise on China's WTO entry, but China should be sincerely interested in joining," he said.
The terms of Beijing's entry would affect other applicants to the WTO, McGregor said, adding that the group could not lower its standards for China.
Business investors from the United States, already upset by changes in taxes and rules, should pay note to anti-U.S. tirades in China's official press and the hostile stance of a popular book on Sino-U.S. relations called "China Can Say No", he said.
"I think that American business people in China really should pay attention to these stirrings of anti-American Chinese nationalism that we're seeing in this book and in the newspapers every day," he said.
The solid accomplishments achieved by the Beijing leadership over the past nearly two decades of economic reform could inspire positive nationalism without need to resort to anti-foreign rhetoric, he said.
While some Beijing officials appeared to want foreigners to play a minimal role, what China really needed was more opening to the outside and a bold continuation of economic reforms launched by paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, he said.
"And China should say yes to a more stable and friendlier relationship with America," he said.
Sino-U.S. ties have been rocked in recent years by disputes over Taiwan, human rights and copyright piracy, as well as annual battles over the conditions attached by the United States to China's Most Favoured Nation trade status (MFN).
While the American Chamber of Commerce had worked hard to boost relations and assure Beijing's MFN status, China's clampdown on its tiny band of pro-democracy dissidents could only harm ties, McGregor said.
"Our plan for next year is to try to get permanent MFN so we won't have this battle every year, but if China is rounding up dissidents and throwing them in jail...It's disappointing because it's not going to help U.S.-China relations," he said.
Beijing should also take account of dissatisfaction among foreign businessmen and investors and take into account their need to make profits, he said.
"China is not at the peak of its goodwill with foreign investors right now... Goodwill matters," he said.
China on Sunday used a Long March 2D rocket to fire a scientific research satellite into orbit from a base in the remote northwestern province of Gansu, the Xinhua news agency said.
The successful launch of the remote-sensing satellite followed a string of setbacks for the Chinese space industry that have sent insurance premiums for commercial launches soaring.
"The satellite went smoothly into orbit and all instruments aboard are operating well," Xinhua said.
The launch of the satellite, which is designed to spend 15 days in orbit before returning to earth for retrieval, was the third successfully completed by the two-stage, liquid-fuelled Long March 2D rocket, the official agency said.
China's space industry, once much admired for its bargain prices and its strong track record of launch successes, has been plagued by problems in recent years.
In August, a domestic communications satellite launched aboard a Long March 3 rocket from Xichang in the southwestern province of Sichuan failed to reach its proper orbit.
In February, a Long March 3B carrying an Intelsat satellite veered wildly seconds after lift-off before exploding in mid-air near the Xichang space centre.
China said six people were killed, 57 injured and 80 homes destroyed in the incident. Video footage smuggled out of China by an Israeli scientist showed dozens of levelled buildings and suggested the casualties were higher.
Chinese officials said the loss of the rocket and its payload was caused by a failure of the "inertia platform" that operates the rocket's directional controls.
In January 1995, a Long March 2E rocket blew up, killing a family of six in a rain of debris and destroying the Hughes-built Apstar 2 satellite it was carrying.
The failures, although hardly exceptional in the high-risk satellite business, have sent insurance premiums for Chinese launches soaring, eroding China's price advantage over Western and Japanese competitors.
Several launch contracts with foreign companies were cancelled following the setbacks, partly because of concerns over delays due to China's launch backlog.
China says it still has a high success rate, with only a handful of the 43 launches carried out by its Long March rocket series going wrong, and officials said this month they had tightened safety measures to prevent further disasters.
Launch vehicles would now self-destruct in the case of failure and officials would ensure people living nearby are evacuated before each launch.
In July, China took a step towards restoration its reputation for reliability when it successfully launched the Apstar 1A satellite.
A China-wide computer network launched by a subsidiary of the official news agency Xinhua on Monday will take Chinese businesses online and supply them with news and economic information, company officials said.
The China Wide Web (CWW) created by China Internet Corp would provide Chinese customers with online services in their own language and would give overseas subscribers a window on to the Chinese business world, company chairman Ma Yunsheng said.
"Our objective is to increase understanding of China," China Internet chief technology officer Chung-Kiu Wong told a news conference in Beijing to announce the service's inauguration.
CWW would use technology developed for the World Wide Web, part of the global Internet computer network, to supply news from international economic information providers such as Reuters Holdings Ltd and Bloomberg, Wong said.
China Internet was a Hong Kong-registered company majority-owned by China's official Xinhua news agency, Ma said. He declined to give details of the other investors in the firm.
In January, Xinhua was appointed the government regulator for foreign suppliers of economic information in China, a role that some analysts say clashes with its involvement in enterprises that supply financial and business data.
Xinhua's regulatory role and China Internet's quasi-monopoly position in the market would help boost the computer company's already bright prospects, said Harry Edelson of Edelson Technology Partners, which has a stake in China Internet.
Unlike the open-access Internet, CWW was modelled on internal company networks or "intranets", Edelson said.
"There will be a lot of real-time information available," he said. "I think there's going to be very fast growth from a zero start."
China Internet would enjoy free use of Xinhua's communications network and already had access agreements with the powerful Minstry of Posts and Telecommunications, he said.
Ma said domestic economic information would also be available through Xinhua news services and databases. He declined to say how many clients were expected to subscribe.
The Internet is viewed by some Chinese officials as a haven for pornography and political dissent but CWW would likely be a politically correct alternative.
"CWW should reflect Chinese culture," technology officer Wong said, without giving details.
CWW would build bilingual online home pages for domestic firms and foreign companies in China and would work to boost foreign understanding of the Chinese market, he said.
"If a U.S. company wants to show its wares on the Chinese Internet, we will translate it so the Chinese can understand... and vice versa," Edelson said.
A huge ethylene venture linking a British Petroleum subsidiary and Shanghai Petrochemical Co Ltd would give BP a major presence in China's downstream petrochemicals, company officials said on Tuesday.
BP Chemicals signed a letter of intent with Shanghai Petrochemical on Thursday to set up a $2.5 billion plant in Shanghai capable of producing 650,000 tonnes of ethylene a year.
"It's a big step forward for our development in China," said Zhang Jianning, BP's Beijing manager of government affairs.
He said BP's biggest China project so far also marked a change of focus for the company, which has until recently concentrated most of its Chinese investment in upstream activities such as drilling and exploration.
Analysts have predicted huge growth in China's downstream petrochemicals industry, as booming economic growth sends demand for products such as ethylene soaring.
"At the moment I would think petrochemicals is getting quite exciting," Zhang said in a telephone interview.
Officials of Shanghai Petrochemical, which is majority-owned by China Petrochemical Corp, or Sinopec, said the huge project demonstrated the company's confidence in its own future and in China's economic development.
It was too early to say how long a feasibility study for the project would take, but for a project of such a scale preliminary research could reasonably last up to two years, said Shanghai Petrochemical deputy director Lian Xiaolu.
Completion of such projects could take up to eight years, Lian told a news briefing in Beijing, adding it was too early to decide the details of how the venture would operate or of the investment required.
BP will own a 50 percent stake in the ethylene plant with the remaining 50 percent either held by Shanghai Petrochemical or shared with its parent Sinopec, officials said.
The venture is one of six ethylene projects with annual capacity of 600,000 tonnes or more promoted by state planners, the official China Daily said.
Sinopec president Sheng Huaren said last week the state oil refiner planned to more than double ethylene production capacity to around five million tonnes a year by 2000 from the current annual 2.36 million tonnes.
Shanghai Petrochemical officials said they hoped to establish a joint venture company with BP to produce acrylonitrile, used to make synthetic fibres.
The joint venture could then be expanded if all went well with technical studies for the ethylene plant, they said.
"If the market is there we will go ahead very quickly on this one," BP's Zhang said. He declined to say when the British firm hoped to begin production.
While the letter of intent showed a major commitment to working with BP, even if the ethylene project developed it did not mean Shanghai Petrochemical would slow cooperation with other foreign firms, said board of directors secretary Cai Hongping.
"It's not like love with a marriage of one husband and one wife," he said. "I think Shanghai Petrochemical will not stop looking for other partners."
China's economy grew by 9.6 percent in the first nine months of 1996, but many urban family incomes are lagging behind, the State Statistical Bureau said Wednesday.
Chinese industrial output was up, farmers were on their way to a year of record grain harvests and the scourge of inflation had been tamed to a year-on-year 6.6 percent in the first three quarters, bureau spokesman Ye Zhen said.
"The development of the macro-economy overall appears good," Ye told a news conference.
Gross domestic product was 4.5675 trillion yuan ($550.3 billion) between January and September, up 9.6 percent from the same period of 1995, Ye said, but gave no details. China's GDP grew by 10.2 percent in 1995.
The average urban income rose to 3,249 yuan ($391) between January and September, an actual year-on-year increase of 3.4 percent, he said.
But the incomes of many urban residents are lagging behind as China's economy booms, Ye said.
A survey of 35 major cities and towns had revealed that the incomes per family member of around 40 percent of households had declined, he said.
Some of the decline was the ordinary result of the birth of children or the retirement of older family members, he said.
"The second kind of situation is when the level of income falls or the level of income growth cannot keep up with inflation," Ye said, adding such problems were the cause of the income fall in about half the families surveyed.
"The difficulties of some low-income urban families have been aggravated," he said.
He gave no explanation of the decline in incomes suffered by some urban wage-earners, but many surplus workers in China's huge and largely stagnant state sector have been sent home on minimum salaries.
Although such workers are not considered unemployed and the state sector is highly reluctant to fire employees, China's urban unemployment rate hit 2.98 percent at the end of September, Ye said.
The number of unemployed in Chinese cities reached 5.3 million, he said, but gave no comparative figures.
China's urban jobless rate was 2.9 percent by the end of June, the same as the official figure for 1995, but state newspapers have warned that unemployment, a major concern for Beijing's communist leadership, could shoot up to 7.4 percent by 2000.
Optimism over the economy and the success of a continuing policy of tight credit aimed at curbing inflation and reining in runaway growth has been boosted by predictions that 1996 will be a bumper year for China's hundreds of millions of farmers.
Government policies had encouraged farmers to increase the area of land under grain, and grain output this year was forecast to exceed 480 million metric tons, beating the 1995 record harvest by about 15 million tons, Ye said.
China had set a target of 465 million tons for 1996.
Other figures released by the Statistical Bureau also painted a positive picture of an economy that Beijing says is on target for a "soft landing" after years of breakneck growth.
Year-on-year retail price inflation in the first three quarters was curbed to 6.6 percent, down 10 percentage points compared with the same period of 1995, Ye said.
The Xinhua news agency on Wednesday quoted economic tsar Zhu Rongji as forecasting inflation would be below 6.5 percent in 1996 and as saying it would be possible to cut it to six percent next year.
Retail inflation hit 21.8 percent in 1994.
China's economy grew by 9.6 percent in the first nine months of 1996, but many urban family incomes are lagging behind, the State Statistical Bureau said on Wednesday.
Chinese industrial output was up, farmers were on their way to a year of record grain harvests and the scourge of inflation had been tamed to a year-on-year 6.6 percent in the first three quarters, bureau spokesman Ye Zhen said.
"The development of the macro-economy overall appears good," Ye told a news conference.
Gross domestic product was 4.5675 trillion yuan ($550.3 billion) between January and September, up 9.6 percent from the same period of 1995, Ye said, but gave no details. China's GDP grew by 10.2 percent in 1995.
The average income for urban Chinese rose to 3,249 yuan ($391) between January and September, an actual year-on-year increase of 3.4 percent, he said.
But the incomes of many urban residents are lagging behind as China's economy booms, Ye said.
A survey of 35 major cities and towns had revealed that the incomes per family member of around 40 percent of households had declined, he said.
Some of the decline was the ordinary result of the birth of children or the retirement of ageing family members, he said.
"The second kind of situation is when the level of income falls or the level of income growth cannot keep up with inflation," Ye said, adding such problems were the cause of the income fall in about half the families surveyed.
"The difficulties of some low-income urban families have been aggravated," he said.
He gave no explanation of the decline in incomes suffered by some urban wage-earners, but many surplus workers in China's huge and largely stagnant state sector have been sent home on minimum salaries.
Although such workers are not considered unemployed and the state sector is highly reluctant to fire employees, China's urban unemployment rate hit 2.98 percent at the end of September, Ye said.
The number of unemployed in Chinese cities reached 5.3 million, he said, but gave no comparative figures.
China's urban jobless rate was 2.9 percent by end-June, the same as the official figure for 1995, but state newspapers have warned that unemployment, a major bugbear for Beijing's communist leadership, could shoot up to 7.4 percent by 2000.
Optimism over the economy and the success of a continuing policy of tight credit aimed at curbing inflation and reining in runaway growth has been boosted by predictions that 1996 will be a bumper year for China's hundreds of millions of farmers.
Government policies had encouraged farmers to increase the area of land under grain, and grain output this year was forecast to exceed 480 million tonnes, beating the 1995 record harvest by about 15 million tonnes, Ye said.
China had set a target of 465 million tonnes for 1996.
Other figures released by the Statistical Bureau also painted a positive picture of an economy that Beijing says is on target for a "soft landing" after years of breakneck growth.
Year-on-year retail price inflation in the first three quarters was curbed to 6.6 percent, down 10 percentage points compared to the same period of 1995, Ye said.
The Xinhua news agency on Wednesday quoted economic tsar Zhu Rongji as forecasting inflation would be below 6.5 percent in 1996 and as saying it would be possible to cut it to six percent next year.
Retail inflation hit 21.8 percent in 1994.
Changing Chinese tastes and a clutch of new factories have paved the way for spectacular growth in China for Swiss food maker Nestle SA, senior company officials said on Thursday.
Nestle's core portfolio of milk products, instant coffee, chocolate and sugar-based confectionary and prepared foods was all being produced in China, with a new plant producing mineral water scheduled to open next year, they said.
"We expect Nestle's total investment in China to reach five billion yuan ($602 million) by the year 2000," Nestle chairman Helmut Maucher told a news conference in Beijing.
Sales in China would grow exponentially, he said.
"We will double every two years, there is no doubt about it," he said.
Nestle had so far completed nine of 11 projects planned in its initial 2.8 billion yuan investment in China and expected sales in China, not including Hong Kong, of 1.5 billion yuan in 1996, company officials said.
Maucher said there were no immediate plans to open new factories. Nestle's focus in the short-term in China was on expanding established plants, but up to four new production projects could be established by 2000.
The changing tastes of Chinese consumers meant there was great scope for sales growth, particularly in the instant coffee market where Nestle's Nescafe brand already had a 75 percent share, officials said.
"It's clear the younger generation will increasingly drink coffee," said Theo Klauser, chief executive of Nestle (China) Investment Services Ltd, which supplies management services for Nestle's  Chinese joint ventures.
While Maucher was confident sales would double every two years, other Nescafe officials were more cautious.
"I think every two years is a very ambitious target," said Klauser, adding that a three-year timescale might be more achievable.
Although Nestle set up shop ahead of many of its multinational rivals in the 1980s, the company had lagged in breaking into China's rapidly growing ice cream market, a company official said.
Joint venture ice cream producers had already established a strong presence on the streets of Beijing and other northern Chinese cities, making it difficult for Nestle to catch up in the short term, said the official who declined to be identified.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
China said on Thursday it could produce more than enough grain to feed its growing population despite frequent natural disasters, rapid industrialisation, long-term droughts and a chronic lack of arable land.
In a draft "white paper" released to allay foreign fears that future Chinese grain shortages could overwhelm world markets, agricultural officials said the nation could feed its people for decades to come.
"Instead of forming a threat to the world's grain supply, China will make ever greater contributions to it," it said. "The Chinese government and people have the ability to solve the problem of grain supply by relying on their own efforts."
Some Western analysts have said China's rapidly expanding economy is swelling the nation's appetite for grain for food and feedstuffs. That in turn could force Beijing to make huge purchases on an international market already stressed by rising global demand.
The draft white paper, issued by the Ministry of Agriculture, dismissed such fears as a repeat of Western scepticism towards China's agriculture that greeted the nation's victorious communist revolutionaries in 1949.
"Some Westerners predicted that the Chinese government would not be able to solve the problem of feeding the country's population," the document said.
"History has already shown the futility of such a prediction," it said in one of many proud references to China's achievements in feeding 22 percent of the world's population with only about seven percent of its cultivated land.
China could raise output by protecting existing farmland, raising efficiency, improving irrigation, changing consumption patterns and reclaiming wasteland, it said.
By 2000, the Chinese population was expected to reach 1.3 billion, pushing total demand for grain to 500 million tonnes.
By the time the population peaked at 1.6 billion people in 2030, total demand was expected to be around 640 million tonnes, but Beijing was confident output would be able to keep pace even in the face of diminishing returns from the land.
"China can achieve its desired total grain output target if the annual average increase rate of per-unit area yield is one percent from 1996 to 2010 and 0.7 percent from 2011 to 2030," the white paper said, adding much bigger increases were likely.
For the next few decades, China planned to reclaim more than 300,000 hectares (741,000 acres) of wasteland each year to make up for land lost to industrialisation.
The proportion of inland and offshore waters used for aquaculture would be increased and the area of irrigated land would be raised to 53.30 million hectares (131 million acres) by 2000 from 49.33 million hectares (122 million acres), it said.
At least 10 percent of China's grain, more than 45 million tonnes last year, was lost annually between planting and consumption. Improved storage and shipping could help make savings of 20 million tonnes a year possible, it said.
China has long been eager to dismiss foreign fears that its demand for grain will spiral out of control, but Beijing has so far failed to convince its most vocal doubters.
China did not have enough land to sustain its economic growth rate and would find it hard to boost grain output, Lester Brown of the U.S.-based Worldwatch Institute said last month.
But the white paper said Beijing would turn to the international market only to make up for local shortages or natural disasters and to adjust the types of grain available.
"If China were to import a great deal of grain from other countries, the international grain market would be under severe pressure, and poorer countries would be unable to obtain enough supplies of cheap grain from it," the document said.
The family of jailed Chinese dissident Wei Jingsheng on Friday welcomed a decision by the European Parliament to award him a prize for freedom of thought, but Beijing slammed the honour as rude interference.
The choice of Wei, who has spent most of the last two decades in jail, as 1996 Sakharov prize laureate would give him encouragement, his family said.
"I feel very happy... we feel grateful to the European Parliament for its support," Wei's brother Wei Xiaotao told Reuters in a telephone interview.
The Chinese foreign ministry said the award served as encouragement for action against the Chinese government that had already damaged Sino-European ties.
"It is a rude interference in China's internal affairs and judicial jurisdiction," the ministry said. "We express great regret and anger at this decision of the European Parliament."
Wei, regarded by many as the father of Chinese pro-democracy dissent and a nominee for this year's Nobel Peace Prize, was jailed for 15 years in 1979 and had been paroled for less than a year before being detained again in April 1994.
Last December he was sentenced to a further 14 years in prison for subversion and for funding democracy activists.
The European Parliament announced on Thursday that Wei had won the 15,000 Ecu ($19,000) Sakharov prize for freedom of thought, to be awarded at a ceremony in Strasbourg in December.
Former winnners of the prize, created to honour the Soviet dissident Andrei Sakharov, include South African President Nelson Mandela and Burmese opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi.
The award put further strain on ties between the parliament and Beijing, which on Thursday angrily denounced a recent meeting between parliamentary officials and the Dalai Lama, China's exiled arch-rival for Tibetan loyalties.
Wei was a criminal convicted of revealing state secrets and threatening state security who had broken the terms of his release. No country had the right to interfere in his case, the foreign ministry said.
The award had already harmed ties with Europe, it said.
Wei Xiaotao, who recently met his brother in jail at the Nanpu saltworks in the northern province of Hebei, said Wei would have to wait until next month to learn of the award.
"He will have to wait until our next meeting to hear about this prize... that place is very closed to news," Wei Xiaotao said. "There's no chance that anyone there will here about it and tell him."
China has in recent months cracked down hard on the tiny band of remaining dissidents who have not yet fled into exile or been imprisoned.
Leading critic Liu Xiaobo this month was sent to a labour camp for three years after he co-authored a petition calling for the impeachment of Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin.
Former student leader Wang Dan, who spent four years in jail for his role in 1989 pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing that were bloodily crushed by the army, is currently awaiting trial in Beijing on the capital charge of subversion.
The award of the Sakharov prize to Wei was unlikely to change Beijing's stance on dissent, his brother said. "I don't think it will have a big influence," he said.
Wei's family had no plans to use the prize money that came with the Sakharov prize, Wei Xiaotao said.
"It's his money... In the future, when he comes out, he can use it," he said.
(1 Ecu=$1.2)
A Beijing court on Wednesday sentenced dissident and former student leader Wang Dan to 11 years in prison, the latest hammer-blow struck by China against its tiny band of pro-democracy activists.
The Beijing Number One Intermediate People's Court took less than four hours to convict Wang of plotting to subvert the government, but the young dissident's family quickly denounced the verdict and vowed to appeal.
"We are angry... He received such a heavy sentence even though he was innocent," Wang's father, Wang Xianzeng, said in a telephone interview after a brief meeting with his son at a Beijing detention centre.
"Wang Dan said he wants to appeal," he said. "Wang Dan feels everything that he has done has been above-board... it was all for China's democratisation."
Wang, 27, was sentenced to 11 years in prison and deprived of his political rights for a further two years, the Xinhua news agency said in a long report hailing the fairness of the trial.
"Sufficient evidence, which includes written materials, witness accounts, recorded tape and criminal technical appraisal, were shown at the court," the official agency quoted the trial's chief judge as saying.
"The evidence is conclusive," it quoted the verdict as saying. "(Wang) instigated people by saying that 'It is time we turn our words into actions'."
Wang, who vanished into detention in May 1995, had faced a maximum penalty of death and a minimum 10-year prison term.
One of the student leaders of the 1989 pro-democracy protests in Beijing that were crushed by the army, Wang had been one of the few members of China's dwindling band of dissidents not in exile or serving a long term in detention or prison.
A spate of arrests and detentions in recent months has left the pro-democracy movement reeling, analysts say.
Wang's conviction was a slap in the face for Western governments that have appealed to Beijing to improve its human rights record, diplomats in the Chinese capital said.
New York-based rights group Human Rights in China denounced the verdict as the result of a show trial that blatantly violated Chinese law and international standards.
Scores of police enforced tight security around the court building in western Beijing, keeping foreign journalists well away from a trial billed by officials as open to the public.
Less than 20 observers had been allowed in the court, said Wang's father, who was allowed to attend along with the dissident's older sister.
"Not one witness was summoned," he said. "The judge did not uphold the justice and dignity of the law... How can writing articles constitute a crime?"
The family would have 10 days to appeal upon receiving official notification of the verdict in about five days' time, he said, adding they were not optimistic the verdict would be overturned.
The 11-year sentence had been no surprise to the family or to Wang, who had been in good spirits during their 30-minute meeting after the trial, said his mother, a 61-year-old museum researcher who attended as one of two defence lawyers.
Wang, who once promoted free debate in the campus of the elite Beijing University, has already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in the 1989 Tiananmen Square demonstrations.
He returned to political activism after his parole in 1993, defying police surveillance to join a daring appeal to Beijing's communist leadership for the release of those still jailed for their part in the 1989 protests.
Wang's father said his son's health had deteriorated during more than 15 months in detention, but added the former student activist believed he had done nothing to be ashamed of.
"He has a clear conscience," he said.
A Chinese court took less than four hours on Wednesday to convict prominent dissident and former student leader Wang Dan of plotting to overthrow the government and sentenced him to 11 years in prison.
The Beijing Number One Intermediate People's Court found Wang guilty of conspiring to subvert the Chinese government, the Xinhua news agency said. He faced a maximum penalty of death.
"Sufficient evidence, which includes written materials, witness accounts, recorded tape and criminal technical appraisal, were shown at the court," Xinhua quoted the judge as saying after the trial.
Wang, 27, was also deprived of his political rights for two years, Xinhua said, quoting the verdict.
"Wang candidly confessed his activities," Xinhua said, adding that he received funds from overseas hostile forces, gave financial aid to families of jailed dissidents and tried to set up an "opposition force" by uniting illegal organisations.
Charges against Wang were backed by testimony by another dissident, Liu Xiaobo, Xinhua said. It did not elaborate. Liu was sent this month to a labour camp for three years.
"His criminal fact is clear, and the evidence is conclusive," Xinhua said quoting the verdict against Wang. "He instigated people by saying that 'It is time we turn our words into actions'."
The verdict was issued just four hours after the trial began. Foreign reporters and legal experts were barred from attending the trial in western Beijing.
Security was tight around the court building, with dozens of police preventing the public from approaching the building.
Earlier on Wednesday, the dissident's father said the family would appeal if Wang were convicted.
"We will definitely appeal... We will not give in," Wang Xianzeng told reporters just hours before the start of the proceedings.
"He is definitely innocent," he said as he left his home with the dissident's mother, Wang Lingyun, to go to the court.
"Speech can't overthrow the government," he said.
Wang's mother, a 61-year old museum researcher who has no background in law, attended the trial as one of two defence lawyers. His father and a sister were allowed to sit in.
Wang Lingyun said on Tuesday she expected Wang to receive a harsh sentence although he would plead not guilty.
The mother had said the dissident was calm and mentally prepared for a harsh sentence, although she has said his health had deteriorated since he vanished into detention in May 1995.
Wang Dan faced a minimum 10-year sentence and a maximum penalty of death.
The New York-based Human Rights Watch said last week the chances of acquittal were slim because Wang has not had adequate time to prepare a defence.
Human Rights Watch attacked the trial on Tuesday as a sign of the Chinese leadership's increasing intolerance of dissent.
Wang has already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square that were crushed by the army in June 1989 with heavy loss of life.
He was politically active again after his parole in 1993, defying police surveillance to join a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of those still jailed for their part in the 1989 protests.
China has recently cracked down on the few remaining dissidents who have not fled into exile or been jailed.
China said on Thursday its jailing of leading dissident Wang Dan for 11 years was not a human rights issue but an ordinary legal matter that would not hurt Beijing's sensitive relationship with the United States.
A Chinese court on Wednesday took less than four hours to condemn former student leader Wang for plotting against the government, in a verdict that prompted quick expressions of deep concern from Washington.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang said the trial would not cause further damage to cross-Pacific ties, long sorely tested by disputes over Beijing's human rights record.
"The case of Wang Dan has nothing to do with the issue of human rights," Shen told a news briefing. "I don't think the case of Wang Dan will have any effect on Sino-U.S. relations."
The Beijing Number One Intermediate People's Court sentenced Wang, 27, to 11 years in prison and stripped him of his political rights for a further two years, after a brief hearing hailed by state media as a model of fairness.
International human right activists rushed to condemn the trial as a sham and the verdict as a travesty, while Wang's family said justice had not been served and vowed to appeal.
"Wang Dan's trial was a parody of justice," rights watchdog Amnesty International said in a statement. "It is clear that the verdict and sentence against him had been decided in advance."
Foreign reporters had been barred from the trial and the speed with which the official Xinhua news agency released a lengthy interview with the chief judge afterwards showed the report had been prepared in advance, Amnesty said.
Police posted outside Wang Dan's home in western Beijing blocked reporters from meeting his family, who plan to appeal as soon as they receive official notification of the verdict.
Two policemen had visited the family on Tuesday morning and others continued to keep constant watch, said the dissident's mother Wang Lingyun, a 61-year-old museum researcher who attended his trial as one of two defence lawyers.
"Wherever I go, they go," she said by telephone.
European governments expressed dismay at the severity of the sentence imposed on a dissident renowned abroad for his role as a leader of the 1989 pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square that were crushed by the army.
Wang, who once promoted free debate on the campus of Beijing University, had already served four years in prison for his role in the 1989 protests. He returned to political activism after his release, before vanishing into detention in May 1995.
Washington officials greeted the verdict against Wang with expressions of concern and high praise for the young dissident, hailing him as one of China's premier voices for human rights.
"We are deeply concerned by the sentence that has been given to Wang Dan," White House spokesman Mike McCurry said.
"We urge the Chinese authorities to show clemency to this courageous man, whose championing of democratic values has gained him deserved international recognition," said U.S. State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns.
Chinese spokesman Shen said Wang's conviction was purely a domestic legal affair.
"The trial of Wang Dan is entirely a Chinese legal procedure carried out in accordance with the law," he said. "It has no connection with human rights or other issues."
Sino-U.S. ties have long been strained by disputes over human rights, trade, copyright theft in China and Taiwan, but both sides say tensions have eased in recent months after a series of high-level meetings.
Officials of the six nations of the Mekong river region arrived in southwestern China on Tuesday for a ministerial conference intended to boost cooperation in an area long hobbled by distrust and war.
The sixth meeting of the Greater Mekong Sub-region (GMS) programme would begin in Kunming city on Wednesday, with ministers from Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam, Burma and China scheduled to review billions of dollars worth of regional infrastructure projects, officials at the conference said.
Ministers would consider an environmental action plan to curb deforestation on the upper reaches of the Mekong which borders or flows through all six nations, said Norida Morita of the Asian Development Bank (ADB).
The meeting would push forward the GMS programme from planning projects to implementation, Morita told reporters.
"The main thrust of the Greater Mekong activities is to link the six countries with a transport network," he said.
A proposed $490 million road to connect Bangkok with Phnom Penh and Ho Chi Minh city in southern Vietnam was one project expected to gain ministerial approval, officials said.
Other joint projects being considered include a $1.8 to $2.1 billion China to Southeast Asia railway and construction of a telecommunications and power transmission network.
Plans to boost infrastructure in the underdeveloped region were only one part of a programme that had helped speed the transformation of the area from wartorn backwater to an attractive investment destination, said GMS consultant David Husband of Global Economics Ltd.
China and Vietnam border troops and naval forces clashed repeatedly in the 1980s after a bloody border conflict in 1959.
Vietnamese troops fought Khmer Rouge guerrillas in Cambodia through the late 1980s, while drug lords and soldiers sparred along the Thai-Burmese border.
"The projects are the tangible results, but sub-regional cooperation is as much as anything about trust and goodwill," Husband told Reuters.
"This very coming together is testimony to the world that something is happening here," he said. "It has helped draw attention to the fact that there is peace in the region."
GMS supporters hope that this trust forged through shared economic and environmental projects will help build stability in the Mekong region, home to almost 230 million people.
Relations between the six nations have seldom been better, despite the Cambodian government's continuing war against the Khmer Rouge and the political divide between Burma's military junta and the country's democratic activists.
A rush of new interest in investment projects in the area was making the coordination of development a key issue at the Kunming conference, ADB's Morita said.
New development initiatives from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and other countries were welcome, but should be organised to complement the development foundation built by the GMS programme and the ADB, he said.
China said on Thursday its jailing of leading dissident Wang Dan for 11 years was not a human rights issue but an ordinary legal matter that would not hurt Beijing's sensitive ties with the United States.
A Chinese court on Wednesday took less than four hours to condemn former student leader Wang to 11 years in prison for plotting against the government, in a verdict that prompted quick expressions of deep concern from Washington.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang said Wang's trial and conviction were entirely legal matters.
"The trial of Wang Dan is entirely a Chinese legal procedure carried out in accordance with the law," he said. "It has no connection with human rights or other issues."
Shen said the verdict would not cause further damage to cross-Pacific relations that have long been sorely tested by disputes over Beijing's human rights record and other issues.
"The case of Wang Dan has nothing to do with the issue of human rights," Shen told a news briefing in Beijing.
"I don't think the case of Wang Dan will have any effect on Sino-U.S. relations," he said.
The Beijing Number One Intermediate People's Court sentenced Wang, 27, to 11 years in prison and stripped him of his political rights for a further two years, in a trial hailed by Chinese state media as a model of fairness.
International human right activists rushed to condemn the verdict, while European governments expressed their dismay at the severity of the sentence imposed on the former leader of the ill-fated 1989 pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing.
Wang, who once promoted free debate in the campus of Beijing University, had already served four years in prison for his role in the 1989 protests that were crushed by the army with heavy loss of life.
Washington officials greeted the verdict with expressions of concern and with strong praise for the jailed dissident, hailing him as one of China's premier voices for human rights.
"We are deeply concerned by the sentence that has been given to Wang Dan," White House spokesman Mike McCurry said on Wednesday.
"We urge the Chinese authorities to show clemency to this courageous man, whose championing of democratic values has gained him deserved international recognition," said U.S. State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns.
Sino-U.S. ties have long been strained by disputes over human rights, trade, copyright theft in China and Taiwan, but both sides say tensions have eased in recent months after a series of high-level meetings.
The family of jailed Chinese dissident Wang Dan on Friday received official confirmation of his 11-year prison sentence, suggesting the way was now clear for the former student leader to appeal his conviction.
A Beijing court on Wednesday took less than four hours to condemn Wang for plotting against the government after a trial that sparked expressions of concern from around the world.
Wang's family received official notification of the verdict on Friday afternoon, implying the 27-year-old activist was now free to appeal within 10 days, said his mother Wang Lingyun.
"The verdict should be first given to him, with another (copy) given to the family," she said in a telephone interview.
"This is an issue for Wang Dan, he has to write an appeal document...for the higher court," she said. "After the court has received it they may inform us."
Wang, a dissident known for his role as a leader of the ill-fated 1989 pro-democracy protests in Beijing's Tiananmen Square, had pleaded not guilty to subversion charges carrying a maximum death sentence and a minimum 10 years' imprisonment.
During a brief meeting with his family after the trial he vowed to appeal, a decision widely considered to be a symbolic gesture as verdicts imposed on Chinese dissidents in past political trials have almost never been overturned.
The 11-year sentence imposed on Wang was the latest in a series of crushing blows on China's embattled band of dissidents, most of whom were already in exile or serving long terms in adminstrative detention or jail.
It drew immediate fire from international human rights activists, who condemned the trial as a parody of justice masking a pre-arranged result.
Chinese state media called the trial a model of fairness. Officials said it was an ordinary legal matter and an internal affair.
The United States and some European and Asian nations expressed their concern, while Czech President Vaclav Havel -- himself a former dissident against a communist government -- said the verdict was unacceptable and deeply disturbing.
Wang, who once promoted free debate on the campus of Beijing University, had already served four years in prison after the 1989 protests were crushed by the army with heavy loss of life.
The former history student returned to activism after his parole in 1993, defying police surveillance to join a daring appeal to Beijing's communist leadership for the release of those still jailed for their part in the 1989 demonstrations.
He was detained once more in May 1995 and disappeared into legal limbo for almost a year and a half until being formally arrested.
Wang Lingyun, a 61-year old museum researcher who attended the trial as one of Wang's two defence lawyers, said it was unclear when she would be able to meet her son again.
"If he continues to ask me to be his defence lawyer, it's possible we will be able to have a lawyer's meeting, like last time," she said. "It's his decision."
The family had had little time to discuss the details of Wang's appeal during their 30-minute meeting at a Beijing detention centre on Wednesday, she said.
"Last time we didn't speak much, because the time was so short," she said. "We hadn't seen each other for such a long time, we just talked about family things."
Chinese state media on Friday lashed out at a U.S.-funded radio news station, accusing the United States and other Western nations of stepping up "Cold War propaganda" against Beijing.
U.S. Radio Free Asia, which broadcasts news to China in Chinese, had been launched by Washington to create chaos and sow dissent in Asian nations, the official China Youth Daily said.
"With the broadcasts of Radio 'Free Asia', the United States is further stretching its gossiping tongue into the Asian region," the newspaper said in an article published on the same day a senior U.S. official began a visit in Beijing.
U.S. Undersecretary of State Lynn Davis had arrived in China for talks on arms proliferation and to lay the groundwork for a crucial visit later this month by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, a U.S. Embassy spokesman said.
Christopher's visit is intended to be the latest in a series of moves by Washington and Beijing to mend ties long strained by disputes over human rights, trade, copyright piracy and Taiwan.
Officials on both sides say relations have warmed in recent months after a string of high-level contacts, but articles in the Chinese state press on Friday took a more hostile tone.
"Although the Cold War has been over for years, the United States and other Western nations rely on the superiority of their communication and information technology to increasingly launch Cold War propaganda," China Youth Daily said.
"The real goal of setting up Radio 'Free Asia' is to use news media to interfere in the internal affairs of China and other Asian nations, to create chaos, and to destroy the stability of these countries," the newspaper said.
Radio Free Asia would only boost people's abhorrence of U.S. power politics and hegemonism, the China Youth Daily said, calling for Asia-wide vigilance against the station.
China last month told Washington to pull the plug on Radio Free Asia, created by the U.S. congress as an Asian counterpart to the anti-communist Radio Free Europe. But U.S. officials have said the local-language news broadcasts were here to stay.
The station announced on Thursday that it planned to begin beaming uncensored news to Tibet this month and to expand Chinese broadcasts next year.
U.S. commentators have suggested the station could become a new irritant in fragile cross-Pacific ties, particularly after U.S. congressmen reversed a change of name to the less contentious Asia Pacific Network.
Another potential stumbling block for Sino-U.S. reconciliation is the case of Chinese dissident Wang Dan, who was jailed for 11 years for plotting against the government after a trial on Wednesday that lasted less than four hours.
Beijing's human rights record has long been a major focus of U.S. concerns and a perennial source of dispute.
While the China Youth Daily focused on the pro-democracy rhetoric of Radio Free Asia, a separate report in the official Legal Daily took aim at the entire U.S. political system.
In a scathing analysis of the current U.S. presidential election, the newspaper said ordinary Americans had little say in the choice of their leadership.
"U.S. democracy is essentially democracy of the capitalist classes or democracy of the rich -- it certainly is not democracy of the whole people," it said.
Most voters chose not to turn out for mud-slinging contests between presidential candidates promoted by special interest groups, it said.
While some analysts see the Chinese media's anti-U.S. rhetorical broadsides as evidence of growing nationalist sentiment, Beijing officials say they are keen to mend fences with a nation also seen as a vital economic partner.
China has ordered two Hong Kong democracy activists to leave the country after they tried to petition Beijing officials over the political future of the colony, Hong Kong sources and Chinese media said on Friday.
Beijing police had told activists Wong Chung-ki and Chui Pak-tai to leave China, the official Xinhua news agency said.
Hong Kong sources said the two had been trying to petition officials over what they called the "undemocratic" methods being used by China to select a chief executive to run the British colony after it reverts to Beijing rule on July 1, 1997.
"The Beijing Public Security Department issued a warning to Chui and Wong, asking them to return (to) Hong Kong within a stated time," Xinhua said.
It was not clear if the two campaigners, both members of local councils in the British colony, had already left Beijing.
Officials of a Beijing hotel had filed a public disturbance complaint against the two for distributing materials to reporters in the hotel on Thursday evening, Xinhua said.
Anxiety has grown in Hong Kong in recent months over how much political freedom China will allow after it regains control of a colony run from London for more than 150 years.
The jailing of leading Chinese dissident Wang Dan for 11 years by a Beijing court on Wednesday awakened fears that those who criticised the post-handover, Beijing-backed administration could face a similar fate.
Chinese authorities, currently overseeing the selection of a group to choose Hong Kong's first post-colonial chief executive, also barred two other pro-democracy advocates from entering the country on Thursday, activists in Hong Kong said.
Officials at the Sha Tau Kok border post refused entry to Andrew To and Chan Kwok-leung of the Hong Kong Democratic Party after keeping them in a room for two hours, To told Reuters.
All four activists had planned to lobby the China-selected Preparatory Committee that will select the committee to decide the chief executive, and to appeal for a reprieve of Hong Kong's current elected legislature, which Beijing has vowed to scrap.
A copy of a statement by the activists obtained by Reuters accused China of using undemocratic methods to choose the chief executive and condemned the decision to bar their colleagues from entering the country.
Their petition urged Beijing to scrap a plan to appoint a provisional legislature in place of the elected Legislative Council, and demanded the territory's future leader be elected instead of chosen by a China-controlled selection committee.
China, which has bitterly opposed democratic reforms introduced in Hong Kong in recent years, says the official Selection Committee will be well equipped to represent the will of the colony's six million people.
The rules for choosing the chief executive would guarantee a selection that was fair, honest and without corruption, Chinese Vice Premier Qian Qichen told Preparatory Committee members in a speech on Friday.
Analysts said a list of candidates for the Selection Committee released on Friday was dominated by pro-China politicians. The Preparatory Committee was scheduled to vote on the list on Saturday.
China has agreed to retain Hong Kong's capitalist system for 50 years but officials have suggested that freedom of expression in the bustling colony would be limited after the transfer.
A survey published on Thursday said most businessmen in Hong Kong expected press freedom, the political system and human rights to deteriorate after the return to Chinese rule.
A China-selected committee on Saturday chose 340 members of the group which will select the first chief executive to lead post-colonial Hong Kong, and said the final appointment would be made in early December.
The Hong Kong Preparatory Committee, a group hand-picked by Beijing to chart the British colony's return to Chinese rule on July 1 next year, chose 340 members of the Selection Committee from a list dominated by pro-China politicians.
The 400-member Selection Committee would make the final selection of the first post-colonial chief executive in a meeting on December 11 in Hong Kong, officials of China's Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office said.
"The 400 members of the Selection Committee are shouldering a great historic mission, I hope they willl not let down the trust of the nation and will not let down the hopes of six million Hong Kong people," said Chinese Vice-Premier Qian Qichen.
The committee should chose a leader capable of maintaining Hong Kong's stability and prosperity, Qian said in a speech to the Preparatory Committee in Beijing's cavernous Great Hall of the People.
The Preparatory Committee meeting chose the 340 Selection Committe members from a prepared list of 409 candidates made up largely of prominent Hong Kong politicians, well-known businessmen and community leaders.
"I think this is a very broad-based representative committee," Chen Ziying of the Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office, when asked why few democrats were in the group.
Preparatory Committee members select 340 of the 400 members. Of the remaining 60 seats, 26 automatically go to 26 delegates on China's National People's Congress, or parliament.
The other 34 members will be appointed by local deputies of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference.
The Selection Committee will also choose a provisional legislature to replace the current elected Legislative Council on July 1, 1997.
Anxiety has grown in Hong Kong in recent months over how much political freedom China will allow after it regains control of a colony run by Britain for more than 150 years.
Democratic campaigners in the colony have accused Beijing of using undemocratic methods to shape its future government and have condemned the scrapping of the existing legislature.
China this week ordered two Hong Kong democratic activists to leave the country after they tried to deliver a petition to officials that criticised the selection method and called for a reprieve of the legislature.
Businessmen Peter Woo and Tung Chee-hwa and retired judge Simon Li, who are front-runners in the contest to become Hong Kong's chief executive after the handover, are members of the Preparatory Committee.
Woo and Li voted in the Selection Committee election, while Tung -- regarded by many as China's favourite -- abstained.
Former Chief Justice Ti Liang Yang, another key candidate for the top job, is not a member of the Preparatory Committee.
Swedish Prime Minister Goran Persson said on Monday he had expressed disapproval to his Chinese counterpart over the jailing of dissident Wang Dan.
Persson raised the case of former student leader Wang, jailed last week for 11 years, during a dinner with Chinese Premier Li Peng in Beijing on Sunday, he told a news conference.
A court in the Chinese capital last Wednesday took less than four hours to condemn Wang for plotting against the government, after a trial that sparked expressions of concern from around the world.
"During the official talks of the delegation we talked about human rights in general," Persson said.
Asked about the case of Wang Dan he said the 27-year-old dissident had not been discussed in the official talks but had been raised afterwards.
"During the dinner I had the opportunity to have a more private discussion with Premier Li Peng and raised that case you mentioned, Wang Dan," he said.
"I told him what we have said before...that we don't like the treament in this case," he said.
Persson, who has drawn political fire at home for his decision to carry out the six-day visit despite Wang's jailing, declined to give details of the talks or to describe Premier Li's reaction to the raising of Wang's case.
It was more efficient to raise such cases as Wang's in private at a dinner than during official talks because China considered such matters internal affairs, he said, adding that Sweden firmly believed in continuing dialogue on human rights.
"We...think that China treats its political dissidents and religious dissidents too hard and are also critical towards their frequent use of capital punishment," he said.
"We have signed an agreement with China where the Swedish Raoul Wallenberg Institute will arrange human rights seminars in Sweden and China...for officials from the prisons and the judicial system," he said but did not elaborate.
The jailing of Wang Dan was latest in a series of crushing blows to China's tiny and struggling pro-democracy movement. Most dissidents have already been forced into exile or are serving long sentences in prison or adminstrative detention.
Sweden and China had signed an agreement on a consulate for Hong Kong, which returns to Beijing rule on July 1, 1997, he said adding that his discussions with Chinese leaders had also touched on international politics and trade.
A delegation of Swedish businessmen was travelling with the prime minister during his visit and was expected to sign a number of deals, Persson said but gave no details.
A senior U.S. arms control official said on Tuesday she was encouraged by Chinese efforts to control exports to unsafeguarded nuclear facilities, but Beijing said the key issue in two days of talks was Taiwan.
The United States had been lending its experience to Chinese efforts to place controls on exports, after a pledge in May by Beijing not to repeat sales of nuclear technology to Pakistan, U.S. Undersecretary of State Lynn Davis told a news conference.
"I am encouraged by the steps the Chinese are taking," Davis said on the second day of arms proliferation talks in Beijing that are intended to pave the way for a visit to China by U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher later this month.
"We have been working with the Chinese to ensure what I call very practical implementation," Davis added. "We have already had some real success in the commitments that China has made in the areas of proliferation and their nuclear assistance to unsafeguarded facilities."
Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen had urged Washington to stop arms sales to Taiwan during a meeting with Davis on Tuesday, the official Xinhua news agency said.
A Foreign Ministry spokesman said U.S. weapons sales to Taiwan were the main Sino-U.S. arms proliferation issue.
"The most sensitive and important issue is that the United States has violated the August 17 communique by exporting large numbers of advanced weapons to Taiwan," spokesman Cui Tiankai told a news briefing.
Cui said Washington had broken its pledge under an August 17, 1982 communique to reduce the quality and quantity of arms sales to Taiwan, which Beijing considers a rebel province.
Xinhua quoted Qian as saying the United States should strictly abide by the August 17 communique to try to reduce and ultimately stop its arms sales to Taiwan.
In August, the U.S. Defence Department notified Congress that it would sell Stinger missiles and launchers to Taiwan, prompting angry Chinese protests.
Disagreement over arms sales and nuclear proliferation have long added to the strains on Sino-U.S. ties, already chilled by disputes over trade, copyright piracy and human rights.
After months of Sino-U.S. negotiations, China said on May 11 that it would not permit the sale of equipment to nuclear facilities not subject to international inspection.
The May exports accord averted possible U.S. sanctions over China's reported sale to Pakistan of ring magnets, which are used in gas centrifuges and can be used in the production of nuclear weapons material.
China and Pakistan have denied that the sales took place.
Washington had said it accepted assurances by Chinese leaders that they did not know about the sales.
Both Beijing and Washington have been keen to resume a "strategic dialogue" on security and arms issues as part of efforts to rebuild cross-Pacific relations.
U.S. arms officials say differences remain with China over the export of nuclear equipment to Iran, which Washington considers a rogue state, while Beijing has repeatedly condemned U.S. arms sales to Taiwan.
China does not rule out the use of force to regain control of Taiwan, Beijing's arch rival since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949, and in March carried out intimidatory missile tests and wargames in the seas near the island.
Davis said Taiwan was discussed during her talks with Chinese officials but declined to give details.
She said U.S. weapons sales to Taipei did not contravene Washington's agreements with Beijing.
Beijing accused the United States on Tuesday of pursuing hostile policies towards China and defended a campaign to boost patriotism as a shield against aggressive foreign forces.
"In the last few years the United States has pursued antagonistic policies toward China," said the official People's Daily, mouthpiece of China's ruling Communist Party.
"U.S. media circles have spared no effort to attack and sully China," it said as disarmament talks between Chinese and U.S. officials entered a second day in Beijing.
U.S. Undersecretary of State Lynn Davis began talks on arms proliferation in the Chinese capital on Monday, part of a visit seen as a vital step towards rebuilding ties long strained by disputes over trade, human rights, copyright piracy and Taiwan.
Both sides, however, say relations have warmed in recent months after a string of high-level meetings. But the Chinese state press has continued to issue harshly worded condemnations of U.S. policies and individuals seen as hostile to Beijing.
In an angry reaction to an article in the New York Times on October 24 by former U.S. ambassador to China James Lilley, People's Daily slammed the U.S. media for unfriendly reporting that was harming vital cross-Pacific ties.
In his signed opinion piece, Lilley wrote that the loss of communism's appeal in China had left a vacuum that was being filled by nationalist xenophobia, but warned that nationalism was a dangerous road to take.
People's Daily said no such warning was required.
"(Some Westerners) see Chinese people's patriotism as being narrow-minded nationalism that will be catastrophic for the West and must quickly be discarded," it said.
Over 100 years of abuse at the hands of imperial powers had taught Chinese how to be patriotic without straying into blind xenophobia, it said.
Washington's anti-Chinese actions did not stop at thwarting Beijing's bid to hold the 2000 Olympics or at U.S. threats over human rights, trade or nuclear proliferation, it said.
Chinese feelings had been badly hurt by outrages such as Washington's dispatch of two aircraft carriers to the seas near Taiwan in March, it added.
Washington sent the aircraft carrier battlegroups to monitor intimidatory war games and missile tests carried out by China near Taiwan in the run-up to the island's first direct presidential elections, a decision that infuriated Beijing.
"It is this kind of pressure from the United States and other Western countries that has inspired the enthusiasm of the Chinese people's patriotism," People's Daily said.
"This kind of intense spontaneous reaction to interference by foreign forces is an ordinary manifestation of the Chinese people's patriotism," it said.
"Only when the motherland is strong and prosperous can the interference and aggression of outside forces be fundamentally resisted and forestalled," it said.
Analysts say Beijing is keen to boost nationalist sentiment in China to fill an ideological vacuum caused by the rush from strict communist values to a market-style economy.
Repeated calls for more patriotism have been accompanied by repeated state media diatribes against the United States and by a mass campaign for a return to orthodox socialist values.
China released dissident Chen Ziming on Wednesday to allow the ailing activist jailed for his role in ill-fated 1989 pro-democracy protests to seek medical treatment, a family member said.
The release of the leading dissident on medical parole came just seven days after a Beijing court jailed former student leader Wang Dan for 11 years following a brief trial that prompted expressions of concern from around the world.
Chen, 42, arrived home from the Beijing Number Two Prison at around 10.30 pm (1430 GMT), his mother Wu Yongfen said.
"His wife went to meet him... He's at his own home," Wu said in a telephone interview.
"Because he is ill, he asked to be released on bail for medical treatment," she said, adding it was unclear how long Chen would be permitted to remain at liberty.
The veteran pro-democracy activist was sentenced to 13 years in prison in 1991 for engaging in "counter-revolutionary", or subversive, activities during pro-democracy protests centred on Beijing's Tiananmen Square in 1989.
Chen had been singled out by Beijing authorities as a behind-the-scenes "black hand" organiser of the demonstrations, which were crushed by the army with heavy loss of life.
He won medical parole in 1994 in a move widely seen as part of a successful bid by Beijing to persuade Washington not to revoke China's Most Favoured Nation trade status on grounds of persistent human rights violations.
Human rights have long been a major irritant in Sino-U.S. ties already strained by disputes over trade, copyright piracy, arms proliferation and Taiwan.
U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher is scheduled to travel to Beijing this month for a visit widely seen as a vital step toward rebuilding the cross-Pacific relationship.
It was unclear whether Chen, who has been treated for cancer, hepatitis B, heart disease and other ailments, would be imprisoned again after treatment, his mother said.
"Last time, in 1994, he was also released on bail for medical treatment and later they made him go back," she said.
Chen was returned to prison on June 25, 1995, after joining calls for Beijing to release political prisoners and reverse its verdict that the Tiananmen Square protests were seditious.
"Recently he has been suffering from a lot of illnesses," said Wu, who last year joined other family members in a bold campaign to demand medical parole for her son.
Chen, who ran a social sciences institute with fellow activist Wang Juntao until the 1989 protests, had been receiving medical treatment twice a month while in prison, she said.
His release by Chinese authorities came amid condemnation from human rights groups over the jailing of Wang Dan after a hearing last Wednesday that lasted less than four hours.
The United States and other nations expressed deep concern over the verdict and sentence. Chinese state media hailed Wang's trial as a model of fairness, but rights activists called it a parody of justice held only to mask a pre-arranged result.
Wang, a dissident also known for his role as a leader of the 1989 pro-democracy protests, had pleaded not guilty to subversion charges carrying a maximum death sentence and a minimum 10 years' imprisonment.
The 11-year sentence imposed on him was the latest in a series of crushing blows to China's embattled band of dissidents, most of whom were already either in exile or serving long terms in administrative detention or prison.
China congratulated U.S. President Bill Clinton on Wednesday for his election triumph, saying the victory presented a good opportunity to improve ties between Washington and Beijing.
Clinton's sweeping win over Republican rival Bob Dole is good news for a Beijing leadership which prefers to deal with familiar statesmen, Chinese academics and officials said.
"We wish to congratulate President Clinton on his re-election," Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai said.
"Now, a good opportunity has presented itself for improving and expanding Sino-U.S. relations," Cui told reporters. "Some positive progress has been made in bilateral relations, with a somewhat improved atmosphere."
China was ready to work with Washington for further progress on the basis of past Sino-U.S. joint agreements, he said.
While Clinton had presided over four years of Sino-U.S. ties often strained by disputes over trade, human rights, arms proliferation and Taiwan, his re-election could help stabilise relations, Chinese academics said.
"The result should be a good thing for Sino-U.S. ties. After four years Clinton now understands China to a certain extent and there is some stability in his China policy," said one academic at a U.S.-funded election party in Beijing.
"Another four years should allow some improvement in relations," said the specialist in international strategic studies, who declined to be identified.
"Clinton is an opponent we know well," said a government official at the reception, where invited U.S. and Chinese guests watched electoral results emerge over satellite television and real time Internet links.
"It's like basketball: if the Chicago Bulls come to play the Beijing team and the two sides have never met before, it won't be a good game," said the official who declined to be named.
"Neither side knows what the other can do," he said.
Washington and Beijing both say ties have thawed since the two sides narrowly averted a trade war over copyright piracy and exchanged diplomatic fire over Taiwan earlier this year.
Cautious optimism was the tone taken by many of the Chinese specialists and officials at the reception in a Beijing hotel, where cola, hamburgers and live election coverage were served up by U.S. businesses keen to boost cross-Pacific understanding.
"The Chinese leaders... like to deal with U.S. presidents whom they know personally," said Professor Xu Cunyao of the Ministry of Culture's Institute for Administrators' Education.
"I think the Chinese leaders will be very happy with this result," he said.
Despite the diplomatic spats of recent years, Sino-U.S. economic and trade ties had grown relatively fast during Clinton's tenure, Gu Yuanyang of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences said in a telephone interview.
"We are all satisfied with this result because it will have a certain positive effect on the recovery and development of Sino-Chinese relations," said Gu, director of the academy's Institute of World Economics and Politics.
Relations would not improve automatically, he said, adding Clinton should push for high-level contacts, ensure China's trade status, smooth Beijing's entry to the World Trade Organisation and refrain from creating difficulties on Taiwan.
After four years of Sino-U.S. ties laced with near-miss trade wars, rhetorical broadsides and diplomatic sparring over human rights, Beijing is hoping for a new post-election approach from Washington.
Bill Clinton's electoral triumph on Tuesday may mean no change of occupant in the White House, but Beijing is hoping for a second-term transformation of the Democratic president's policy on China, diplomats and analysts said on Thursday.
"After this election (Clinton) doesn't need to worry about attracting votes," said Tong Tianqi, a international relations researcher at an institute under the State Council, or cabinet.
"We hope he will take a practical approach... it's possible he will change his approach," Tong said.
Relations between Beijing and Washington have been badly strained for years by disputes over trade, human rights, arms proliferation and Taiwan, but both sides say ties have warmed recently after a series of high-level meetings.
Beijing's hopes for change in Clinton's China policy are the flip side of the desire for stability in the fragile Sino-U.S. relationship that made Chinese academics and officials welcome his victory as the return of a devil they knew.
"The most important thing for us is stability in U.S. policy," said an official of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation.
After four years in office Clinton was a familar face to a Beijing leadership that preferred to deal with statesmen it knew, and the U.S. president's understanding of China had also grown, the analysts said.
Chinese officials and state media have spotlighted what they call U.S. obstruction to Beijing's long-coveted accession to the World Trade Organisation (WTO) as a key area of dispute.
China blames Washington for blocking its entry to the global trade body on favourable terms as a developing country, while U.S. officials say Beijing must do more to open its markets.
Chinese hopes for change in Washington's approach could be borne out as U.S. electoral passions faded, but deep-rooted differences meant the path of Sino-U.S. ties over the next four years was unlikely to run smooth, diplomats in Beijing said.
"The Chinese will be thinking: is this the point at which the Americans might kick in with some new set of suggestions on either WTO or human rights cooperation, or both," said a Western diplomat. "I wouldn't be suprised if there were some."
Clinton's meeting with Chinese president Jiang Zemin in the Philippines later this month on the fringes of a regional economic forum would be a key opportunity to bolster ties, diplomats said.
The presidential face-to-face will be the latest in a string of high-level contacts that officials on both sides hope will set relations on a more stable footing and lead to an eventual exchange of state visits.
While there appeared to be few immediate threats to the new Sino-U.S. cordiality, issues such as copyright piracy in China -- which has twice led both sides to the brink of a trade war -- and Taiwan would continue to dog ties, the diplomats said.
China's growing U.S. trade surplus would continue to raise hackles in Washington, while Beijing's human rights record would remain a major stumbling block -- despite the release on medical parole of dissident Chen Ziming on Wednesday, they said.
Chen's release came just seven days after a Beijing court jailed former student leader Wang Dan for 11 years following a brief trial that prompted U.S. expressions of deep concern.
Wang's sentence was just the latest blow to China's tiny band of pro-democracy dissidents, most of whom were already in exile or serving long sentences in detention or jail.
Washington was tired of scuffling with Beijing over its treatment of dissidents, but China would need to make bigger concessions if it hoped to bring an end to the annual threat of U.S.-backed censure at the U.N. Human Rights Commission in Geneva, said a diplomat.
"I don't think that (Chen's release) would be effective," he said. "It's pretty small compared with what went before."
Some of the brightest stars of Chinese pop put on a glittering show in Beijing on Friday, but officials kept politically-suspect rock heroes off the playlist, sources close to the concert said.
A capacity audience of around 18,000 flocked to the Capital Gymnasium to see a showcase event featuring dozens of performers from China's fledgling popular music industry.
State media said the event, the first leg of a double concert in the capital, was intended to celebrate the growth of the pop music industry since it was banned as capitalist poison during the chaos of the 1966-76 Cultural Revolution.
The concerts were intended to capture the flavour of the past decade of Chinese pop, but organisers had been ordered to cut some of the nation's biggest and most influential rock and roll stars from the playlist, sources close to the event said.
The Friday 'A' concert, to be followed by a 'B' performance on Saturday, was a showcase mainly for sugary pop songs largely focused on themes of love and friendship --  a staple diet for state-run music broadcasters.
Harder-edged music -- unpopular among communist authorities keen to promote safe socialist loyalties -- was conspiciously absent.
Beijing has repeatedly ordered campaigns to boost socialist morality weakened in the rush to a market economy, prompting tighter official controls on all forms of cultural activity.
Cui Jian, widely regarded as the father of Chinese rock music, was not scheduled to attend either concert, organisers said.
Sources close to the event said Cui, whose music is a blend of Western rock, Chinese instruments and politically-sensitive lyrics, had originally been intended to play a major part in the event but had been barred by China's musical mandarins.
The classically-trained performer's music is still hugely popular among listeners, but ideologically-suspect anthems such as "Nothing to My Name' that caught the mood of a generation in the late 1980s are seldom permitted on state-controlled media.
"Cui's basically been banned from performing in Beijing since 1993," said a promoter close to the event who declined to be named. "The higher-ups told the organisers...he couldn't take part."
Heavy rock group Hei Bao, or Black Panther, which has won the hearts of many younger Chinese despite official disapproval, would also be absent, said concert promoter and radio presenter Zhang Shurong.
Zhang said he had not been told of any ban against Cui or Hei Bao, who have long been forced to seek venues far from the Chinese capital.
Hei Bao had not been banned but were considered unsuitable because they could make the audience too excited, he said, adding the stars still on the playlist were attraction enough.
"They are all very important, all people who can play epoch-making roles in the circle of Chinese singers," he said.
China on Tuesday rolled out the memory of long-dead revolutionary leader Sun Yat-sen to strengthen its drive for reunification with Taiwan and defy what it sees as foreign forces trying to split the motherland.
The 130th anniversary of Sun's birth was an occasion for remembering his work for the cause of national unity, said the official People's Daily newspaper in a front-page editorial on a national hero revered by both Beijing and arch-rival Taipei.
Sun had firmly advocated the safeguarding of both China's sovereignty and unity, President Jiang Zemin told an anniversary meeting in Beijing's cavernous Great Hall of the People.
"It was always the unremitting pursuit of Mr Sun Yat-sen to achieve the return of Taiwan at an early date and to fulfil the great cause of the unification of the motherland," said the People's Daily, the mouthpiece of China's communist leadership.
While in Sun's day it had been Japanese occupation that kept the Taiwanese apart from their mainland brethren, Sun's unitary zeal was as relevant now as then, it said in an article that also hit out at foreign forces trying to divide China.
In fullsome tributes to Sun issued by the state media, officials rushed to appeal to Taiwan leaders to work for speedy reunification while condemning all moves toward independence.
Sun, who helped lead the 1911 revolution that overthrew China's imperial Qing dynasty, also founded the Nationalist Party which later fled to Taiwan after losing a bitter civil war against the communists in 1949.
While the Communist Party says it took up his banner of revolution after his death in 1925, Taipei's Nationalist leaders see themselves as Sun's true heirs.
The farmer's son turned doctor and radical has long been seen as a potential symbol of unity for politicians on either side of the Taiwan Strait who have walked very different revolutionary roads in the seven decades since his death.
Cross-strait relations have been sorely tested in recent years by Taipei's attempts to break out of the diplomatic isolation imposed by Beijing, which considers the island a rebel province and has vowed to invade, if it ever declares independence.
Separatism was still rampant in Taiwan, while forces both there and abroad still worked to split the Chinese nation, the People's Daily said.
"The activities to split the motherland of the Taiwan authorities have not ceased and forces for 'Taiwan independence' run wild on the island," it said.
"Internationally, forces still exist that interfere in our nation's internal affairs and support 'Taiwan Independence'."
While some Taiwanese politicians have long called for independence, the ruling Nationalist Party dissmisses Beijing allegations that it harbours a hidden "Two Chinas" agenda and says it is firmly committed to reunification some day.
Growing detente between Beijing and Taipei ran aground in June 1995, when Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui made a landmark unofficial visit to the United States, enraging Beijing.
Ties cooled further in March when Chinese war games and missile tests in the seas near Taiwan overshadowed the island's first direct presidential election, prompting Washington to send two aircraft carrier battlegroups to the area.
U.S. Navy intelligence specialists have concluded that the war games were rehearsals for a possible all-out invasion of the island in the future, a study made available on Monday showed.
While Chinese state media called on the populace to emulate Sun's revolutionary spirit, local authorities celebrated the anniversary with historical soirees and exhibitions.
Gold and silver stamps bearing his portrait would be issued nationwide soon, the official Xinhua news agency said.
Chinese leaders Wednesday denounced Beijing's exclusion from the World Trade Organisation as unjust, saying the giant Communist nation had made great strides in opening its markets to trade and investment.
Protectionism or trade sanctions should not be policy tools in a world increasingly dependent on international trade, Minister for Economic Restructuring Li Tieying said at a meeting of business executives.
"It is unjust to exclude China from the World Trade Organisation," Li told a business summit in Beijing.
"A World Trade Organisation without China is incomplete," said Li, who is also a member of the Communist Party's elite Politburo. "We hope this situation will quickly change."
Chinese officials say Beijing should be allowed to join the WTO on lenient terms as a developing country. They blame the United States for blocking their accession with tough demands for more open markets.
Disagreement over the terms of Beijing's admission to the WTO, which Washington says should take into account China's huge and fast-growing economic clout, is just one of a number of disputes that have long troubled Sino-U.S. ties.
Rows over copyright piracy, arms proliferation, human rights and Taiwan have all strained relations in recent years, with Washington's annual review of China's Most Favoured Nation trade status triggering some of the bitterest rhetoric.
China has urged Washington to make MFN status permanent, and Li warned Washington that the United States would lose if MFN was revoked.
"If the United States cancels China's Most Favoured Nation treatment, and imported the same goods from other countries, then U.S. consumers would have to spend $14 billion more every year," he quoted World Bank statistics as showing.
Beijing and Washington earlier this year went to the brink of a trade war after Washington announced punitive sanctions over widespread copyright piracy in China.
In a pointed reference to such disputes, Li said tough trade tactics should not be overused, but did not mention the United States by name.
"The new international economic order ... should not have any kind of trade protectionism or discriminatory policies and the big stick of sanctions should certainly not be wielded at every opportunity," he said.
China's growing trade surplus with the United States is also widely seen as a barrier to warmer Sino-U.S. relations.
U.S. embassy officials said Wednesday that the top U.S. textile negotiator had postponed her trip to China for talks in the face of U.S. sanctions on Chinese textiles and a threat by Beijing to retaliate.
Chinese exports to the United States in the first 10 months had increased by 5.5 percent to $21.3 billion, official Chinese newspapers said Wednesday. They gave no details for imports.
Chinese leaders on Wednesday denounced Beijing's exclusion from the World Trade Organisation (WTO) as unjust, saying the nation had made great strides in opening its markets to trade and investment.
Protectionism or trade sanctions should not be policy tools in a world increasingly dependent on international trade, said Chinese minister for economic restructuring Li Tieying.
"It is unjust to exclude China from the World Trade Organisation," Li told a business summit in Beijing.
"A World Trade Organisation without China is incomplete," said Li, who is also a member of the Communist Party's elite Politburo. "We hope this situation will quickly change."
Chinese officials say Beijing should be allowed to join the WTO on lenient terms as a developing country and have blamed the United States for blocking their accession with tough demands for more open markets.
Chen Jinhua, chairman of the State Planning Commission, said China was committed to gradually establishing a trade system in line with international practice and had this year already slashed import tariffs to an average 23 percent from 36 percent.
Beijing would continue to open its markets to foreign trade and investment and to push for membership of the global trade club, Chen said in a speech to the business summit.
"We will continue positive negotiation with the members of the World Trade Organisation to regain membership in the organisation at the earliest possible date," he said.
Disagreement over the terms of Beijing's admission to the WTO, which Washington says should take into account China's huge and fast-growing economic clout, is just one of a number of disputes that have long troubled Sino-U.S. trade ties.
Rows over copyright piracy, arms proliferation, human rights and Taiwan have all strained relations in recent years, with Washington's annual review of China's Most Favoured Nation (MFN) trade status triggering some of the bitterest rhetoric.
China has urged Washington to make MFN status permanent, and Li warned the United States itself would lose if MFN was revoked.
"If the United States cancels China's Most Favoured Nation treatment, and imported the same goods from other countries, then U.S. consumers would have to spend $14 billion more every year," he quoted World Bank statistics as showing.
Beijing and Washington earlier this year went to the brink of a trade war after Washington announced punitive sanctions over widespread copyright piracy in China.
In a pointed reference to such disputes, Li said tough trade tactics should not be overused, but did not mention the United States by name.
"The new international economic order... should not have any kind of trade protectionism or discriminatory policies and the big stick of sanctions should certainly not be wielded at every opportunity," he said.
U.S. embassy officials said on Wednesday that the top U.S. textile negotiator had postponed her trip to China for talks in the face of U.S. sanctions on Chinese textiles and a threat by Beijing to retaliate.
China's growing trade surplus with the United States is also widely seen as a barrier to warmer Sino-U.S. relations.
Exports to the United States in the first 10 months had increased by 5.5 percent to $21.3 billion, official Chinese newspapers said on Wednesday. They gave no details for imports.
China's power minister vowed Thursday to protect the interests of foreign investors expected to provide one-fifth of the 700 billion yuan ($84 billion) to be invested in power generation between 1996 and 2000.
Foreign investment in the electricity generation sector would be carefully channelled to boost China's domestic industry, power minister Shi Dazhen told a business conference.
"We have established a legal framework to protect foreign investors," Shi told reporters at the conference.
Beijing would perfect its laws and regulations to ensure that investor interests were guaranteed, he said.
China's electricity generating capacity would hit 290,000 megawatts by the end of 2000 from 217,000 megawatts at the end of 1995, Shi said.
China would require around 700 billion yuan ($84.4 million) investment in the power sector during Beijing's state-set ninth five-year plan, which runs from 1996-2000, he said.
Foreign investors were expected to come up with 20 percent -- around $17 billion -- while the central government provided 40 percent and local authorities and enterprises shelled out the remaining 40 percent, he said but gave no details.
The investment estimates appeared to be lower than those made by other senior power officials last month, who said China would need $20 billion from abroad.
Shi said he was unaware of the $20 billion figure.
Potential foreign investors have said an effective 15 percent limit on returns on investment from Chinese power plant projects is a major disincentive, but Shi waved aside such concerns, saying any specific limit would be impractical.
Chinese energy officials have consistently denied setting any limit on returns, although they have said the best rate from key projects is around 17 percent.
Chinese electricity prices are fixed by the state, which has kept prices low.
Shi said foreign investors remained keen to put their money behind Chinese efforts to build enough generating capacity to keep up with rocketing economic growth and to raise per capita capacity from the meagre 180 watts achieved by the end of 1995.
"Although the power industry has developed very quickly, because China has a population of 1.2 billion, the power supply is still very tight and the supply level is very low," he said.
"There is great enthusiasm among foreigners to invest in this sector," he said, adding that such investment should be carefully guided.
"The use of foreign investment must be combined with that of China's own power manufacturing industry, with foreign funds used to buy Chinese-made generating equipment," he said.
Foreign funds would be focused on high technology plants with capacity of 300 megawatts or more, he said.
Beijing says it wants to replace inefficient thermal power stations that burn dirty high-sulphur coal with larger new plants and with nuclear and hydro-electric projects.
European record business executives on Friday sang the praises of China's crackdown on widespread copyright piracy, saying Beijing appeared sincere in its desire to build a legitimate music industry.
European companies were eager to establish cooperative ventures with local firms that would allow them to supply music to a vast listening audience currently largely supplied from illicit music production lines, the executives said.
"The Chinese market has enormous potential," EMI Europe President Rupert Perry told reporters in Beijing, adding that China was making progress in its crackdown on piracy.
Beijing vowed to clamp down on pirates and prise open its cultural markets in a June agreement with the United States that narrowly averted a multibillion dollar cross-Pacific trade war over violations of intellectual property rights.
Analysts and some industry figures have cast doubt on China's commitment to wipe out piracy, but the music executives said they had been encouraged by their talks with Chinese copyright and publishing officials.
"Our conversations with Chinese officials in the last couple of days lead us to believe that they are very cognisant of the problem and doing everything that they can to control it," said Perry.
"The laws are in place, they have an understanding of what has to happen and yes, they have had successes in closing certain factories," he said. "We believe that will continue."
The executives, who are part of a trade delegation to China led by European Commission Vice President Sir Leon Brittan, said they hoped to build an industry that would develop Chinese musical talent for a domestic and international audience.
The multimillion dollar Chinese music market had the potential to grow 10-fold over the next few years, industry officials in the delegation said.
"We... tried to explain to the Chinese what we could do together," said Polygram Far East president Norman Cheng, "They have been pretty receptive to all these ideas."
"This is our first round of meetings," said Michael Smellie, senior vice president of BMG Entertainment International Asia Pacific. "We were encouraged."
Music imports into China were still negligible, while pirate sales were estimated at $170 million a year, roughly equivalent to the value of legitimate sales, said Adrian Strain of the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI).
European music companies were looking for Chinese partners to develop the local market, with former pirate firms among the potential wedding partners, the executives said.
While it was impossible to wipe out piracy with a single campaign, Beijing's crackdown on illicit production had worried illegal producers and had forced them to shift some production lines to Vietnam and even South America, IFPI officials said.
The head of China's restive northwestern Xinjiang on Friday accused western nations of working with pro-independence activists to try to split the nation, saying no end was in sight in the war on separatism.
Activists in the mainly-Moslem district had fomented riots and carried out political killings, but their struggle against Beijing rule was bound to fail, chairman of the Xinjiang autonomous region, Ablait Abdureschit, told reporters here.
"Against the strategic background of some people internationally engaging in splitting and westernising China, there is a small clique who want to split Xinjiang from China and achieve independence," he said.
"To achieve their objectives they take all kinds of actions; they infiltrate, make propaganda, carry out assassinations and create riots," he said.
"The vast majority of Xinjiang people resolutely oppose such activities," he said, adding western conspiracies to divide China could never succeed.
Separatists stood against the economic progress that Beijing was bringing to a region where development had long lagged behind other areas of China, he said, accusing un-named western nations of conspiring with pro-independence activists.
"In the last few years some western countries have concentrated on engaging in activities to westernise and split China," he said. "...In Xinjiang, the separatists have cooperated with the international conspiracy to westernise and split China."
Authorities in Xinjiang this year intensified a crackdown on separatists and unauthorised religious activity after a series of violent clashes, bombings and assassinations of officials and Islamic leaders regarded as pro-Beijing.
The arid region, described by officials as a sunny "Land of Fruit and Melons", is considered by many Chinese a wild frontier province and has a long history of ethnic unrest between the native Uighur population and members of China's Han majority.
In May, Beijing ordered tighter controls along Xinjiang's long borders to block the smuggling of weapons and subversive materials from nearby central Asian states.
Ablait Abdureschit said only a few people were involved in separatist activities in the region, but acknowledged the struggle against separatism was unlikely to end soon.
"Nationalist separatist activities occurred in the past, occur now, and will occur in the future, abroad and also within the country," he said. "This struggle is long-term and complicated."
Despite the struggle against separatism, the outlook was bright for the sprawling region, which borders Afghanistan, Pakistan and three mainly-Moslem central Asian states from the former Soviet Union, Ablait Abdureschit said.
Beijing, which provided more than 40 percent of the region's government budget, was working hard to boost the economy and improve Xinjiang's links with the outside world, he said.
The resource-rich region was aiming to become one of the country's top grain producers by the end of the century and had already gathered a record cotton harvest of 1.05 million tonnes in 1996, while oil and gas resources were abundant, he said.
"The general situation in Xinjiang is good," he said.
China's soaring demand for computer chips is expected to fuel strong growth in a domestic semiconductor industry that has long lagged behind its Asian neighbours, industry and government officials said on Monday.
Beijing hoped to boost the output of advanced integrated circuits (ICs), despite complaints that import tariffs and U.S. technology export restrictions made some vital equipment difficult to obtain, they said.
"In recent years the industry has grown fast," said Yu Zhongyu, chief engineer of the Ministry of Electronics Industry. "In the next five years it will grow even faster."
Chip production had been identified by Beijing as the first priority of the electronics industry, Yu told Reuters at an industry conference in the Chinese capital.
Demand for ICs would continue to be pushed by China's growing hunger for consumer electronics and telecommunications, with personal computers expected to become a major future source of demand, he said.
The value of China's IC output soared to $550 million in 1995 from $400 million the year before, but production was just one-fifth of demand, said industry group Semiconductor Equipment and Materials International (SEMI).
China was expected to produce 700 million chips a year by 2000, up from 330 million in 1995, SEMI officials said.
The value of equipment imports for the plants needed to make chips was expected to soar to about $700 million in 1997 from an estimated $500 million this year, they said.
China was pulling itself out of a semiconductor swamp created by its attempts during the 1980s to set up small-scale producers around the country, said an official of one U.S. company that supplies semiconductor production equipment.
Beijing was now promoting larger, more advanced fabs, or IC plants, that could match international standards, said the official, who declined to be identified.
"They have made up their mind that they are going to go for it...and believe me, the market is big," he said.
Yu said Beijing had decided to build 0.5 micron ICs at the Huahong Microelectronics Ltd in Shanghai as part of moves to develop China's ability to make sophisticated small chips.
Other sub-micron plants were being built or expanded in cooperation with foreign firms, such as Mitsubishi Stone IC Co, a joint venture between China's Stone Group and Mitsubishi Electric and Mitsui &amp; Co Ltd of Japan, he said.
The $1.6 billion Mitsubishi Stone venture was announced in March, with a $100 million 0.35 micron IC fab to be launched next year.
South Korean chipmaker Samsung Electronics Co, which opened a $100 million semiconducter plant in the eastern province of Jiangsu in July, has said it expects the Chinese market to grow an average annual 26 percent until 1999.
Difficulties in importing production equipment were a major obstacle to China's creation of a semiconductor industry that could compete with neighbouring powerhouses such as South Korea and Japan, industry analysts at the conference said.
"China's increased import tariffs and U.S. restrictions on technology exports are the biggest problems," said one analyst. "Companies say they can't bring in the equipment they need."
China said on Tuesday a visit by U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher could help keep Sino-U.S. ties on track but warned differences remained on such sensitive issues as trade and human rights.
Christopher, the highest level U.S. official to visit Beijing for two years, was scheduled to arrive in the Chinese capital on Tuesday evening for meetings intended to give a vital boost to long-strained Sino-U.S. ties.
"We hope this visit by Christopher to China can play a certain role in helping keep Sino-U.S. relations on track for healthy and stable development," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai told a news briefing.
While holding out the hope that ties could continue to grow warmer, Cui also criticised Washington's policies on trade, Chinese human rights and U.S. arms sales to Taiwan.
China has sent Washington mixed signals in the run-up to Christopher's visit, combining conciliatory talk with tough rhetoric on a range of tricky diplomatic issues, but diplomats say both sides are keen to make the visit a success.
Sino-U.S. ties have long been rocked by disputes over trade, human rights, copyright piracy in China, arms proliferation and Taiwan, although both sides say tensions have eased recently.
Differences remained with the United States over trade issues, but these should not be solved by threats of economic force, Cui said.
"There are differences and problems in Sino-U.S. trade and sometimes conflicts; this is the result of increasing trade," he said.
"The two sides should resolve possible differences and conflicts on a basis of mutual equality and by consultation rather than with unilateral actions or the imposition (of one side's) views," he said.
U.S concerns over China's human rights record, long a major issue in ties, have been heightened by Beijing's rejection last week of former student leader and dissident Wang Dan's appeal against his 11 years sentence for subversion.
Wang's sentence was a heavy blow to China's struggling pro-democracy movement and was widely seen as a slap in the face for Washington, which has touted constructive engagement with Beijing as the best way to boost Chinese human rights.
Cases such as Wang's were not human rights issues and were judicial matters that had nothing to do with Sino-U.S. relations, Cui said.
Washington's annual review of China's Most Favoured Nation (MFN) trade status, necessary to avoid heavy tariffs on Chinese imports, was another unneccesary irritant, he said.
"The U.S. review of China's MFN status every year is inappropriate," he said. "The settling of MFN once and for all is already on the agenda."
Washington has also been critical of Chinese policies on weapons proliferation, but Cui said the United States was the main offender, with arms sales to Beijing's arch-rival Taiwan.
"Of the so-called weapons proliferation issues, the most sensitive and most important are U.S. weapon sales to Taiwan," he said.
Christopher has come under pressure from members of Congress to raise U.S. concerns over the future of human rights in Hong Kong after it returns to Beijing rule next year but Cui said such matters were not Washington's concern.
"Hong Kong issues are totally China's internal affair," he said.
China has launched an ideological onslaught on dissent in Tibet, vowing to crack down on pro-independence monks and nuns and calling for tighter controls on religion in the restive Himalayan region.
Beijing's campaign to build "spiritual civilisation" -- communist code for a return to socialist values -- was a matter of strategic importance for the region's future, the official Tibet Daily said in an edition seen in Beijing on Wednesday.
The ideological campaign would aim to cut the role of religion in the deeply Buddhist region, as well as wipe out the influence of Tibet's exiled spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama, and curb separatism, the newspaper's November 11 edition said.
"Monks and nuns who follow the Dalai Lama clique's separatist wrecking activities will be dealt with according to the law," it quoted Tibet's communist leadership as saying.
"Those who use religion and superstition in...activities threatening the physical and mental health of the masses will be resolutely suppressed," it said in a long front-page report laced with references to Marxist ideological struggle.
China has long tried to weed out pro-independence monks and nuns, blaming them for playing a major role in an underground Tibetan campaign against Beijing rule.
The London-based watchdog group Tibet Information Network reported this week that a jailed Tibetan nun had had her sentence doubled to 18 years for defying Beijing's choice as the reincarnation of the region's second holiest monk.
The 10th Panchen Lama died in 1989, and Beijing has anointed a six-year-old boy as his reincarnation. The Dalai Lama has named another six-year-old boy as the 11th Panchen Lama.
The identification of reincarnations of living Buddhas, organisation of major religious activities and construction of religious sites all require local government approval, the Tibet Daily said, adding that management of religious festivals would be tightened.
Monks and nuns would be organised to take part in activities to benefit society and would be directed to become "patriotic religious professionals", while Communist Party members who took part in religious events would be disciplined, it said.
Work was needed to establish in Tibetan people's minds the view that their region was an inseparable part of China, it said.
Spiritual civilisation, a watchword touted by China's leadership as a way to revive socialist morality weakened by the nation's rush to a market-style economy, was also needed to combat enemy Westerners, the Tibet Daily said.
"The schemes of hostile Western forces to split and Westernise us will not change," it said, without giving details.
The newspaper reserved some of its harshest rhetoric for supporters of the Dalai Lama, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989 for his non-violent campaign for autonomy for his homeland.
Beijing's main rival for Tibetan loyalties has lived in exile since a failed uprising against communist rule in 1959, but he remains revered among the region's devout Buddhists.
"The ideological infiltration of our region by the Dalai Lama clique is still very fierce," the Tibet Daily said. "The splittist forces' war to win ground, win over the masses and the the youth and win command of the monasteries is still intense."
The goodwill generated by recent high-level visits may warm a Sino-U.S. presidential meeting this weekend, but lingering disputes mean the two leaders will still have much to talk about, diplomats and analysts said on Friday.
Chinese President Jiang Zemin's meeting with his U.S. counterpart Bill Clinton at a conference of the Asian-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum in the Philippines would be a key chance to bolster recent progress in easing ties, they said.
A visit this week by U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher had brought Beijing welcome signs of new U.S. flexibility on such thorny issues as weapons proliferation, trade and Taiwan, said a Chinese specialist on U.S. affairs.
"During Christopher's visit to China there was progress on all the issues," said Niu Jun of the North American foreign policy department of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
Both sides had acknowledged a need to boost contacts and exchange state visits, while Christopher had accepted that U.S. arms sales to Beijing's island rival Taiwan were a weapons proliferation issue, Niu said in a telephone interview.
The clearest sign of Washington's desire to repair the battered cross-Pacific relationship was U.S. willingness to consider starting peaceful nuclear cooperation even before a previously signed accord on the issue was implemented, he said.
"This change (on nuclear technology transfer) symbolised the change in the U.S. attitude," he said.
"There has to be a belief in the possibility of establishing fairly good relations with China in the future (for the United States to be willing) to transfer this kind of advanced technology," he said.
China is eager to buy nuclear reactors from U.S. firms equally keen to tap into its potentially large market, but cooperation has been stunted by U.S. fears that Beijing places few controls on the proliferation of nuclear technology.
While nuclear flexibility is controversial in Washington, mutual interest made nuclear cooperation the issue one that Washington and Beijing could use to ensure a recent improvement in ties did not falter, said a Beijing-based Western diplomat.
"I think that's the big carrot the Americans are trying to hold out for more progress on non-proliferation," the diplomat said. "It's something the Americans would quite like to do anyway because there's money in it."
While Christopher's visit had helped to boost ties in general, China was still likely to hold out for unilateral concessions from Washington on the terms of its accession to the World Trade Organisation, human rights and trade, he said.
"They don't really seem to have made a lot of progress," he said. "I get the impression that there's still a lot of hard pounding to go."
A U.S. desire to see more concrete commitments from Beijing before making concessions meant that the Jiang-Clinton meeting could end up achieving little of real substance, he said.
Taiwan, which Beijing has considered a rebel province since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949, would remain China's main policy focus at the presidential meeting, said Niu.
"For China the most important issue is Taiwan...and the reaffirmation that (the United States) will not sell weapons to Taiwan," he said.
While China's stance on most Sino-U.S. bugbear issues was clear, Beijing was unlikely to give any public signal of its intentions on newer issues such as a U.S. push for tax-free imformation technology imports or other APEC proposals, the Western diplomat said.
"I think the Chinese are keeping their powder dry on all these issues," he said.
Motorola Inc is appealing to Chinese authorities over taxes on capital imports that would boost the cost of a $500 million semiconductor plant being built in the city of Tianjin, a company official said on Friday.
Construction of the plant in Xiqing district, a half an hour's drive from the northern port city's centre, was on schedule and production was expected to begin in the first quarter of 1998, said the official, who declined to be identified.
The U.S. high-technology giant was appealing to China's State Council, or cabinet, over taxes on imports of vital equipment for the semiconductor plant, or fab, he said.
Beijing on April 1 abolished privileges for foreign-funded ventures that had allowed them to import machinery and other capital equipment free of tax. Investors say the move has dramatically increased the cost of many projects.
"There is an appeal committee within the State Council and we are appealing for some tax exemption (for the Xiqing plant)," the Motorola official said.
He declined to say if the company was optimistic of being granted exemptions, or when a decision was expected.  
An official of the State Council's information office contacted by telephone said he was unaware of an appeal by Motorola over taxes on imports, adding that such matters were the concern of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation.
Work on the Xiqing project had already begun, the Motorola official said.
"We have already broken ground...Now we are erecting the buildings," he said. "We are looking at 1998, first quarter (to begin production)."
Initial investment in the venture was expected to be around $500 million, but the cost of such semiconductor plants could easily rise to $1.0 billion, he said but gave no details.
Motorola has been quoted as saying the Xiqing plant will produce 180,000 eight-inch sub-micron wafers a year, making it a major addition to a Chinese semiconductor industry that has long lagged far behind its Asian neighbours.
Motorola, which has vowed to invest $1.2 billion in China, Taiwan and Hong Kong between 1988 and 2000, generated sales revenues in China and Hong Kong of $3.2 billion last year, the official said.  
The company's China plants were considered strategic investments, he said, adding that the local content rate of their products was expected to rise to around 55 percent by 2000 from around 45 percent currently.
Motorola's exports from its China operations accounted for about 30 percent of production value, less than expected because of the breakneck expansion of the domestic market, he said.
"The market here, especially the telecom market, just exploded," he said.
State media has quoted Motorola executives as saying the number of Chinese using pagers is likely to rise by around 43 percent this year to more than 40 million people, making China the biggest user of pagers in the world.
Motorola currently supplies more than 50 percent of the domestic pager market, the official said, but declined to give details.
In the competitive mobile phone market -- where Motorola is seen as enjoying less success -- the U.S. firm was hoping development of Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) cellular technology would help boost market share, he said but gave no details.
China issued a spirited defence of embattled U.N. Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali on Friday, accusing the United States of trying to use financial blackmail to stop him from serving a second term.
Boutros-Ghali had helped push forward world development during his five-year term as U.N. chief and his re-election should have been assured, said the People's Daily newspaper, official mouthpiece of China's communist leadership.
The United States should reconsider its lonely stance as the only nation on the U.N.'s 15-member Security Council to oppose the Egyptian's re-election, the newspaper said.
Washington on Tuesday vetoed Boutros-Ghali's candidacy, accusing him of being too slow in pushing U.N. reform and saying his candidacy would further delay U.S. payment of $1.4 billion in membership dues owed to the world body.
"Lumping together Boutros-Ghali's reappointment and the payment of membership dues can only make people feel that someone is trying to blackmail the United Nations," People's Daily said in a signed editorial.
All U.N. members, whatever their internal politics, were responsible for paying dues and U.S. opposition to Boutros-Ghali was unjustified, it said in the latest of a series of Chinese affirmations of support for the U.N. chief.
"The United States has absolutely not raised any decent grounds for opposing Boutros-Ghali's renewal, but has just criticised him for being weak on U.N. reform," it said.
"You just have to respect facts to be able to see that this kind of criticism of inadequacy is not persuasive."
Boutros-Ghali's opposition to U.S. attempts to use the United Nations as a cover for policies of hegemony and power politics was a key factor behind Washington's opposition to his re-election, said the Yangcheng Daily newspaper.
The U.S. Republican-dominated Congress is delaying payment of the $1.4 billion U.S. debt to the United Nations, a policy helping to bankrupt the cash-strapped world body.
People's Daily said Boutros-Ghali had worked to push U.N. reform, had paid great attention to the cause of world development and had made a special contribution to development in Africa during his tenure, which ends on December 31.
Diplomats say African nations are currently driving the campaign for Boutros-Ghali's re-election, aiming to keep his candidacy alive as long as possible in the hope of a compromise solution or a change in the U.S. stance.
Boutros-Ghali said on Thursday that he did not wish to see his name submitted to the Security Council for another vote but also that he was not withdrawing from the race.
Washington's reluctance to propose alternatives to Boutros-Ghali was a sign of U.S. insecurity and its knowledge that any candidate it chose would be rejected by other nations, the People's Daily said.
"If the African nations continue to support Boutros-Ghali, the United States will face a difficult decision," it said.
"Many people hope the United States that cast the opposing vote will consider its position anew and solve this problem in an appropriate way.
Authorities in central China's Anhui province have ordered three pro-democracy activists to stand trial on charges of counter-revolutionary propaganda and incitement, a human rights group said on Monday.
The Hefei Intermediate People's Court in the Anhui capital was scheduled to try dissidents Shen Liangqing, Ma Lianggang and Huang Xiuming on Tuesday, New York-based watchdog Human Rights in China said in a statement.
A court official in Hefei contacted by telephone declined to comment on the case, saying questions related to it touched on matters that had "not been made public".
The group said the trial would be the latest step in a state crackdown on dissent that has seen many of the main figures in China's struggling pro-democracy movement disappear into prison or administrative detention.
There was little doubt about the likely result of the trial of Shen, Ma and Huang, all of whom had been detained at least once since they took part in an ill-fated campaign for more democracy in 1989, the U.S. group said.
"Although they must go for trial on (November) 26th, it has already been decided that they are guilty and must be punished," it said.
All were unemployed, though Shen had been a government official and Huang a manager at a company. Ma had been a student.
The evidence against the three stemmed from articles written and distributed in 1991, and for which all had already been detained for more than a year, the human rights group said.
"To suddenly try them again now is a typical case in the Chinese government's strict nationwide suppression of dissidents," it said.
Earlier this month, a Beijing court took just 10 minutes to reject the appeal of leading dissident Wang Dan and uphold his 11-year prison sentence for subversion.
The trial and failed appeal of the former student leader were part of a series of crushing blows delivered by authorities to China's tiny band of political dissenters.
Visiting U.S. and European officials and politicians have raised the case of jailed dissidents in talks with Chinese leaders, but have said individual human rights cases should not be allowed to disrupt overall ties.
China dismisses criticism of its human rights record as interference in its internal affairs.
Human Rights in Asia said observers were being denied access to the trial of the three Anhui dissidents, although the proceedings were officially open.
"It is believed this is another trial in which society and the free media are not permitted to understand the real situation," the group said.
The intermediate court official said he could not confirm any details of the case.
"We cannot answer over the phone, because this concerns a matter that has not been made public," the official said.
A long-delayed Japanese mission to discuss the details of Tokyo's huge state loans to China has reached basic agreement on 22 development projects proposed by Beijing, Japanese officials said on Thursday.
Projects involving infrastructure, agriculture and environmental protection were likely to be among the recipients of favourable Japanese loans, said Shiro Sadoshima, director of the loan aid division of Japan's Foreign Ministry.
Final decisions had yet to be made on the 22 projects slated to receive the 180 billion yen ($1.6 billion) earmarked for the first year of the yen loan package, which will run from 1996 to 2000, Sadoshima told a news briefing.
Japanese sources in Beijing say discussions on the projects had been long delayed because of faltering relations and Japanese anger at China's nuclear testing that last year led to the freezing of Japanese grant-in-aid.
The 580 billion yen in Japanese soft loans due to be extended to China between 1996 to 2000 were not formally affected by the protest, but no missions to approve their details had been sent since China conducted a nuclear test in May 1995.
Asked if Chinese nuclear testing was a factor in Tokyo's delay in sending the loan mission, Sadoshima said that did not appear to be the case.
"At least, our government has never said that," he said, adding it was incorrect to say work on the loans had been "resumed" -- a word used by other Japanese officials.
"It's not a resumption... We never stopped," he said.
Relations between Beijing and Tokyo have been strained this year by a controversial visit by Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto to a shrine to Japan's war dead and by a territorial dispute over an island group in the East China Sea.
While Chinese state media have been quick to condemn what they call resurgent Japanese militarism, diplomats say Beijing is keen not to allow the disputes to harm an economic relationship in which the soft yen loans are an important part.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai earlier this week warned Japan not to use financial assistance as a form of political pressure, saying to do so could only harm ties.
The yen loans, widely seen in China as a form of reparation for the suffering inflicted by Japan during World War Two, have themselves been a source of dispute.
The rise of the value of the yen in 1994 and 1995 -- which sent the cost of the loans soaring -- prompted howls of Chinese complaints and demands to be allowed to repay in U.S. dollars.
Tokyo refused, but the yen's later decline helped blunt the issue as a potential cause of conflict and both sides have recently shown new willingness to cooperate on other issues.
Prime Minister Hashimoto has been reported as promising to consider lifting the freeze on grant-in-aid to China, but Sadoshima said that issue would not be discussed by the loan mission.
"That's not my department," Sadoshima said.
($1 = 113 yen)
The child chosen by China to be Tibet's second holiest monk passed the first anniversary of his selection quietly in Beijing on Friday, far from the restive Himalayan region, officals in the capital said.
Officials in Tibet said they had concluded a six-month push to curb separatist sentiment in the deeply Buddhist region's monasteries, a campaign that an overseas watchdog group has reported led to the expulsion or detention of scores of monks.
Seven-year-old Gyaincain Norbu, chosen by China as the 11th incarnation of the Panchan Lama, would not attend any activities on the first anniversary of his selection, an official of the Tibet regional authority's Beijing office said.
"The child is in Beijing, so there will not be any activities in Tibet," the official said by telephone.
All planned anniversary celebrations slated for the capital had been completed, he said.
State media have said that Norbu, regarded by many Tibetans as a pretender to the 10th Panchen Lama's spiritual mantle, visited Beijing's Yonghe Lamasery last week to celebrate the anniversary of his enthronement.
Tibet's spiritual leader, the exiled Dalai Lama, has named another boy as the reincarnation of the 10th Panchen Lama, the Himalayan region's second holiest monk who died in 1989.
Chinese sources have said Beijing's choice lives in the capital under state protection against possible assassination attempts by radical Tibetans.
In Tibet, an official of the religious affairs bureau said a six-month campaign to boost patriotism and curb separatist sentiment in the region's monasteries had been concluded.
The London-based human rights watchdog Tibet Information Network (TIN) said this week that official attempts to bring restive clergy to heel had led to at least 150 monks being expelled from their monasteries and possibly 20 arrests.
TIN said many monks had been told to leave because they refused to criticise the Dalai Lama, Beijing's greatest rival for the loyalties of the remote region's people.
Some monks had been sent back to civilian life because they did not behave properly during the patriotism campaign, the religious affairs official said but gave no details.
He dismissed a report from TIN that the campaign left only 300 monks at Ganden monastery near the Tibetan capital.
"Ganden has more than 490 monks...they are all at the monastery," he said, but declined to comment on whether there was an official limit on the number of clergy allowed there.
"That is a secret, we cannot talk about it on the telephone," he said.
While Beijing says most Tibetans back Chinese rule, a constant propaganda barrage against supporters of the Dalai Lama, exiled since an abortive uprising against Beijing rule in 1959, is testament to his remaining influence.
An edition of the Tibet Daily newspaper seen in Beijing on Friday quoted senior officials as saying all public figures should clearly state their position in the war on separatism.
"Some of our comrades do not sufficiently recognise the Dalai Lama clique's ideological infiltration and do not combat it strongly enough," the newspaper said.
