There are no signs of slackening demand for new telephone lines or services like caller ID at the regional Bells and GTE Corp, and earnings growth will remain robust in the third quarter.
"We are still seeing very strong demand for new services across the board," said Bette Massick of brokers Bear Stearns.
While regional Bell earnings growth is still above historic trends, Merrill Lynch analyst Dan Reingold expects third quarter average annual growth of 8.1 percent to fall short of the 9.6 percent set in the buoyant second quarter.  
Analysts' buy ratings generally favor Ameritech Corp, with BellSouth Corp, SBC Communications Inc and non-Bell company GTE close behind.
"Given continued strong growth in underlying operations, certain Bell stocks look attractive at the moment," said Guy Woodlief of Dean Witter Reynolds, whose favorites are Ameritech and GTE.
Regional Bells have badly trailed the broad market this year after last year's bullish outperformance, hit by fears of stiffer competition in the new unified market place.  
The Federal Communications Commission has made it clear that the Telecom Act of 1996 means Bells will have to face substantive competition before they can enter long distance markets in their own local calling regions.
GTE is an exception.  It already has long distance services in 23 states and has over 250,000 customers.
"I'm sure you will see the effect of GTE long distance operations as a minor cost pressure," said Massick.  She said it would take several years for the service to break even.  
Regional Bells are operating under a more favorable regulatory regime than two years ago, allowing them to cut costs without sharing the savings with consumers.
"With prices instead of earnings regulated, unit growth and cost reductions are flowing to the bottom line," Reingold said in a recent research report.
Company   (all in dollars)    Q3 est   yr ago  results date
Ameritech..................0.94.......0.84..Oct 15
SBC Communications.........0.95.......0.88..Oct 16
Bell Atlantic..............1.09.......1.01..Oct 17
BellSouth..................0.62.......0.56..Oct 17
GTE Corp...................0.78.......0.71..Oct 17
Pacific Telesis............0.68.......0.64..Oct 17
NYNEX Corp.................0.93.......0.86..Oct 22
US West Comms.......0.60.......0.59..Oct 23
NOTE: U S West Communications Group.
Estimates from First Call. Reporting dates from analysts.  
Cellular and other wireless services continue to be a big money earners for the Bells, though increased price competition is expected during 1997 as Personal Communications Services (PCS) increase to five from two the number of wireless telephone providers in each metropolitan area.
Even the advent of two mega mergers -- Bell Atlantic Corp and NYNEX Corp and SBC Communications and Pacific Telesis Group -- announced earlier this year has done little to enliven the sector.
While the effect of competition is an unknown, cost cuts can be solidly charted.
Satellite television company DirecTV will on Monday slash the price of its entry-level receiver dish to $199 to grab customers before digital cable TV competitors get going, sources close to the company said.
"The new entry level price will be about $199," a source said, declining to be identified. DirecTV declined to comment.
DirecTV, part of Hughes Electronics Corp, is responding to recent similar price cuts by rival Echostar Communications Corp. DirecTV's cheapest dish currently costs $499, although models costing up to $900 are available.  
The price cuts are linked to taking a package of basic programming service which costs around $360 a year.
AT&amp;T Corp, which has a 2.5 percent stake in DirecTV and markets the service directly, will not be changing the price of its own package which already offers the dish for $199 to consumers who are in its True Rewards program.
Consumers in that AT&amp;T program have to use loyalty points earned towards the cost of the service.
The dishes are made by Thomson Consumer Electronic Corp's RCA. Thomson is owned by France's Thomson Corp.  
However, another source said AT&amp;T would begin to apply discounts to the cost of programming, reducing it to $155 a year from the current $360 for True Rewards members.
AT&amp;T declined to comment.
DirecTV is the largest U.S. direct satellite service, with 1.7 million subscribers, and growing at 20-30 percent a year.
PrimeStar is the second largest with 1.35 million. It is owned by a group led by cable TV firm Tele-Communications Inc . EchoStar is third with 105,000.
The turf war is already on between telephone companies, cable TV firms and satellite operators for a digital entertainment market worth tens of billions of dollars.
Phone firms are planning to offer wireless cable that beams programs by line of sight, cable TV companies are planning upgraded cable services and internet access over high speed networks, but satellite companies already have a lead.
"They are two or years out in front while the cable TV firms and telcos are just getting started," said Jimmy Schaeffler, an analyst at the Carmel Group.
One advantage of satellite services -- not lost on AT&amp;T, which has an option to take a stake of up to 30 percent in DirecTV -- is that consumers who buy a dish are not likely to write off the cost by switching to another provider.
AT&amp;T, which is suffering from heavy competition in long distance telephone services, is hoping to cut the loss of customers by tying them in to a satellite TV service.
"The bottom line is that this is all about market share," said Schaeffler.  -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1712
Third quarter results at both MCI Communications Corp and Sprint Corp will be restrained by the cost of new ventures, and in Sprint's case the issue of new shares will lower per share earnings.
But analysts say both have so far escaped the problems which have hit AT&amp;T Corp in the consumer long distance market, and which led to AT&amp;T's profit warning in September.
"MCI will have increased earnings, but will continue the second quarter trend of slower long distance volume growth," Massick said Bette Massick of brokerage Bear Stearns.  
Sprint's earnings per share are expected to be lower than a year ago because of investment in the international Global One venture and in Personal Communications Services.
Sprint's shares in issue will rise to about 435 million, from 351 million a year ago, because of stock issued to partners Deutsche Telekom  DTK.CN and French Telecom.
MCI's heavy investment in media, Internet and satellite services with News Corp Ltd is not expected to break even for several years.
"The dilutive effects of the MCI ventures will increase year over year," Massick said.  
AT&amp;T said on September 24 that earnings per share could be as much as 10 percent below analysts' forecasts of $0.92 per share for the third quarter.  If this fear were realized, it would report earnings of $0.83, 13.5 percent below the $0.96 of a year earlier.
Analysts say AT&amp;T's problems were an expensive and flawed consumer market strategy of trying to win customers by offering them $100 checks and the competitive effect of small, fast-growing resellers and "dial around" services.  
Resellers include companies like Excel Communications Inc, which have produced 50 percent-plus annual revenue growth by using independent sales representatives to sell to friends, family and associates.
Dial around is so named because customers use a 1-800 number to access a rival service advertising cut price rates for long distance or international calling, without switching their long distance provider.
The long distance giants do not lose the customer, but notice a fall in average billable revenue.  
MCI expects higher customer turnover in consumer markets because of increased competition. But neither it nor Sprint depends as heavily on the consumer market as AT&amp;T does.
Merrill Lynch analyst Dan Reingold said in a research report that demand demand for Sprint's services is robust.
"Our forecast minute (of use) growth rate of 9.1 percent should be almost double the industry average...indicating that Sprint continues to take market share," Reingold said.
By contrast he expected AT&amp;T minutes of use to grow by 6.2 percent from a year ago, and revenue on this to rise just 1.5 percent.
This growth gap of 4.7 percentage points would exceed the 3.4 percent of the second quarter, he said.
Analysts say Sprint and MCI are not immune to the threat from dial around and resellers, but in any case the threat will be contained in the next two or three years.
"I think the idea of packages or bundles of services will be very much a threat to the small dial around competition because they won't be able to compete up and down the product chain," said Guy Woodlief of brokers Dean Witter Reynolds.  
AT&amp;T's adoption of a flat rate 15 cent long distance charge should help it regain market share, especially against Sprint, which charges a flat 25 cents during the day.
Such is the danger is adopting a clear pricing policy -- when more than one major competitor does it comparisons become easy and can lead to a downward spiral in calling charges.
"Given AT&amp;T's brand position in the market place, it is going to remain a formidable competitor," said Woodlief. Company   (all in dollars)    Q3 est   yr ago  results date
Sprint Corp................0.73.......0.76..Oct 16
AT&amp;T Corp .................0.83.......0.90..Oct 17
MCI Communications Corp... 0.44.......0.40..Oct 22
Estimates from First Call. Reporting dates from analysts
AT&amp;T Corp. Chairman Robert Allen is likely step down early to help attract a talented enough successor to take the helm of the nation's largest long-distance company, sources close to AT&amp;T said Friday.
They said the person chosen to succeed Alex Mandl, who resigned as AT&amp;T president and chief operating officer in August to head a small wireless communications company, would expect to be able to succeed Allen, 61, well before the four years still to run on his contract.
"I think it is fair to assume that," said one source, who declined to be identified.
AT&amp;T would not comment on the search for Mandl's successor and whether the candidate would succeed Allen, who is also chief executive officer.
"The search by the board is a private matter and we won't comment beyond that," said AT&amp;T spokesman Jim Byrnes.
Analysts said one possibility was that Allen would split off the role of chief executive to the new president in a year or so but retain his chairmanship until retirement.
"I expect the (AT&amp;T) system would allow and wish Allen to stay on in a senior official position for some time," said Mark Bruneau at COBA MID, a consulting firm.
An ambitious candidate would want to make an early impact on the strategic direction of AT&amp;T, one source said, noting that the fast-changing telecommunications market may be barely recognisable in four years.
The sources declined to comment on possible candidates, but some names already mentioned in the news media seem to have ruled themselves out.
"There is probably more speculation out there than truth in the media at this juncture" on the candidates, one source said.
Two candidates mentioned by the New York Times on Friday ruled themselves out. William Esrey, chairman of long-distance company Sprint Corp., said through a spokesman he was unaware of being a candidate for the AT&amp;T job.
"His contract with Sprint precludes working with competitors for several years after he leaves the company," the spokesman said.
Similarly, Hughes Electronics Corp. said its president, Michael Armstrong, was unaware of being an AT&amp;T candidate.
The Wall Street Journal reported that Eastman Kodak Co. Chairman George Fisher and former AT&amp;T director James Barksdale, now chairman of Netscape Communications Corp., also ruled themselves out.
The AT&amp;T board meets Wednesday, a day before the company reports third-quarter earnings, and may discuss the issue then.
Allen, a 40-year AT&amp;T career veteran, would be reluctant to depart early but said in a recent press interview that he would consider doing so if a perfect candidate came along.
Expectations of an early departure by Allen were fanned by AT&amp;T's warning in September when it said earnings per share for the third quarter may be 10 percent below analysts' expectations.
The warning crowned a rough year for AT&amp;T, which incurred the wrath of politicians, the media and the public for announcing 40,000 job cuts in January. Meanwhile, the rise in the stock price that job cuts often produce has not materialised, so Wall Street and investors are not happy either.
AT&amp;T's split into three parts is proceeding as planned, leaving the company to concentrate on its core long-distance telecommunications business, where competition is heating up.
While the Dow Jones industrial average is up nearly 17 percent so far this year, AT&amp;T shares -- adjusted for the company's breakup -- are off 16 percent.
AT&amp;T has hired executive search groups Korn Ferry and Spencer Stuart to seek an outside candidate. Officials at both firms declined to comment.
AT&amp;T Corp chairman and chief executive Robert Allen will step down early as the price of attracting a talented enough successor to take over, sources close to the company said on Friday.
The sources said that whoever is chosen to succeed Alex Mandl, who quit in August as president and chief operating officer, would expect to be able to succeed Allen, 61, well before the four years still to run on his contract.
"I think it is fair to assume that," said one source, declining to be identified.  
AT&amp;T would not comment on the search for Mandl's successor and whether the candidate would succeed Allen.
"The search by the board is a private matter and we won't comment beyond that," said AT&amp;T spokesman Jim Byrnes.
Analysts say one possibility is that Allen would split out the role of chief executive to the new candidate in a year or so but retain his chairmanship until retirement.
"I expect the (AT&amp;T) system would allow and wish Allen to stay on in a senior official position for some time," said Mark Bruneau of consultant COBA MID.  
An ambitious candidate would wantct on the strategic direction of AT&amp;T, one source said, noting he fast-changing telecommunications market may be barely recognizable in ars.
The sources declined to comment on who the candidates might be, but many aired in the media already seem to have ruled themselves out.
"There is probably more speculation out there than truth in the media at this juncture (on who the candidates are)," said one of the sources.  
The AT&amp;T board meets next Wednesday, a day before its third quarter results, and may discuss the issue then.
Allen, a 40-year AT&amp;T career veteran, would be reluctant to depart early, but in a recent press interview said he would consider it if a perfect candidate came along.
AT&amp;T has hired executive search groups Korn Ferry and Spencer Stuart to look for an outside candidate, but officials at the firms declined to comment on the process.  
Two candidates mentioned by the New York Times on Friday virtually ruled themselves out. William Esry, chairman of long distance telephone company Sprint Corp, said through a spokesman he was unaware of being on any AT&amp;T candidate list.
"His contract with Sprint precludes working with competitors for several years after he leaves the company," the Sprint spokesman added.
Similarly, Hughes Electronics Corp said president Michael Armstrong was unaware of being an AT&amp;T candidate.  
The Wall Street Journal reported that Eastman Kodak Co chairman George Fisher and former AT&amp;T director James Barksdale, who is chairman of Netscape Communications Corp, also ruled themselves out of the speculation.
Expectations of an earlier end to Allen's career have been fanned by AT&amp;T's profit warning in September, in which it said earnings per share for the third quarter may be 10 percent below analysts' expectations.
The warning crowned a bad year for the largest U.S. telecommunications firm.  
AT&amp;T incurred the wrath of politicians and the media for announcing 40,000 job cuts in January, but an improved stock performance it was meant to produce has not appeared, so Wall Street and investors are not happy either.
While the company's split into three parts is going ahead as planned, the remainder of AT&amp;T is now more firmly wedded to the long distance telecommunications services sector, in which competition is heating up.
While the Dow Jones Industrial Average is up 16 percent in 1996, AT&amp;T -- adjusted for its split -- is down 16 percent. -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1712
Sprint Corp said on Tuesday  it put its local telephone ventures with cable television companies on a back burner because there are more immediate opportunities in reselling existing local telephone service.
"For a lot of reasons the wireline ventures with the cable TV companies moved ... to a back burner," Arthur Krause, Sprint chief financial officer told Reuters.
Sprint's cable partners are Tele-Communications Inc, Comcast Corp and Cox Communications Inc, which together reach 30 million households.  
They had planned to be an early part of Sprint's plan to offer bundled local, long distance and wireless telephone with cable TV on a single bill across the United States.
Krause said faster-than-expected legislative action from the Federal Communications Commission had opened up chances of earlier interconnection deals with incumbent local telephone companies than had been expected two years or so ago.
Some analysts believe there are technical and strategic difficulties too, which have already led to local services being arranged as several separate ventures rather than one common branded service as originally planned.  
Krause predicted Sprint's first such resale deal would precede any offerings of local service in partnership with the cable TV companies, but gave no exact timings.
He noted that resale was always a major part of the plan, because Sprint can only reach 11 million of the 100 million U.S. homes through its own local telephone service unit, and its cable partners reach only another 30 million.
Eventually local service would be provided broadly on Sprint-owned facilities, he said.  
Sprint reported third quarter earnings on Tuesday and pleased analysts with its operating performance, but the stock remains weighed by worries over its ambitious plans, like Sprint PCS, a multi-billion dollar wireless venture.
Krause said the market should see Sprint as two companies.
"We have been encouraging people to look separately at the core operation and at the ventures," he said.
Sprint's core telephone operations should be analyzed based on their earnings, while the new cash-hungry ventures  should be approached on a discounted cash flow basis, he said.  
"(Otherwise)...the value of the new ventures ends up as less than zero," he said.
Krause declined comment on estimates of dilution caused by Sprint PCS ahead of the finalization of the venture's 1997 business plan, which he expected within 30 days.  Analysts expect dilution of $450 miilion to $650 million in 1997.
Krause said he was encouraged that churn, or customer turnover, was declining in its long distance operations, particularly when others were being hit hard.
"(Nevertheless) churn rates still exceed what anyone would hope they would be," he said.
AT&amp;T Corp said in September that high churn in this competitive marketplace was one of the reasons that it predicted an earnings shortfall for the third quarter.
Krause said Sprint's marketing encouraged customers to remain with the company.
"Sprint Sense has a cashback plan that basically rewards people who stay a year or longer," he said, of a consumer market plan.  For small business customers he said that the "Fridays Free" campaign had been equally successful. -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1712
Sprint Corp showed a dynamic performance in all businesses in the third quarter of 1996, and better than MCI Communications Corp or AT&amp;T Corp will manage in long-distance telephone, analysts said.
But uncertainty surrounding the success of expensive new ventures, and continuing dilution of earnings from funding them, are a big and enduring question mark for investors.
"There is a two-sided story here: The businesses are growing very well, but there is all this dilution from new ventures," said analyst Richard Klugman of PaineWebber.  
Sprint third-quarter earnings per share were broadly in line with analysts' estimates at $0.72, down from $0.76 a year ago, weighed down by the cost of new ventures, a 24 percent increase in shares in issue and a two point tax rate rise.
But top line growth was outstanding, analysts said. Call volume carried soared by 21 percent from a year ago, while revenues increased 14.1 percent over the same period.
"Clearly this is going to be the strongest growth of the big three (AT&amp;T, MCI, Sprint) in long-distance volume and revenues," said Better Massick of brokers Bear Stearns.  
However, the shares managed only a restrained rise of 1/2 to 40-3/8 by 1300 EDT/1700 GMT Tuesday.
Two complex multi-billion dollar ventures, Sprint PCS and Global One, caused respectively four and six cents per share of earnings dilution in the third quarter, and more is seen.
Sprint PCS is a wireless Personal Communications Services (PCS) national network being built for tiny new mobile phones that have better battery life and building penetration than existing cellular services, and extra features like paging.  
Sprint owns 40 percent of Sprint PCS, Tele-Communications Inc owns 30 percent, and Comcast Corp and Cox Communications Inc each own 15 percent.
"The question mark over the company is PCS and its ability to execute the strategy," said Simon Flannery of J.P. Morgan.
PCS services are already operating in one metropolitan area, Washington-Baltimore, and Sprint expects to launch two more in November and to be in 15 to 20 by the year end.  
But as each new market opens, the amortization of the license cost -- Sprint paid a total of $2.1 billion for licenses -- plus marketing, network costs and subsidised handset costs also kick in.
Analysts estimate that Sprint could suffer $450 million to $650 million dilution from those costs in 1997. The more successful it is with PCS, the higher these costs will be.
"PCS will not breakeven for years," Klugman said. "But Global One should breakeven sometime in the second half of 1997," he added.  
Global One is an international venture designed both to act as a carrier of services for other telecommunications companies, and a one-stop shop for multinational corporations.
It is half owned by Sprint, and a quarter each by France Telecom and soon-to-be privatised Deutsche Telekom.
The European companies also took a 20 percent stake in Sprint for $3.66 billion in January, which accounts for the extra shares in issue.
Sprint said that Global One is on course for annualised revenues of $1 billion a year by the end of 1996, but Flannery said it was harder to figure out the earnings position.
"The visibility of earnings at Global One is not very good yet," Flannery said. -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1712
Ameritech Corp. and Sprint Corp., the two biggest telecommunications companies in the Midwest, Tuesday reported double-digit profit increases in the third quarter of 1996 and said they expect more to come.
Sprint, a long-distance and local carrier based in Kansas City, Mo., said net income rose 16 percent to $312.4 million from $268.5 million in the 1995 quarter. Revenues grew 10.6 percent to $3.54 billion from $3.21 billion.
Earnings per share fell to 72 cents from 76 cents, mainly because of a 20 percent stake taken in Sprint by France Telecom and Germany's Deutsche Telekom which lifted the number of shares outstanding by 24 percent.
Ameritech, based in Chicago, said net income for the three months ended Sept. 30 edged up to $519 million, or 94 cents a share, from $512 million, or 92 cents a share.
Both companies' earnings were broadly in line with analysts' consensus forecasts carried on First Call, which tracks estimates.
"We currently expect to once again report double-digit volume and revenue growth ... in the fourth quarter," Sprint Chief Financial Officer Arthur Krause said.
Ameritech, whose core business is local phone service in the Midwest, said revenues rose 10 percent to $3.7 billion from $3.4 billion.
"Each of our three strategies -- growing our core business, investing in high-growth initiatives and geographic expansion -- plays an integral role in our ability to create sustainable double-digit growth," said Ameritech Chief Executive Richard Notebaert.
Analysts were impressed by Sprint's strong showing in long-distance service, an area where industry giant AT&amp;T Corp. recently slipped up and warned of lower profits.
"Clearly this is going to be the strongest growth of the big three (AT&amp;T, MCI Communications Corp. and Sprint) in long-distance volume and revenues," said analyst Bette Massick of brokers Bear Stearns.
However, some were concerned that the cost of investments such as Sprint PCS, a wireless venture, were eating up profit growth.
"There is a two sided story here: the businesses are growing very well, but there is all this dilution from new ventures," said analyst Richard Klugman at Painewebber.
Sprint PCS is a wireless Personal Communications Services (PCS) national network being built for tiny new mobile phones designed to have better battery life and building penetration than existing cellular services, and extra features including paging.
Sprint owns 40 percent of Sprint PCS, Tele-Communications Inc. owns 30 percent, and Comcast Corp. and Cox Communications Inc. each own 15 percent.
PCS services are already operating in one metropolitan area, Washington-Baltimore, and Sprint expects to launch two more in November and to be in 15 to 20 by the year end.
The other venture is Global One, an international firm designed as a carrier of services for other telecommunications companies and as one-stop shop for multinational corporations.
It is half owned by Sprint, and a quarter each by France Telecom and soon-to-be privatised Deutsche Telekom.
For the year to date, Sprint's net income grew 27 percent to $938.5 million, or $2.22 a share, from $739 million, or $2.10 a share. Sales expanded to $10.42 billion from $9.42 billion.
Ameritech said nine-month net income slipped 1.9 percent to $1.56 billion, or $2.83 a share, from $1.60 billion, $2.88 a share, despite a 12 percent growth in revenues to $11.0 billion from $9.9 billion.
The company said international investments drove more than one-third of its earnings growth in the quarter, led by investments in Belgacom of Belgium, Matav of Hungary and Telecom New Zealand.
In the third quarter telephone lines increased by 3.7 percent to 19.6 million, while cellular customers increased by 37 percent to 2.3 million.
Ameritech's shares fell 87.5 cents to $54.375 while Sprint added 37.5 cents to $40.25, both on the New York Stock Exchange.
GTE Corp said on Wednesday that it expects to continue increasing earnings per share by at least 10 percent for the forseeable future, on revenues seen rising six to eight percent per year.
"At this point there is nothing on the horizon to suggest we should be backing off from that (earlier forecast)," chief financial officer Michael Kelly told Reuters.
GTE earlier reported third quarter earnings per share of $0.78, 10 percent ahead of a year ago and exactly in line with analysts' consensus estimates carried on First Call.  
However, analysts were pleased by very strong growth in the business fundamentals, which included an industry-leading 7.4 percent rise in access lines and a 20 percent growth in cellular users. The stock was 2-3/4 firmer at 41-3/8 in early afternoon.
Kelly was delighted with GTE's line growth.  "We just don't see it stopping; its unbelievably strong," he said.
GTE's local calling areas are mostly suburban, where families who telecommute are most likely to live, and where families have adolescent children who need their own lines -- as well as a computer or two in the home needing a line.  
On top of this GTE areas are concentrated in Sunbelt areas like Florida, where economic growth has been very strong, or California, where it is rebounding from recent weakness.
"GTE is in a position to grow faster that the regional Bells because of their concentration in suburban markets," said Bette Massick of Bear Stearns, noting that an end to sales of local operations has unmasked this growth.
Kelly said that GTE had worked hard to cut its customer turnover -- or churn -- in cellular services, which increases marketing costs substantially.  Targeting high value customers had paid dividends, without hitting overall growth.  
As a result, average monthly bills are $61 per month, $3 above the industry average, and churn has fallen 18 percent from a year ago.  Most customers are now on term contracts.
"Our (consumer) bad debt is coming down also," Kelly said.
GTE offers long distance across 31 states, including all the areas where it already offers local service -- a privilege which regional Bells will only be allowed when they have proven their own local calling markets are competitive.
It has already garnered 500,000 customers since it began in March and expects to reach one million soon after the end of 1996 at the expense of the industry's big three players.  
"...Most of our business is coming from the three traditional dominant players," Kelly said.
AT&amp;T Corp, MCI Communications Corp and Sprint Corp are the industry's big three.
Kelly said that the long distance customers gained seemed above average in terms of call duration and spending.
GTE in late August began providing customers in Tampa with a single bill for all their GTE cellular, local, long distance and Internet services and will roll this out to new regions as soon as possible.
Single billing has long been desired by the industry as a tool to retain customers, who like the convenience of writing a single monthly check, but few companies have the software in place to support it. -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1712
GTE Corp. Wednesday said earnings rose 9 percent in the third quarter, boosted by strong demand for new phone lines from people setting up businesses or hooking up computers at home.
The results were in line with expectations, but GTE's stock jumped as investors cheered the report from the nation's largest local telephone company, as well a court ruling late on Tuesday that suspended key parts of federal rules designed to foster competition in local phone markets.
Other local phone company stocks also rose after the ruling by a three-judge appeals court panel in St. Louis. The judges said they had "serious doubts" about the Federal Communication Commission's authority to impose its pricing policies.
The FCC rules, among other things, would require the Baby Bells and other local carriers to lease their phone lines to new competitors at steep discounts of up to 25 percent.
Analysts said state regulators were likely to call for lower discounts. The appellate panel put the new rules on hold while it considers a court challenge to the FCC's plan.
The challenge to the FCC rules had been spearheaded by GTE, which was joined by some of the Baby Bells, other local carriers and state regulators.
"(The legal challenge) improves the probability for getting higher prices to resell local networks than under the FCC guidance," said Bette Massick at brokers Bear Stearns.
GTE jumped $3.625 to $42.25 in consolidated afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Other Bell stocks that rose included BellSouth, up $2.50 to $38.875, Bell Atlantic, ahead $2.125 to $60.875, Nynex, which gained $1.625 to $44.50, Ameritech, up $1.75 to $56.125 and Pacific Telesis, which added $1.375 to $34.625, all on the NYSE.
In its report, Stamford, Conn.-based GTE said net income rose to $756 million, or 78 cents a share, in the quarter ended Sept. 30, from $695 million, or 72 cents a share, in the 1995 period.
The results matched analysts' forecasts of 78 cents a share, according to First Call, which tracks estimates. The 1995 figures included a gain of $11 million, or 1 cent a share, from the sale of secondary telephone properties.
Sales grew 7 percent to $5.34 billion from $5.0 billion.
In addition to strong line demand, GTE cited growth in its cellular and long-distance services.
"The continued pace of our revenue growth, driven by record line growth as well as strong demand for new and enhanced services, is particularly encouraging," Chairman Charles Lee said in a statement.
The number of domestic access lines grew 7 percent in the quarter, with more than half the growth in the residential side of the business from additional lines to the home, GTE said.
GTE said its number of cellular customers grew almost 5 percent in the quarter, while cellular revenue surged 15 percent.
It also said it doubled its number of long-distance customers to more than 500,000 from the end of the second quarter.
AT&amp;T Corp's proposed successor to Robert Allen as chairman and chief executive will be a surprise, not one of those whose names have been mentioned in the press, sources close to the company said on Wednesday.
Neither Michael Armstrong, President of Hughes Electronics Corp nor William Esrey, chief executive of Sprint Corp are in contention, despite broad press speculation.
The sources declined to identify the true candidate.
AT&amp;T declined comment, as did Korn Ferry International and Spencer Stuart, the executive search firms involved.
AT&amp;T's board met earlier in the day to examine a slate of candidates put forward by the executive search groups for the post of president and chief operating officer, and sources expect an announcement in the next few days.
AT&amp;T reports its third quarter results on Thursday.
"The search had (already) been narrowed to a critical few... and the board, not just Bob Allen, will make the final decision," said one source, declining to be identified.
The post is vacant after Alex Mandl resigned in August to head a tiny new wireless company, Associated Communications.
One possibility is that Allen would split out the role of chief executive to the new candidate in a year or so but retain his chairmanship until nearer retirement.
Allen, a 32-year AT&amp;T career veteran would be reluctant to depart early, but in a recent press interview said he would consider it if a perfect candidate came along.
"AT&amp;T wants a world class marketer and technologist, with considerable experience of leading a major business," one source said.
It is unclear yet whether AT&amp;T will give a clear succession timetable in the announcement for the new post.
Armstrong, Esrey, Eastman Kodak Co chairman George Fisher and James Barksdale, chairman of Netscape Communications Corp, have ruled themselves out of the candidature, but this has not stopped the speculation.
Expectation of an earlier end to Allen's career has been fanned by AT&amp;T's profit warning in September in which it said earnings per share for the third quarter may be 10 percent below analysts expectations.
The warning crowned a bad year for the largest U.S. telecommunications firm.
AT&amp;T incurred the wrath of politicians and the media for announcing 40,000 job cuts in January, but an improved stock performance it was meant to produce has not appeared, so Wall Street and investors are not happy either.
While the company's split into three parts is going ahead as planned, the remainder of AT&amp;T is now more firmly wedded to long distance telecommunications services sector, in which competition is hotting up.
While the Dow Jones Industrial Average is up 16 percent in 1996, AT&amp;T -- adjusted for its split -- is down 14 percent. -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1712 (c) Reuters Limited 1996
AT&amp;T Corp.'s proposed successor to Robert Allen as chairman and chief executive will be a surprise, not one of those whose names have been mentioned in the press, sources close to the company said Wednesday.
Neither Michael Armstrong, president of Hughes Electronics Corp., nor William Esrey, chief executive of Sprint Corp., are in contention, despite broad media speculation.
The sources declined to identify the true candidate.
AT&amp;T declined to comment, as did Korn Ferry International and Spencer Stuart, the executive search firms involved.
AT&amp;T's board met earlier in the day to examine a slate of candidates put forward by the executive search groups for the post of president and chief operating officer, and sources expect an announcement in the next few days.
AT&amp;T reports its third-quarter results Thursday.
"The search had (already) been narrowed to a critical few ... and the board, not just Bob Allen, will make the final decision," said one source, declining to be identified.
The post is vacant after Alex Mandl resigned in August to head a tiny new wireless company, Associated Communications.
One possibility is that Allen would split out the role of chief executive to the new candidate in a year or so but retain his chairmanship until nearer retirement.
Allen, a 32-year AT&amp;T career veteran, would be reluctant to depart early, but in a recent interview said he would consider it if a perfect candidate came along.
"AT&amp;T wants a world-class marketer and technologist, with considerable experience of leading a major business," one source said.
It is unclear yet whether AT&amp;T will give a clear succession timetable in the announcement for the new post.
Armstrong, Esrey, Eastman Kodak Co. Chairman George Fisher and James Barksdale, chairman of Netscape Communications Corp., have ruled themselves out, but this has not stopped the speculation.
Expectation of an earlier end to Allen's career has been fanned by AT&amp;T's profit warning in September in which it said earnings per share for the third quarter may be 10 percent below analyst expectations.
The warning crowned a bad year for the largest U.S. telecommunications firm.
AT&amp;T incurred the wrath of politicians and the media for announcing 40,000 job cuts in January, but the improved stock performance it was meant to produce has not appeared, so Wall Street and investors are not happy either.
While the company's split into three parts is going ahead as planned, the remainder of AT&amp;T is now more firmly wedded to the long-distance telecommunications services sector, in which competition is heating up.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average of blue-chip stocks is up 16 percent so far this year, but AT&amp;T -- adjusted for its split -- is down 14 percent.
With most of their third quarter results in, regional Bells are fulfilling their promise to build out more telephone lines, to put more new services on each line and to make more money doing it.
Share analysts say the Bells and GTE Corp show no signs of slackening demand and are preparing themselves well for the challenge of full competition in their local markets.
"I would characterise the quarter as a cause for celebration in just about every instance," said Bill Vogel of Dillon Read, a long-time bull on regional Bell stocks.
Thursday saw results of Bell Atlantic Corp BellSouth Corp Pacific Telesis Group and SBC Communications Inc, following results on Tuesday from Ameritech Corp and on Wednesday from GTE Corp. NYNEX Corp and U S West Inc report next week.
Earnings per share growth averaged 8.25 percent, ranging from 3.0 percent at Ameritech to BellSouth's 12.5 percent. All were within a cent of analyst's First Call estimates.
"Generally the bottom line results have come in as expected," said Goldman Sachs analyst Julie Kennedy.
Annual access line growth has averaged 4.9 percent, well above levels seen in the 1980s and early 1990s, boosted by demand for Internet access, home computers, facsimile machines and extra business lines.
"The temporary scare the market had with Ameritech's line growth seems a one-off," said Kennedy.
Ameritech saw a dip in line growth to 3.7 percent from 4.4 percent from a year ago, but it followed a drop in advertising and seemed to reflect changed priorities, analysts said.
Pacific Telesis, which is being taken over by SBC, reported strong results which reflected a bounce-back in the California economy. The toll market, a problem area for the company in previous quarters, came good with stable market share and a 6.1 percent increase in revenues year-on-year.
Vogel said the market was absorbing competitive access providers (CAPS) like MFS Communications Co Inc and Teleport Communications LP, without hitting the Bells' growth.
"Results show that the main business lines of the Bells are untouched in both price and volume by the CAPS," he said.
Nevertheless, Bell shares remained muted on Thursday, with none of those reporting results moving more than 1.5 percent.
The Bells have underperformed the broad market this year, with analysts saying investors remain concerned about regulation and competition stemming from the 1996 Telecom Act.
This week's good news, in the shape of a legal challenge to Federal Communications Commission (FCC) jurisdiction over the pricing process for reselling local circuits to competitors, is still lost in the broader Bell worries.
The FCC has to review the prices the Bells can charge for access to their local customers in 1997.
"The cloud over these stocks, what has to be decided by the FCC on access charges, has still not lifted," Kennedy said. -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1712
Like an ageing prizefighter, AT&amp;T Corp is destined to slug it out with vigorous rivals both big and small in the $75 billion long distance telephone arena, with no lift in earnings performance in sight.
Though AT&amp;T has just started to improve its marketing punch, share analysts say by the time it shows up in earnings it will be facing fresh opponents -- muscular regional Bells.
"It is hard to find a positive medium-term outlook for AT&amp;T," said Bette Massick of brokers Bear Stearns, adding that more attractive stocks could be found elsewhere.  
Thursday's third quarter earnings were in line with analysts' estimates, revised after September's profits warning.  But few analysts give hope for a quick profit rebound now that the company's fortunes are so clearly tied to its long distance marketplace.
AT&amp;T earlier reported a 12 percent earnings per share decline to $0.84 from $0.96 a year ago -- with increased competition and higher marketing expenses hitting long distance -- while financial services sank into losses.  
"I don't see much earnings improvement next quarter or in the first two 1997 quarters," said Simon Flannery of brokers J.P. Morgan.  The shares were 1/2 lower at $39-3/8.
AT&amp;T said it has been encouraged by early responses to its new $0.15 a minute flat price for long distance, and analysts say this should stem the weakness for now.
AT&amp;T has a higher proportion of revenues from the consumer long distance market place than its two archrivals MCI Communications Corp and Sprint Corp.  
The spinoff of Lucent Technologies Inc in September and of NCR Corp at the end of 1996, plus numerous unit sales, can only tighten the dependence.
Companies like GTE Corp -- which took half a million long distance customers in its first six months -- and Southern New England Telecommunications Corp are entering the market in a big way, mostly in the consumer area.
They join hundreds of tiny aggressive companies like Excel Communications Inc, which lease the circuits of the big players and then compete with them at low prices.  
By the second half of 1997, dependent on the state of a legal tussle over U.S. Federal Communications Commission resale rules, regional Bells will be starting to enter the long distance market themselves.
By this time AT&amp;T, like other long distance players, is hoping to offer local calling using the circuits of the regional Bells. But the legal challenge led by GTE may succeed in shutting the FCC out of the resale pricing process.
"If so, it will cost AT&amp;T more to get into the local market," Massick said.  
Major players by then will be starting to offer packages including wireless, local and long distance and in some cases satellite or cable television too, all on one bill.
This should shut out some of the small resellers and throw the fight onto brand names, where AT&amp;T should be strong -- but the outcome is far from clear, analysts say.
In the meantime, they are hoping for strong action at the loss-making Universal Card credit card unit.
"The credit card business was very disappointing; that's something to watch going forward," Flannery said.
Analysts were concerned by a worsened risk profile and bad debt record at the unit.  If this can happen during buoyant economic times, a recession would be very painful, they say. -- Nick Louth, New York Newsroom 212 859 1712
Long distance and local telephone company Frontier Corp. said on Monday it is investing up to $500 million in a $2 billion fiber optic network being built across the United States.
Frontier said it will be the largest fiber optic network built in the United States as a single project, and will put it ahead of AT&amp;T Corp., MCI Communications Corp. and others whose networks include both old and new technologies.
Lucent Technologies Inc., spun off from AT&amp;T Corp. in September, will supply the network cable. That contract is worth at least $100 million, a source close to the deal said.
The network is being built by privately owned Qwest Communications, which began work in 1995 and has already spent $500 million. Qwest said it is open to other telecommunications partners to help fund the remaining $1 billion.
The network will connect almost 100 cities and use the technical standard known as SONET, or Synchronous Optical Network, which gives high performance and reliability.
"Used in a ring, SONET allows you to recover from a network failure in milliseconds," said analyst Christine Heckart of consultants TeleChoice. "This investment will expand Frontier's network reach to customers it was hard to get at low cost," she said.
Frontier, based in Rochester, N.Y., currently leases its network from others. But it expects to be able to cut costs significantly by this investment, which will increase its network capacity forty-fold.
Robert Barrett, president of Frontier's Network Systems unit, said the network would begin to bring benefits in 1997, halving network transport costs, and cutting incremental network costs by 80 percent.
"Clearly it makes better sense for us to own the network," Barrett told a teleconference.
Qwest, a company specializing in network construction, is based in Denver, Colo. It is a subsidiary of Anschutz Co. Anschutz's owner and chief executive is Philip Anschutz, the largest shareholder in Union Pacific Corp.
Frontier will fund $350 million to $400 million of its investment from its own cash flow, and may use short- and medium-term debt for the remaining $100 million to $150 million.
Frontier's stock lost 25 cents to end at $27.75 on the New York Stock Exchange.
MCI Communications Corp is ducking the trench warfare in the consumer long distance telephone market by quietly using data warehousing  to target key customers who are unlikely to flee to the enemy.
MCI Chief Financial Officer Doug Maine said these customers are looking for advanced services, preferably in a package, but have hitherto been hard to pinpoint.
"It has taken tens of millions of dollars and many years to develop profiles of customers who can be targeted in our marketing," Maine told Reuters in an interview.  
Data warehousing requires powerful computers to assemble profiles of users from thousands of individual spending decisions and was a technique first applied by retailers.
"I always tell investors it is a hidden asset you cannot put a value on," Main said.
Sales people use these profiles to sell new services to existing customers, or target those of rivals who are likely to move across for the right services -- and stay.
"We've done this for some time in the business sales force," Maine said.  
The main enemy is churn, the tendency for some customers to switch between providers, which wastes all the marketing, promotional and administrative money spent recruiting them.
Third quarter results on Tuesday from MCI showed the benefits in the business and data markets that account for two-thirds of MCI's total revenues, but it is early days to see much improvement in the consumer market.
MCI said churn was higher than a year ago in the consumer market, but lower than in the second quarter.  
While AT&amp;T Corp slugs it out with tiny but tenacious resellers in a costly battle for customers using millions of dollars in promotional ammunition, MCI has cut its promotional spending for customer sign-ons by 70 percent from a year ago.
Maine said MCI One, a service package on one bill, has no sign-on bonus but half of new users take the Internet service. MCI One users are five times as likely to take cellular and calling cards than when services are billed separately.  
It is not just a land war. MCI has cross promotions with Northwest Airlines, American Airlines and Delta Air Lines Inc, seeing overlaps between frequent fliers and heavy users of calling cards and wireless services.
Offering free air miles is much cheaper than offering cash, but just as alluring to certain markets.
"Our line-up gives us access to 70 percent of frequent fliers," said Maine.
Maine said that AT&amp;T and Sprint Corp have been mining their databanks too, and the whole industry will have a headstart against the regional Bells, which are much newer to the game, when markets are all open to competition.
Despite all its data warehousing, MCI still makes errors.
MCI said it is in the process of revamping its paging services, which resell the networks of Paging Network Inc and Mobile Telecommunications Technologies Corp after it discovered heavy churn.
Paging customers in the third quarter fell to 342,000 from 474,000 the previous quarter, and are expected to be lower in the fourth quarter too before a recovery seen for 1997. -- New York Newsroom  212 859 1712
Whoever takes over from Robert Allen as chairman and chief executive of AT&amp;T Corp has a major task on hand to wake the sleeping giant, reverse its loss of market share and move strongly into new market opportunities.
"You need to do something to increase the growth rate at the margin, to throw out this rearguard mentality," said analyst Bill Deatherage of brokers Bear Stearns.
AT&amp;T's core long distance market share has fallen to 55 percent from 60 percent in two years, while it has failed to capitalize profitably on the growth of new areas.  
"They need to get away from the price game; they cannot win that way," said Chris Landis, a consultant at TeleChoice Inc, and a former AT&amp;T executive.
While AT&amp;T made the right move into wireless with the purchase of McCaw Cellular, the integration of the products on one invoice is very important and has yet to happen.
"You need someone who can sell a bill because that is how you communicate with your customer," said Landis.  
Whoever is recruited to fill the vacant slot of chief operating officer, created when Alex Mandl left in August, will expect to take over as chief executive and chairman from Allen quickly, and will insist on a firm timetable.
"The problem is going to be getting the talent you need while Bob Allen is still around," said Landis.
Sources close to the company say AT&amp;T has narrowed down its search to a shortlist of eager candidates -- none yet identified in the press -- but say an announcement is unlikely until the latter part of the week at the earliest.  
Television channel CNBC said Tuesday that Ameritech Corp's Richard Notebaert is the latest to emerge as a possible successor to Allen.  Ameritech said chief executive Notebaert was abroad and unavailable for immediate comment.
As a regional Bell chief executive he has powerful credentials for the post, but it remains unclear whether AT&amp;T's search is focused within the industry, or would be broadened to a candidate with powerful marketing skills from some other industry.  AT&amp;T, and the two executive search firms involved, Korn Ferry International and Spencer Stuart, have declined comment consistently on the succession issue.  
However, while the guessing game over successors has held sway in the press, it has been a snooze for investors, said analyst Bill Deatherage of brokers Bear Stearns.
"This is discussed much more in the press than by investors," Deatherage said.
He said that even if investors knew the candidate, it would be months at least before he or she would be able to have a discernible effect on the huge inertia in the corporation.
Some analysts have suggested that Allen may stay on as chairman while the new recruit rapidly steps up to become chief executive, but Landis thought Allen's continued presence would overshadow the new executive.
"Insiders would much rather see Bob Allen leave sooner than later and it could be his best act to show his love for the company," he said. -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1610
WorldCom Inc. said Monday it will acquire MFS Communications Co. Inc. in a stock swap worth about $14 billion, creating a giant international business communications company.
The combined company, to be called MFS WorldCom, will provide "a single source for a full range of local, long distance, Internet and international service over an advanced fiber optic network," Worldcom said.
The merged company will have current annualized revenue of about $5.4 billion, with more than 500,000 business customers throughout North America, Europe and Asia. It will have an end-to-end fiber optic network with 25,000 miles of fiber in service or under construction connecting all major metropolitan areas in the United States.
"We are creating the first company since the breakup of AT&amp;T to bundle together local and long distance services carried over an international end-to-end fiber network owned or controlled by a single company," said Bernard J. Ebbers, president and CEO of WorldCom.
The deregulation of the telecommunications industry early this year promises to bring end-to-end service, but neither AT&amp;T Corp. nor any regional Bell can yet achieve it because of regulatory checklists and negotiating tussles.
"We think this gives us at least a two-year headstart over our competitors," Ebbers said in an interview.
The merger comes only weeks after MFS' $2 billion purchase of UUNET Technologies Inc. was completed on Aug. 12. That merger created a single source for Internet, voice, data and video services over an international fiber optic grid. MFS' stock has risen 41 percent a year since it went public three years ago.
In the latest deal, which was unanimously approved by both companies' boards, each share of MFS common stock will be exchanged for 2.1 shares of WorldCom common stock.
"As of Friday's closing, the merger consideration for MFS stock is approximately $14 billion," the statement said.
MSF's stock leaped $10 to $44.875 on Nasdaq in late trading.
However, worries that the deal was too generous hit Worldcom's stock, which has soared an average of 57 percent a year over the last 10 years. It fell $3.75 to $22.625 on Nasdaq after the company said the merger would dilute earnings for three years.
Although the transaction was valued at $55.39 per WorldCom share based on Friday's closing price, the steep drop in WorldCom's stock brought the value down to $47 per share, traders said.
"Over time, I think the deal will be viewed very positively, but it will take time," one takeover trader said.
Omaha, Neb.-based MFS is a major provider of communications services for business and government. Its local networks in dozens of major U.S. cities enable it to outflank the regional Bells' lock on access to local business customers, giving it a strong bargaining position in the merger.
"He (Ebbers) had the only one sizable company to merge with whose stock we really wanted (to own)," James Crowe, chief executive of MFS, told reporters.
Despite the substantial stock premium for MFS, savings would soon cover the cost of the deal, Ebbers said.
Jackson, Miss.-based WorldCom said it expects significant cost savings from reduced line and access costs. The deal will also eliminate duplication of capital spending programmes and position the combined company to take full advantage of the recent easing of telecommunications laws, it said.
Specifically, MFS no longer has to build a $500 million intercity network, because WorldCom already has one. WorldCom will not have to take a share in a $450 million transatlantic cable for its expanding international business because MFS is already a partner in one.
Ebbers said access charges that Worldcom pays to local telephone companies to reach their local customers would drop because MFS already has local lines to businesses in 45 U.S. cities, rising to 85 cities in two years.
UUNET, the internet service provider that MFS bought earlier this month, will have the biggest savings.
WorldCom said the companies hope to close the latest merger in four to eight months, subject to federal regulatory approval. Shareholders will vote on the deal at special meetings.
Worldcom said in a separate statement that it has adopted a shareholder rights plan to discourage a hostile takeover. It said move was not affected by the deal with MFS.
John Walter believes that making strategies work within the machinery of AT&amp;T Corp will be the core both of his job as chief operating officer and when he steps up to become chief executive (CEO) in 1998.
"You can have the greatest strategy in the world, but if you dont execute, it doesnt matter," Walter told Reuters.
Walter, chairman and chief executive of commercial printing firm R.R. Donnelley &amp; Sons Co, was on Wednesday appointed by AT&amp;T as president and chief operating officer, and heir apparent to AT&amp;T CEO and chairman Robert Allen.  
Walter will immerse himself in the operations of AT&amp;T during the 14 months when he and Robert Allen work as a team, and emerge capable of holding the reins.
"I'm very comfortable with my ability to move this enterprise forward," he said in a telephone interview.
Walter declined to outline areas where he believed AT&amp;T had failed, but underlined achieving objectives and having an appropriate cost base as his clear focus.
"We have to have a cost platform which allows us to compete effectively or we are disadvantaged even before we come into the ring," he said.  
Analysts have repeatedly criticised AT&amp;T's inability to meet its objectives, which has resulted in an erosion of the value of the brand name and a sliding share price.
AT&amp;T has flung tens of millions in $100 checks at consumer long distance customers only to find them desert again to rivals in the industry. Its share in the $75 billion market has fallen to around 55 percent from 60 two years ago.
"They haven't had the level of execution on the consumer side that we should have seen," said consultant Chris Landis of TeleChoice, who is also an ex-AT&amp;T executive.  
AT&amp;T has made repeated attempts to make money in online services and the Internet, but has sold off almost all its creative content efforts and has retreated to a core offering of Internet access.
For every acquisition that worked well, like the 1994 purchase of McCaw Cellular, there have been others that failed, like the $7.5 billion 1991 takeover of NCR Corp.
Adjusted for the split-off of Lucent Technologies Inc, AT&amp;T shares have fallen 16 percent this year, about the same as the broad market has risen.  
Among Walter's favorite quotes: "When you hire, hire people better than you and then you'll build a company of giants. Hire people worse than you and you'll disappear."
Printing industry analysts say Walter has used technology very effectively to make Donnelley grow, but some say growth came at a price.
"A lot of things have been going wrong," said one analyst, citing the lower earnings outlook and falling stock price.
But analyst Rudolf Hokanson of Deutsche Morgan Grenfell said Walter was an effective manager.
"He tried to make people more accountable, tried to flatten some of the reporting structure," said Hokanson.
-- New York Newsroom 212 859 1712
AT&amp;T Corp said that the decision to wait 14 months before newly appointed President John Walter takes over as chief executive from Robert Allen made sense while he learned about a different business.
"It was something that Bob Allen felt made sense and something that made sense to John (Walter)," Hal Burlingame AT&amp;T senior vice president for human resources, told Reuters. "It had a lot of input from the board (too)," he said.  
AT&amp;T appointed Walter as its new president and chief operating officer from November 1, following AT&amp;T board approval last night. Walter is chairman and chief executive of printing firm R.R. Donnelley &amp; Sons Co.
Walter will not take over as chief executive from Allen until January 1998, 14 months time, and will become chairman in May 1998 at AT&amp;T's annual shareholder meeting.
In the meantime they will work together, while Walter gets to more fully understand AT&amp;T's business, Burlingame said.  
"They will work together very tightly on all the issues confronting the business, but Bob will obviously be chairman and CEO during that process," he said.
Analysts had expected a full handover to whoever was chosen to succeed Allen in six or 12 months, and said the slower timetable was one reason for the stock price fall.
AT&amp;T stock was down 1-7/8 at 38 at 1430 EDT/1830 GMT in heavy volume.  
Burlingame declined comment on what Walter would be paid, except to say that his package would have a very strong alignment with the interests of AT&amp;T shareholders. Details will be available with the next 10K filing.
"Mr Walter had a very fine plan with a lot of futures built into it at R.R. Donnelley. We hav recognised that in the program we put together," Burlingame said.
AT&amp;T separately told a news conference that the main part of the pay would be performance-related, and that the package, while competitive, was by no means a record-breaker.  
Donnelley's last proxy filing showed Walter's compensation for 1995 as $900,000 plus a bonus of $555,000 and other annual compensation of $36,427.
Walter's predecessor as AT&amp;T chief operating officer and president, Alex Mandl, left in August to join a startup firm called Associated Communications for a package that included a mighty $20 million salary.
Burlingame said AT&amp;T started with a list of more than 30 names from executive search firms, and narrowed those down to 17 early in September, when candidates were first approached.  
A lengthy board meeting on September 13 in West Virginia whittled down the number from 17 to six. Extensive discussions took place with Walter in the last week before his appointment was confirmed.
"The (stock) market doesn't know him yet, but this a person who will be regarded very positively as people come to know him," Burlingame said. -- New York Newsroom  212 859 1712
With AT&amp;T Corp losing market share and floundering in new markets, Wall Street had been expecting a well-known industry leader to take over from Chairman Robert Allen and turn the company around.
Instead, AT&amp;T has recruited a relative unknown, John Walter, chairman and chief executive of R.R. Donnelley &amp; Sons Co. He may be up to the job, but the market will be kept guessing for 18 months while Allen serves out his time.
"He may be exactly what they need, but we won't know for a while," said consultant Jeffrey Kagan of Kagan Telecom.  
Analysts and consultants say Walter is well respected but has never faced the scale of challenge he will find at AT&amp;T, which bestrides the crossroads of communication, software, computing and the Internet.
"AT&amp;T is the biggest battleship you have ever seen. Donnelley is not a small company, but AT&amp;T is 10 times the revenues and has three times the employees," said David Goodtree, a consultant at Forrester Research.
AT&amp;T appointed Walter as its new president and chief operating officer, effective November 1.  
But he will not take over as chief executive from Allen until January 1998. Four months later he will become chairman at AT&amp;T's annual meeting.
"Allen does have an image problem, though I don't have that opinion of him," said Barry Sine of SBC Warburg, who cut his rating on AT&amp;T stock to hold from buy today. "The long handover period is an issue for the market."
AT&amp;T's share in the $75 billion long distance telephone market has fallen to around 55 percent today from 60 percent two years ago. Marketing stumbles hurt earnings in the recent third quarter, and investors are losing patience, analysts say.  
AT&amp;T stock was down two points at 37-7/8 at noon EDT/1600 GMT in heavy volume. Adjusted for the split-off of Lucent Technologies Inc, AT&amp;T shares have fallen 16 percent this year, about the same as the broad market has risen.
Sine said of Walter, "This is not a candidate to lead the rally."
Analysts say top candidates to succeed Allen, such as George Fisher of Eastman Kodak, may have been put off by the lengthy 18-month transition time while Allen remains in charge.  
"I heard the reason Fisher didn't take the job was the 18-month delay before taking the reins," Kagan said.
However, a source close to AT&amp;T, speaking on condition of anonymity, said no tentative or firm offer was made to any candidate who subsequently withdrew. AT&amp;T declined comment on the matter.
"I was expecting 12 months (handover) at most," said Chris Landis, an analyst at consultancy Telechoice Inc and a former AT&amp;T executive. "I think most insiders were too."  
Walter has qualities and experience that AT&amp;T will be able to make good use of, analysts said. His printing company specialized in high volumes and quick turnarounds.
"That's a good quality to have at AT&amp;T because you are talking about billions of phone calls a month," said Goodtree.
Donnelley is a formidable user of technology and has used telecommunications to transform its business. It is also a significant customer of AT&amp;T.
Cable &amp; Wireless Plc Chief Executive Richard Brown spoke favorably of Walter.  
"I think AT&amp;T is fortunate to get John Walter," Brown told Reuters. "John Walter is a leader...He know the telecoms world but he is not directly involved. He's a quick study."
On the downside, there is the huge leap of scale and the different nature of AT&amp;T's business. Donnelley is a project-based company, while AT&amp;T is a process-based company requiring different management techniques.
While Walter has made great inroads in the business market where Donnelley finds its customers, he has little experience in consumer markets where AT&amp;T is having its biggest trouble fighting off aggressive competitors.
In an interview this summer, Allen told Business Week magazine that he would be prepared to step down early "if we find God, or something short of that.."
John Walter has found some adherents at AT&amp;T, but the stock market is not yet ready for a conversion.
AT&amp;T Corp. surprised almost everybody Wednesday by picking John Walter, chairman of printing company R.R. Donnelley and Sons, as its new president and heir apparent to Chairman Robert Allen.
The giant communications company, ending weeks of speculation, said that Walter, 49, was unanimously elected Tuesday night to the posts of president and chief operating offficer and as a member of the board, effective Nov. 1.
"I'm confident John Walter brings leadership qualities that will make the new AT&amp;T successful, not only in the hotly contested long-distance market, but across the whole range of ... communications services," Allen, 61, said in a statement.
In a telephone interview, Walter said, "I'm very confident with my ability to move this enterprise forward." Walter declined to outline areas where he believed AT&amp;T had failed, but underlined an appropriate cost base as his clear focus.
"We have to have a cost platform which allows us to compete effectively or we are disadvantaged even before we come into the ring," he said.
Industry analysts were stunned that AT&amp;T had not chosen a better-known executive. They were also concerned that an 18-month handover would not lead to a quick enough change in strategy.
"My first reaction was 'John who?'" said David Goodtree, an industry analyst with Forrester Research.
AT&amp;T stock closed $1.875 lower at $37.875 on the New York Stock Exchange, where it was among the most active issues.
Adjusted for the spin-off of Lucent Technologies Inc., AT&amp;T shares have fallen 16 percent this year -- about the same as the broad market has risen.
"This (Walter) is not a candidate to lead the rally," said analyst Barry Sine of SBC Warburg.
"I was expecting 12 months (handover) at most," said Chris Landis, an analyst at consultancy Telechoice Inc., and a former AT&amp;T executive. "I think most insiders were, too."
The president and COO posts were left vacant after Alex Mandl resigned suddenly in August to head a small, new wireless company, Associated Communications.
AT&amp;T said its board considered a number of candidates but quickly focused on Walter because his track record at Chicago-based Donnelley, the world's largest commercial printer, fit well with the challenges at AT&amp;T.
"He's transformed a large, old-line company challenged by new technologies and changing markets into a tough global competitor. Meeting those challenges is what leading the new AT&amp;T is all about," Allen said.
Allen said that starting in January 1998 he and Walter would split the duties of chairman and chief executive, with Walter becoming chairman later that year.
"The board and I have every expectation that John will become chairman and CEO of AT&amp;T," Allen said.
AT&amp;T Senior Vice President Hal Burlingame said Allen and Walter would work closely during the transition.
"They will work together very tightly on all the issues confronting the business, but Bob will obviously be chairman and CEO during that process," he said.
AT&amp;T officials declined to detail Walter's salary, but told a news conference that the main part of the pay would be performance related, and that the package, while competitive, was by no means a record breaker.
Donnelley's last proxy filing showed Walter's compensation for 1995 as $900,000 plus a bonus of $555,000 and other annual compensation of $36,427.
Walter, who joined R.R. Donnelley in 1969 as a trainee, held numerous positions in the publishing and information company, becoming chairman in 1989.
"During the 10 years of his operational leadership, Donnelley steadily increased revenue, earnings and cash flow in an industry experiencing little growth," AT&amp;T said in its announcement. "It also transformed itself."
Today Donnelley is a global leader in managing and distributing information -- from magazines to software disks and online services.
Expectations of an early end to Allen's career were heightened when the company warned in September that its earnings would be weaker than expected. The warning eroded staff morale that already had been hurt in January when the company lopped off 40,000 jobs.
AT&amp;T's operating profits of $1.36 billion, or 84 cents a share, for the third quarter were off about 11 percent from $1.53 billion, or 96 cents a share, a year ago. The drop in operating profits came as increased competition and higher marketing expenses hit the company's core long-distance phone business, while financial services sank into losses.
Analyst say top candidates, like George Fisher of Eastman Kodak, may have been put off by the lengthy transition time to the top job while Allen remains in charge.
"I heard the reason Fisher taker didn't take the job was the 18-month delay before taking the reins," said consultant Jeffrey Kagan of Kagan Telecom.
However, a source close to AT&amp;T, speaking on condition of anonymity, said no tentative or firm offers were made to any candidates who subsequently withdrew. AT&amp;T declined comment.
AT&amp;T started with a list of more than 30 names from executive search firms, and narrowed those to 17 early in September, when candidates were first approached.
A lengthy board meeting on Sept. 13 in West Virginia whittled down the number from 17 to six. Extensive discussions took place with Walter in the last week before his appointment was confirmed.
"The (stock) market doesn't know him yet, but this a person who will be regarded very positively as people come to know him," Burlingame said.
AT&amp;T Corp. surprised almost everybody Wednesday by picking John Walter, chairman of printing company R.R. Donnelley and Sons, as its new president and heir apparent to Chairman Robert Allen.
The giant communications company, ending weeks of speculation, said that Walter, 49, was unanimously elected Tuesday night to the posts of president and chief operating offficer and as a member of the board, effective Nov. 1.
"I'm confident John Walter brings leadership qualities that will make the new AT&amp;T successful, not only in the hotly contested long-distance market, but across the whole range of ...communications services," Allen, 61, said in a statement.
Industry analysts were stunned that AT&amp;T had not chosen a better-known executive. They were also concerned that an 18-month handover would not lead to a quick enough change in strategy.
"My first reaction was 'John who?'" said David Goodtree, an industry analyst with Forrester Research.
AT&amp;T stock closed $1.875 lower at $37.875 on the New York Stock Exchange, where it was among the most active issues.
Adjusted for the spin-off of Lucent Technologies Inc., AT&amp;T shares have fallen 16 percent this year -- about the same as the broad market has risen.
"This (Walter) is not a candidate to lead the rally," said analyst Barry Sine of SBC Warburg.
"I was expecting 12 months (handover) at most," said Chris Landis, an analyst at consultancy Telechoice Inc., and a former AT&amp;T executive. "I think most insiders were, too."
The president and COO posts were left vacant after Alex Mandl resigned suddenly in August to head a small, new wireless company, Associated Communications.
AT&amp;T said its board considered a number of candidates but quickly focused on Walter because his track record at Chicago-based Donnelley, the world's largest commercial printer, fit well with the challenges at AT&amp;T.
"He's transformed a large, old-line company challenged by new technologies and changing markets into a tough global competitor. Meeting those challenges is what leading the new AT&amp;T is all about," Allen said.
Allen said that starting in January 1998 he and Walter would split the duties of chairman and chief executive, with Walter becoming chairman later that year.
"The board and I have every expectation that John will become chairman and CEO of AT&amp;T," Allen said.
AT&amp;T Senior Vice President Hal Burlingame said Allen and Walter would work closely during the transition.
"They will work together very tightly on all the issues confronting the business, but Bob will obviously be chairman and CEO during that process," he said.
AT&amp;T officials declined to detail Walter's salary, but told a news conference that the main part of the pay would be performance related, and that the package, while competitive, was by no means a record breaker.
Donnelley's last proxy filing showed Walter's compensation for 1995 as $900,000 plus a bonus of $555,000 and other annual compensation of $36,427.
Walter, who joined R.R. Donnelley in 1969 as a trainee, held numerous positions in the publishing and information company, becoming chairman in 1989.
"During the 10 years of his operational leadership, Donnelley steadily increased revenue, earnings and cash flow in an industry experiencing little growth," AT&amp;T said in its announcement. "It also transformed itself."
Today Donnelley is a global leader in managing and distributing information -- from magazines to software disks and online services.
Expectations of an early end to Allen's career were heightened when the company warned in September that its earnings would be weaker than expected. The warning eroded staff morale that already had been hurt in January when the company lopped off 40,000 jobs.
AT&amp;T's operating profits of $1.36 billion, or 84 cents a share, for the third quarter were off about 11 percent from $1.53 billion, or 96 cents a share, a year ago. The drop in operating profits came as increased competition and higher marketing expenses hit the company's core long-distance phone business, while financial services sank into losses.
Analyst say top candidates, like George Fisher of Eastman Kodak, may have been put off by the lengthy transition time to the top job while Allen remains in charge.
"I heard the reason Fisher taker didn't take the job was the 18-month delay before taking the reins," said consultant Jeffrey Kagan of Kagan Telecom.
However, a source close to AT&amp;T, speaking on condition of anonymity, said no tentative or firm offers were made to any candidates who subsequently withdrew. AT&amp;T declined comment.
AT&amp;T started with a list of more than 30 names from executive search firms, and narrowed those to 17 early in September, when candidates were first approached.
A lengthy board meeting on Sept. 13 in West Virginia whittled down the number from 17 to six. Extensive discussions took place with Walter in the last week before his appointment was confirmed.
"The (stock) market doesn't know him yet, but this a person who will be regarded very positively as people come to know him," Burlingame said.
AT&amp;T Corp., ending weeks of speculation, said Wednesday that its board elected John Walter, chairman of printing company R.R. Donnelley and Sons, as its new president, chief operating officer and heir apparent to Chairman Robert Allen.
The giant communications company said that Walter, 49, was unanimously elected Tuesday night to the two management posts and as a member of the board, effective Nov. 1.
"I'm confident John Walter brings leadership qualities that will make the new AT&amp;T successful, not only in the hotly contested long-distance market, but across the whole range of rapidly growing communications services," Allen, 61, said in a statement.
Industry analysts, however, were stunned that AT&amp;T had not chosen a better-known executive. They were also concerned that an 18-month handover would not lead to a quick enough change in strategy.
AT&amp;T stock fell $2 to $37.75 in heavy volume on the New York Stock Exchange, where it was among the most active issues in afternoon trading. Adjusted for the split off of Lucent Technologies Inc., AT&amp;T shares have fallen 16 percent this year -- about the same as the broad market has risen.
"This (Walter) is not a candidate to lead the rally," said analyst Barry Sine of SBC Warburg.
"I was expecting 12 months (handover) at most," said Chris Landis, an analyst at consultancy Telechoice Inc., and a former AT&amp;T executive. "I think most insiders were, too."
The president and COO posts were left vacant after Alex Mandl resigned suddenly in August to head a small, new wireless company, Associated Communications.
AT&amp;T said its board considered a number of candidates but quickly focused on Walter because his track record at Chicago-based Donnelley, the world's largest commercial printer, fit well with the challenges at AT&amp;T.
"He's transformed a large, old-line company challenged by new technologies and changing markets into a tough global competitor. Meeting those challenges is what leading the new AT&amp;T is all about," Allen said.
Allen said that starting in January 1998 he and Walter would split the duties of chairman and chief executive, with Walter becoming chairman later that year.
"The board and I have every expectation that John will become chairman and CEO of AT&amp;T," Allen said.
Walter, who joined R.R. Donnelley in 1969 as a trainee, held numerous positions in the publishing and information company, becoming chairman in 1989.
"During the 10 years of his operational leadership, Donnelley steadily increased revenue, earnings and cash flow in an industry experiencing little growth," AT&amp;T said in its announcement. "It also transformed itself."
Today Donnelley is a global leader in managing and distributing information -- from magazines to software disks and online services.
Expectations of an early end to Allen's career were heightened when the company warned in September that its earnings would be weaker than expected.
AT&amp;T's operating profits of $1.36 billion, or 84 cents a share, for the third quarter were off about 11 percent from $1.53 billion, or 96 cents a share, a year ago. The drop in operating profits came as increased competition and higher marketing expenses hit the cmopany's core long-distance phone business, while financial services sank into losses.
Industry analysts had speculated that Allen would surrender the role of chief executive, rather than chairman, to the new candidate and retain his chairmanship until nearer his retirement.
Analyst say top candidates, like George Fisher of Eastman Kodak, may have been put off by the lengthy transition time to the top job while Allen remains in charge.
"I heard the reason Fisher taker didn't take the job was the 18-month delay before taking the reins," said consultant Jeffrey Kagan of Kagan Telecom.
However, a source close to AT&amp;T, speaking on condition of anonymity, said no tentative or firm offers were made to any candidates who subsequently withdrew. AT&amp;T declined to comment.
WorldCom Inc. said Monday it agreed to acquire MFS Communications Co. Inc. in a stock swap worth about $14 billion, creating a giant international business communications company.
The combined company, to be called MFS WorldCom, will provide businesses with local and long-distance telephone, data communications and Internet services all on one network -- something no competitor yet can on a significant scale.
"We are creating the first company since the breakup of AT&amp;T to bundle together local and long-distance services ... controlled by a single company," said Bernard Ebbers, chief executive of WorldCom.
The deregulation of the telecommunications industry early this year promises to bring end-to-end service, but neither AT&amp;T Corp. nor any regional Bell can yet achieve it because of regulatory checklists and other issues.
"We think this gives us at least a two-year headstart over our competitors," Ebbers said in an interview.
For WorldCom, the fourth largest U.S. long-distance company, the deal will allow it to muscle into business markets that the regional Bells and biggest long-distance providers thought they had to themselves.
For MFS it provides the long-distance connection between its metropolitan circuits that it long needed, and a very healthy premium over the prevailing share price.
The merged company will have current sales of about $5.4 billion a year, with more than 500,000 business customers throughout North America, Europe and Asia.
It will have an end-to-end fiber optic network with 25,000 miles of fiber in service or under construction connecting all major metropolitan areas in the United States.
The merger comes only two weeks after MFS's $2 billion purchase of internet provider UUNET Technologies Inc. was completed on Aug. 12. Monday's merger is expected to close within eight months, the companies said.
Under the agreement approved by both companies' boards, each share of MFS common stock will be exchanged for 2.1 shares of WorldCom common stock. Owners of MSF stock will control about 56 percent of the enlarged company.
MSF's stock leaped $9.75 to close at $44.75 on Nasdaq.
But Worldcom stock fell $3.75 to $22.625 on Nasdaq after the company said the merger would dilute earnings for three years.
Although the transaction was valued at $55.39 per WorldCom share based on Friday's closing price, the steep drop in WorldCom's stock brought the value down to $47 a share, traders said.
"Over time, I think the deal will be viewed very positively, but it will take time," one takeover trader said.
Omaha, Neb.-based MFS has local networks in dozens of major U.S. cities, which could help it outflank regional Bells' lock on access to local business customers. This gave it a strong bargaining position in the merger talks.
"He (Ebbers) had the only one sizable company to merge with whose stock we really wanted (to own)," James Crowe, chief executive of MFS, told reporters.
Despite the substantial stock premium for MFS, savings would soon cover the cost of the deal, Ebbers said.
Jackson, Miss.-based WorldCom said it expects significant cost savings from reduced line and access costs. For example, MFS no longer has to build a $500 million intercity network, because WorldCom already has one. WorldCom will not have to take a share in a $450 million trans-Atlantic cable for its expanding international business because MFS is already a partner in one.
Ebbers said access charges that Worldcom pays to local telephone companies to reach their local customers would drop because MFS already has local lines to businesses in 45 U.S. cities, rising to 85 cities in two years.
Worldcom said in a separate statement that it has adopted a shareholder rights plan to discourage a hostile takeover. It said its move was not affected by the deal with MFS.
However WorldCom could nevertheless be a target for a regional Bell, tempted by the company's long-distance network, said mergers and acquisitions advisor Robert McNamara at consultant Broadview Associates.
"You have effectively put WorldCom into play with this (takeover) move," McNamara said.
WorldCom Inc's audacious $14 billion takeover of MFS Communications Co Inc on Monday has both thrilled and unnerved share analysts.
They are thrilled by the strategy of one combined company beating industry giants to offer end-to-end business services, but some are worried by the MFS price tag and the danger of diluting WorldCom's hitherto rocket-like earnings trajectory.
"Strategically it is an extremely good move. It is likely to be the first to market such an offering for businesses," said analyst Guy Woodlief of Dean Witter Reynolds.  
"It will give WorldCom a breadth of services to business unmatched in the telecommunications industry," said Robert McNamara, a mergers and acquisitions advisor at consultants Broadview Associates.
I think there is some great strategic vision here," said Kevin Moore, analyst at brokers Alex Brown. He this morning upgraded his rating on the stock to strong buy from neutral.
Analysts have not finalised calculations, which are complicated by MFS's only-recently completed acquisition of Internet access company UUNET, but they say that on an earnings basis the deal looks extremely dilutive for WorldCom.  
"I would describe the price as a dizzying multiple, 20 times trailing earnings," said Bill Vogel of Dillon Read.
Most of the damage is done by huge new amortization charges -- $400 million a year for goodwill paid by MFS for UUNET, and $200 million a year for goodwill paid by WorldCom for MFS itself. WorldCom itself normally only pays $130 million a year in amortization.
Bernard Ebbers, WorldCom chief executive and chief executive of the new entity MFS WorldCom, said the new company should now be valued on a discounted cash flow basis, not on an earnings basis.  
"WorldCom has traditionally been very focused on earnings, price earnings multiples and anti-dilutive deals. They have crossed a very significant barrier here," said McNamara.
Woodlief said the company was now trading at 11 times cashflow for the new entity, instead of 10 times cashflow for WorldCom on its own, but with better cash flow growth rates now in prospect.
"The stock looks very attractive at this level," Woodlief said. "Its only an issue of shareholder perception. You are paying a higher premium for a higher growth rate."
Moore forecast that once WorldCom's management team does the rounds of investors in the next few days, the stock would bounce back.
"They are a very persuasive management team," Moore said. -- Nick Louth, New York Newsroom  212 859 1712
The keys to WorldCom Inc's $14 billion takeover of MFS Communications Co Inc are savings on duplicated costs and a chance to be the first with end-to-end service in U.S. businesses telecommunications.
WorldCom chief executive Bernard Ebbers acknowledged that there was a substantial premium in the stock terms offered for MFS but said savings would soon cover the cost of the deal.
"It is not to say that price isn't important, but it really depends on how quickly you pay for it," Ebbers told Reuters in an interview on Monday.  
MFS, with local networks in dozens of major U.S. cities, was in a unique position to outflank the regional Bell's lock on access to local business customers. It was in a position to get the terms it wanted.
"There aren't a lot of MFS's out there," Ebbers said.
"He (Ebbers) had the only one sizeable company to merge with whose stock we really wanted (to own)," James Crowe, chief executive of MFS, told reporters.
WorldCom stock soared a heady 57 percent a year over the last ten years. MFS has grown 41 percent a year in the three years since it was floated.  
Ebbers said savings and new market opportunities would mean the deal would pay for itself within five or six years, though for the first three years, 1997-1999, earnings per share would be diluted, but solidly accretive thereafter.
Worries that the stock transaction was too generous for MFS hit Worldcom stock, which was 3-3/4 or 15 percent lower at 22-5/8 in early afternoon. MFS soared 10 to 44-7/8, with both atop the active shares list on Nasdaq.
Ebbers said communicating the deal's advantages may take time. "If that happens we will have a significantly increased stock price from where we are today," he said.  
UUNET, the internet service provider which MFS completed buying earlier this month, will have the biggest savings.
Now it can provide both local and long distance connections without having to pay fees on outside networks. These fees had previously swallowed up half of its revenues.     Most
importantly, the combined company MFS WorldCom can present a comprehensive business package without having to use the networks or pay the fees of others.
End-to-end service is the promise of the U.S. deregulation which became law early this year, but neither AT&amp;T Corp nor any regional Bell can yet achieve it either because of regulatory checklists or negotiating tussles.
"We think this gives us at least a two-year headstart over our competitors," Ebbers said.
By being first, Ebbers expects to reap wholesale business from the regional Bells and GTE Corp, companies which at a retail level are its competitors.
Ebbers said that any Bell which wanted to offer local telephone service outside its own region could simply resell the MFS WorldCom network, under the Bell's own brand name. -- New York Newsroom  212 859 1712
Lucent Technologies Inc is beginning to reap the rewards of severing its umbilical to AT&amp;T Corp as regional Bells customers flock back.
Lucent's final fiscal 1996 quarter showed a surge in Bell orders as ageing networks were upgraded for demanding data and multimedia services. Lucent network system sales jumped 42.4 percent year-on-year to $3.2 billion in the quarter.
"It is underpinned by some fundamental demand that could keep it going," Don Peterson, Lucent's chief financial officer, told Reuters in an interview.  
One of the motives for AT&amp;T's divestment of Lucent was a loss of orders. The Bells, seeing AT&amp;T as a big new rival in their local calling areas, shied away from sharing their technological shopping lists with an AT&amp;T unit.
"That was a reason for the down quarter last year," Peterson said. Lucent's changed year end to September 30 from December 31 means this year only had three quarters. The 1996 final quarter corresponds to the third quarter in past years.
Overall revenues climbed 24.7 percent to $5.9 billion in the quarter from a year ago, though comparisons are likely to be less favorable next quarter.  
"The next quarter will be good as well, I am expecting, but it will be comparing itself to a record fourth quarter in 1995," he said. "It would be a mistake to expect 25 percent growth again, unfortunately."
Increased orders have led to the hiring of 5,000 new factory workers even as Lucent implements a plan to cut jobs overall.
Peterson said the company cut 12,600 of the 23,000 posts scheduled to be eliminated from Lucent's 125,000 workforce by 1998. But with the new hires, net job cuts only amount to about 7,000.  
The closing of the Phone Center stores, the pruning of product lines and a drop in rental revenues combined to hold back revenues. Still, a host of new products, including a long-range cordless phone and sophisticated answering machines, are being prepared for 1997.
Next year, "we're going to have 70 percent of a sales in products that aren't on the shelf today," he said.
Peterson predicted that new products would continue to galvanize the company's performance.  
Voice processing, a $3 billion market that is growing at 20 percent a year, would bring products for handling services such as phone banking and voice mail, as well as linking databases and phone systems for telemarketing.
"We'll see an increase in the data focus in our business," he said, noting soaring use of frame relay and the Internet.
In business communications, Peterson expected the emergence of a "voice server" product in both public and private networks.
Such a product would combine the roles of telephone exchange with a network server just as fiber optic cables now carry a mixture of data and voice, both digitized.
-- New York Newsroom 212 859 1712
Soaring Internet usage is bringing the United States phone system perilously close to gridlock by tying up millions of local phone lines every evening, say industry experts and analysts.
"It is like gridlock on a highway: If you are close to capacity, traffic still moves slowly, but just add a few more vehicles and you get gridlock," said Amir Atai, director of network and traffic performance at BellCore.
With Internet use rising at 42 percent a year, according to industry studies, phone capacity simply cannot keep pace.
"This type of (Internet) usage on our network is growing at 10 percent a month and we are watching it closely," said NYNEX Corp. spokeswoman Susan Butta.
For phone networks, gridlock means fewer calls going through on the first try, more busy signals and even blocked calls, where perplexed callers hear nothing at all after dialing.
The bottleneck is essentially confined to local networks, and does not affect long distance carriers, experts say.
Industry studies suggest that if U.S. Internet penetration reaches 15 percent, it would force a $22 billion network investment by the regional Bell phone companies to support it. California currently has the highest penetration at eight percent.
"We think action is required within two years," when the 15 percent figure is expected to be reached, said Atai.
Short-cut solutions exist, such as using filters to sort Internet calls from others based on their destination number.
If that idea catches on, it could open a huge market for firms like Lucent Technologies Inc. and Northern Telecom Ltd., which make the filters.
But regional Bells, indignant that Internet service providers do not have to pay access charges to reach Bell customers as long distance companies do, are reluctant to pay to sort out the problem.
"Bell switch ports are being tied up and they're not even being compensated for it," said David Goodtree, an industry analyst with consultancy Forrester Research.
The problem has swept like a tide from California, where Pacific Telesis Group (PacTel) already has major problems, to major cities and even some suburban areas.
"We found the problem is very severe in California and east coast metropolitan areas. It is beginning to appear in some other areas," Atai told Reuters.
The congestion could be a boon to cable TV operators in the fight for internet market share, analysts say.
Cable modems running on upgraded coaxial cable -- designed for the high data rate of video pictures -- are expected to avoid congestion problems and should be available in volume late next year, analysts say.
The problem is fundamental to the nature of phone systems.
"The local network was designed for short calls which you make and then hang up, but Internet calls often occupy a line for hours," said Goodtree. Those lines may not even be carrying much data, but are lost to the system in that time.
PacTel studied some of its telephone switches in detail and found that an average Internet surf was 20.8 minutes long, compared with 3.8 minutes for an average phone call. Ten percent of Internet calls were six hours or longer.
To make matters worse, the peak hour for phone systems has now switched to 10 p.m. because of evening Internet use, throwing out the logistics of networks designed around pre- and post-lunch weekday calling peaks.
PacTel said a study of one Silicon Valley telephone switch showed 16 percent of call attempts failed during peak evening hours because of Internet traffic, and 2.5 percent of lines used by Internet service companies absorbed 20 to 36 percent of the switch's capacity.
Ultimately, analysts say Internet traffic will migrate to packet data networks, the most efficient way of routing it.
Packet networks act like traffic policemen, routing data on the next free highway away from jams, even if it means splitting up a convoy  -- the words of a phone conversation for example -- travelling to the same destination.
CIDCO Inc said its sales so far in the second half were similar to those in the first six months of the year -- as the company predicted in July -- though sales of caller ID equipment in California were even worse than expected.
"We were right on in July. If anything it is worse than we had ever thought (in California)," Chief Financial Officer Scott McDonald told Reuters on Thursday.
Still, McDonald, who is also chief operating officer, said he was comfortable with analysts' current 1996 estimates, which were revised down sharply after the July statement.  
"Everything about the second half -- that is still the indication. Yes, we're happy with the guidance...," he said, referring to the company's statement during the summer.
In July, the company said it was unlikely to meet analysts' sales forecasts for the second half and instead expected sales in line with those in the first six months.
It said its lower expectations reflected weakness in California, uneven sales through Ameritech Corp and delays in new products.  
Caller ID services have taken off across the United States in recent years, with additional demand generated when long-distance caller ID received federal approval last year.
However, regulators in California had reservations about caller ID on privacy grounds and only approved Pacific Telesis Group's launch the service in the state in July 1996.
McDonald said the negative publicity about privacy for callers has inhibited sales despite a recent PacTel marketing campaign, and sales are not expected to pick up rapidly.  
"I would think they would be a little better, but not much," he said, referring to California caller ID sales in 1997. "You open up a seventh of the U.S. market, and all of a sudden it turns out to be a dud."
Sales of caller ID by Ameritech continue to be choppy -- as cited in the sales warning -- because of management changes at the company and on-off publicity for its caller ID service. Still, McDonald expects improvements soon.
Ameritech offers local telephone services in Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio and Wisconsin.
Rivals the world over will shudder if British Telecommunications Plc and MCI Communications Corp merge, marrying MCI's aggressive marketing and quick reactions with the deep pockets and reach of BT.
Already first with a one-stop telecommunications shop for multinational corporations, a unified BT/MCI would pose an even greater threat in newly competitive U.S. markets, analysts said.  
"This is AT&amp;T Corp's worst nightmare. Bob Allen (AT&amp;T chief executive) will not get a wink of sleep this weekend," said consultant Jeffrey Kagan of Kagan Telecom.
The two companies on Friday confirmed market rumors that they were considering a merger and would make an announcement by the end of the weekend, but gave no further details.
However, a source close to the deal told Reuters that the deal would be a cash and stock offer from BT for MCI, the junior partner in market capitalisation.  
No price has yet been agreed upon, the source said, but analysts are speculating on $40 a share which would value MCI at $28 billion, and leave BT with a bill for $22.1 billion for the 80 percent of the company it does not already own.
"If it is true, it would have huge implications for the U.S. market," said analyst Ken McGee of the Gartner Group.
"MCI had taken competition about as far as it could go, and needs an infusion of capital for the next stage," he said.
MCI has around 20 percent of the $75 billion U.S. long distance market, compared to 55 percent for AT&amp;T, but both are also entering the $90 billion local calling market.  
There they will meet seven regional Bells, once a legal challenge to the 1996 Telecom Act is resolved. The act was designed to let long-distance and local companies compete in a unified market place.
"It gives MCI an enormous warchest to attack the local markets and defend itself against the regional Bells in the long distance market," said analyst Guy Woodlief of brokers Dean Witter Reynolds.
"It would allow MCI to go after the U.S. local market with a fury that the Baby Bells have never seen," Kagan said.  
Analysts said BT has a very strong balance sheet and free cash flow, which could help fund the coming multi-front marketing war from wireless, long distance and local calling to satellite TV, Internet and business data services.
One conundrum is the MCI/News Corp media joint venture. BT would end up with MCI's about 13 percent non-voting stake in News Corp, which could cause regulatory problems for BT in the British media market.
However, elsewhere it would provide a deep fund of capital for global markets where communication and entertainment are gradually fusing, analysts said.  
"BT has a hell of a strong balance sheet, that's for sure," said Richard Klugman, an analyst at brokers PaineWebber.
Some analysts said the timing was perfect, calling President Bill Clinton's bluff before the November 5 election. "Wonderful timing isnt it?" said Frank Dzubeck, president of consultants Communications Network Architects.  
He said that with the U.S. bashing Europe over freeing air routes and opening markets such as that of Deutsche Telekom AG in Germany, it will now be tested on how open the U.S. market itself is to a foreign company like BT, whose home market is fully open to competition.
Dzubeck said that BT would be able to unify the global strategy and sort out some of the problems in concert, their global multinational business venture with MCI and make sure those problems are not replicated elewhere.
One competitor to MCI, Sprint Corp got an unexpected boost on Friday from the news of the merger talks.
Sprint's stock rose 4-1/2 to 43-3/4, with analysts saying an expected $40 per share value for MCI, would allow investors to focus on the long-term value of the network Sprint is building too. -- New York Newsroom  212 859 1610
MCI Communications Corp., the No. 2 long distance phone company, said Friday it was in talks to be acquired by British Telecommunications Plc in what would be one of the biggest mergers ever.
Industry analysts said that if a deal emerges, it would send shudders throughout the worldwide telecommunications industry, and present an especially tough challenge for AT&amp;T Corp., the leading -- but struggling -- U.S. phone company.
British Telecom already holds a 20 percent stake in MCI.
No price has yet been agreed upon, a source close to the deal said, but analysts were speculating on $40 a share, which would value MCI at $28 billion, and leave British Telecom with a bill for $22.1 billion for the 80 percent of the company it does not already own.
Washington-based MCI said it expected the talks to be concluded this weekend, although it noted that there were no guarantees an agreement would be reached. "MCI anticipates that its deliberations will be concluded this weekend and an announcement will be made prior to Monday morning," it said.
Analysts said a combination of the two companies would be a good fit in the super-competitive U.S. long distance phone industry, where MCI and No. 3 Sprint have been battling an ailing AT&amp;T Corp.
"This is AT&amp;T Corp.'s worst nightmare. (AT&amp;T Chief Executive) Bob Allen will not get a wink of sleep this weekend," said consultant Jeffrey Kagan, of Kagan Telecom.
"This is an extremely competitive business, and horizontal mergers like this make sense," said Allen Sinai, chief economist at Lehman Brothers Global Economic Advisors. "The economies of scale in this case could be considerable, and the leverage in terms of potential profits is high ... It would be good purchase."
A spokesman for British Telecom confirmed the British company was interested in a merger with MCI.
A British Telecom-MCI deal would be the largest between a British and American company, and it would rank as the second-biggest ever involving a U.S. company, behind the RJR Nabisco Inc. buyout by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts &amp; Co., worth $30.6 billion including debt, according to Securities Data.
British Telecom is aiming to offer a mixture of cash and stock for the 80 percent of MCI it does not own, one source told Reuters. The source, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said an announcment was expected on Sunday, if not before.
"If it is true, it would have huge implications for the U.S. market," said analyst Ken McGee of the Gartner Group. "MCI had taken competition about as far as it could go, and needs an infusion of capital for the next stage," he said.
MCI has around 20 percent of the $75 billion U.S. long distance market, compared with 55 percent for AT&amp;T. But both are also preparing to enter the $90 billion local calling market.
"It gives MCI an enormous warchest to attack the local markets and defend itself against the regional Bells in the long distance market," said analyst Guy Woodlief of Dean Witter Reynolds.
Analysts said British Telecom has a very strong balance sheet and free cash flow, which could help fund the coming multi-front marketing war, from wireless, long distance and local calling to satellite TV, Internet and business data services.
British Telecom suffered a serious setback in September after German utility RWE severed links with British Telecom to join a rival consortium led by Britain's Cable &amp; Wireless Plc. to provide service in Germany.
At the end of September British Telecom signalled its ambitions in the French market through a consortium involving Compagnie Generale des Eaux.
"It would be a good fit for British Telecom and provide a major foothold in this country," said Thom Brown, managing director of Rutherford Brown and Catherwood.
In Washington, lawyers and analysts said a deal would likely win approval of U.S. regulators.
"It appears this deal would pass (Federal Communications Commission) approval at first glance," said Scott Cleland of the Washington Research Group of Schawb Capital Markets.
An FCC rule adopted last year permits a foreign carrier to invest in a U.S. carrier in excess of a 25 percent cap, as long as the overseas company's home market is open for competition from U.S. telecommunications companies.
Scott Harris, a former head of the FCC's international bureau and now an attorney with Gibson, Dunn &amp; Crutcher, said that other than the U.S. telecommunications market, the British market is the "most open" in the world.
MCI was founded in 1968 as MICOM, or Microwave Communications of America Inc. It was the first company to be authorised by the Federal Communications Commission to compete against AT&amp;T in the domestic long-distance market.
MCI started offering point-to-point private-line service between Chicago and St. Louis in January, 1972, sold stock and was incorprated as MCI Communications in 1973.
The Washington-based company filed an antitrust suit against AT&amp;T in 1974. Six years later, a jury ruled in MCI's favour on almost all counts and awarded the company $1.8 billion, providing a warchest to fund its expansion following the 1982 decision by the Department of Justice and AT&amp;T to break up the giant's monopoly on the nation's long distance industry.
MCI Communications Corp., the No. 2 long distance phone company, said Friday it was in talks to be acquired by British Telecommunications Plc in what would be one of the biggest mergers ever.
Industry analysts said that if a deal emerges, it would send shudders throughout the worldwide telecommunications industry, and present an especially tough challenge for AT&amp;T Corp., the leading -- but struggling -- U.S. phone company.
British Telecom already holds a 20 percent stake in MCI.
No price has yet been agreed upon, a source close to the deal said, but analysts were speculating on $40 a share, which would value MCI at $28 billion, and leave British Telecom with a bill for $22.1 billion for the 80 percent of the company it does not already own.
Washington-based MCI said it expected the talks to be concluded this weekend, although it noted that there were no guarantees an agreement would be reached. "MCI anticipates that its deliberations will be concluded this weekend and an announcement will be made prior to Monday morning," it said.
Analysts said a combination of the two companies would be a good fit in the super-competitive U.S. long distance phone industry, where MCI and No. 3 Sprint have been battling an ailing AT&amp;T Corp.
"This is AT&amp;T Corp.'s worst nightmare. (AT&amp;T Chief Executive) Bob Allen will not get a wink of sleep this weekend," said consultant Jeffrey Kagan, of Kagan Telecom.
"This is an extremely competitive business, and horizontal mergers like this make sense," said Allen Sinai, chief economist at Lehman Brothers Global Economic Advisors. "The economies of scale in this case could be considerable, and the leverage in terms of potential profits is high ... It would be good purchase."
A spokesman for British Telecom confirmed the British company was interested in a merger with MCI.
A British Telecom-MCI deal would be the largest between a British and American company, and it would rank as the second-biggest ever involving a U.S. company, behind the RJR Nabisco Inc. buyout by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts &amp; Co., worth $30.6 billion including debt, according to Securities Data.
British Telecom is aiming to offer a mixture of cash and stock for the 80 percent of MCI it does not own, one source told Reuters. The source, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said an announcment was expected on Sunday, if not before.
"If it is true, it would have huge implications for the U.S. market," said analyst Ken McGee of the Gartner Group. "MCI had taken competition about as far as it could go, and needs an infusion of capital for the next stage," he said.
MCI has around 20 percent of the $75 billion U.S. long distance market, compared with 55 percent for AT&amp;T. But both are also preparing to enter the $90 billion local calling market.
"It gives MCI an enormous warchest to attack the local markets and defend itself against the regional Bells in the long distance market," said analyst Guy Woodlief of Dean Witter Reynolds.
Analysts said British Telecom has a very strong balance sheet and free cash flow, which could help fund the coming multi-front marketing war, from wireless, long distance and local calling to satellite TV, Internet and business data services.
British Telecom suffered a serious setback in September after German utility RWE severed links with British Telecom to join a rival consortium led by Britain's Cable &amp; Wireless Plc. to provide service in Germany.
At the end of September British Telecom signalled its ambitions in the French market through a consortium involving Compagnie Generale des Eaux.
"It would be a good fit for British Telecom and provide a major foothold in this country," said Thom Brown, managing director of Rutherford Brown and Catherwood.
In Washington, lawyers and analysts said a deal would likely win approval of U.S. regulators.
"It appears this deal would pass (Federal Communications Commission) approval at first glance," said Scott Cleland of the Washington Research Group of Schawb Capital Markets.
An FCC rule adopted last year permits a foreign carrier to invest in a U.S. carrier in excess of a 25 percent cap, as long as the overseas company's home market is open for competition from U.S. telecommunications companies.
Scott Harris, a former head of the FCC's international bureau and now an attorney with Gibson, Dunn &amp; Crutcher, said that other than the U.S. telecommunications market, the British market is the "most open" in the world.
MCI was founded in 1968 as MICOM, or Microwave Communications of America Inc. It was the first company to be authorized by the Federal Communications Commission to compete against AT&amp;T in the domestic long-distance market.
MCI started offering point-to-point private-line service between Chicago and St. Louis in January, 1972, sold stock and was incorprated as MCI Communications in 1973.
The Washington-based company filed an antitrust suit against AT&amp;T in 1974. Six years later, a jury ruled in MCI's favor on almost all counts and awarded the company $1.8 billion, providing a warchest to fund its expansion following the 1982 decision by the Department of Justice and AT&amp;T to break up the giant's monopoly on the nation's long distance industry.
MCI Communications Corp., the nation's second-largest long distance provider, said Friday it was in talks with British Telecommunications Plc on a possible merger of the two companies.
British Telecom already holds a 20 percent stake in MCI.
An MCI spokesman told Reuters the company expected the talks to be concluded this weekend, although he noted that there were no guarantees an agreement would be reached.
"We have entered into negotations with BT on a possible business combination," the spokesman said, reading from a prepared statement.
Industry analysts applauded the talks, saying a combination of the two companies would be a good fit in the super-competitive U.S. long distance phone industry, where MCI and No. 3 Sprint have been battling an ailing AT&amp;T Corp.
"This is an extremely competitive business, and horizontal mergers like this make sense," said Allen Sinai, chief economist at Lehman Brothers Global Economic Advisors. "The economies of scale in this case could be considerable, and the leverage in terms of potential profits is high ... It would be good purchase."
MCI's stock was halted for trading at $27.25, up $1.875 on Nasdaq, although it jumped as much as $5 to $30.625 after CNBC television reported that the companies were talking. The exchange said it would investigate those trades.
"It would be a good fit for British Telecom and provide a major foothold in this country," said Thom Brown, managing director of Rutherford Brown and Catherwood.
"It wouldn't take away from the long-distance battle. Before that's over, there will be losers and winners," he added.
CNBC said Lazard Freres, MCI's investment bankers, and Morgan Stanley were working on the deal, which it said could be worth upward of $22 billion.
"It makes sense," said Kevin Haggerty, senior vice president and manager of equity trading at Fidelity Investments. "I think BT is a great company.  The synergy is there. BT made a great initial investment."
Hordes of aggressive telephone resellers banging at the gates of AT&amp;T Corp, Sprint Corp and MCI Communications Corp have already grabbed $12 billion of the $80 billion long distance market.
But Monday's merger between MFS Communications Co Inc and WorldCom Inc allows tiny resellers to swarm into a rich citadel industry giants see as their own.
"Its international services, data, Internet and intranet as well as local service resale," said analyst Daryl Edmonds of brokers Bear Stearns.  
MFS is a provider of local calling networks to businesses, while WorldCom is a long distance and international carrier.
MFS WorldCom will be a ferocious competitor itself, able to offer end-to-end business services, but as a carrier's carrier it will allow in many resellers to new markets, by offering "own brand" telecommunication services off the shelf.
Fast growing resellers like Excel Communications Inc, one of over 400 such firms in the industry, have helped to eat away at the long distance telephone market and set the standard for cheap service, analysts say.  
For long distance companies, and regional Bells trying to defend their home turf, it will mean more competition, more pressure on margins and harder work to keep customers.
Profit margins and growth rates in high speed data, dedicated access Internet, international calling and broadband applications like videoconferencing are way beyond that seen in long distance, which is becoming a commodity market.
Resellers would threaten future sources of growth for the biggest firms in the industry.  
"You now have one company, MFS WorldCom, which crystallizes the brave new world (of competition)," said Simon Flannery of brokers J. P. Morgan.
He said resellers could always have pieced together such services, but this merger will make it easier.
Resellers focused on consumer services will not even be competing with MFS WorldCom's own branded product, which is pitched at small businesses.
UUNET, which MFS bought for $2 billion earlier this month, will be particularly empowered as a carrier of the internet services of others.  
As part of MFS WorldCom it will be able to call on 2,900 sales people across the country instead of 63.
"We think it is a very positive move for the reseller market place," MFS WorldCom chief executive designate Bernard Ebbers said during Monday's merger news conference, mentioning Excel and GTE Corp as possible buyers of services.
GTE and some regional Bells are already buying long distance services from WorldCom for their entry into that market. Using MFS's networks, they could now extend local services into cities in other parts of the country.  
This new competition is one of the aims of the 1996 Telecommunications Act, but the irony is this merger -- of an outsider in long distance and an outsider in local telephone -- could have happened even without deregulation.
"Both companies were unencumbered by national regulation," said Edmonds though he noted that to reach the greatest market opportunity they still need access to some elements of the Bell's local networks, a process eased by the telecom act.
"MCI or Sprint will say 'we can do this too'," said Flannery.
However, they are some way behind in their reach.
MCI this morning detailed its local phone service plans, but its MCI Metro network will only reach 25 cities by March 1997, while MFS already has 45 cities up and running.
However, analysts reckon it will be some time before MFS WorldCom can become a threat in the really high margin areas of dealing with the national or global communication accounts of large companies.
-- New York Newsroom 212 859 1712
A $22 billion merger between British Telecommunications Plc and MCI Communications Corp looks as good as agreed, crystallising the largest ever international business combination in record time.
Analysts and consultants said on Saturday that news of a London news conference at 8 a.m. EST (1300 GMT) on Sunday means the boards needed minimal time to wrap up the deal after the negotiations were reported on Friday.
MCI announced it would hold a news conference in New York at 2 p.m. EST (1900 GMT).
"At this point it really does sound like a done deal," said consultant Jeffrey Kagan of Kagan Telecom.
At the conference, BT executives are likely to announce a $40 per share stock and cash offer valuing the 80 percent of MCI that it doesn't already own at $22.1 billion, and the entire company at $28 billion, analysts said.
If BT, with a market capitalisation of around 22.2 billion stg ($36.3 billion) uses mainly stock to foot the bill, it could mean MCI shareholders would own up to 37 percent of the combined company.
As a single company BT/MCI would be a true colossus, with revenues of $38 billion, 182,000 employees and a market value of $64 billion.
In the international big league it would be behind only Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp of Japan and AT&amp;T Corp of the United States. In Europe, it would be roughly the same size as Deutsche Telekom AG.
MCI directors, meeting on Saturday in "The Mausoleum," the name MCI staff give to their granite-domed Washington headquarters, have reason to be well pleased with the deal.
Analysts say MCI management will be left in charge of the U.S. market, and be given more money to fight in new markets and defend existing ones in the new deregulated environment.
"It is inconceivable to me that BT would change the MCI management," Kagan said.
For MCI the deal brings a 30 percent fillip to a stock price that had languished for almost two years, but for BT the benefits may be more symbolic than actual, analysts say.
"What does BT get for its $22 billion?" asked David Goodtree of Forrester Research.
"You only need a global strategy to serve big businesses and they already have their Concert venture to serve that market. Other markets are regional," he said.
Economies of scale would be hard to find. Both companies already squeeze their suppliers to the limit, their brands are already strong in their respective markets, and geography and local market knowledge will continue to dictate fortunes.
According to one source close to the deal, staff numbers are not going to be cut as part of the deal, although existing job and cost cutting initiatives will continue.
A final hurdle, long thought insuperable to such a deal, is U.S. regulatory objections. But regulatory experts say the Federal Communications Commission itself opened a loophole earlier this year.
The FCC made a ruling that said bidders from truly open markets would be allowed to exceed the 25 percent limit on foreign ownership of U.S. media and communication assets.
"BT's home U.K. market is the most open in Europe and arguably the most open in the world," said Bill Gaik, telecommunications director for Deloitte &amp; Touche Consulting.
A $22 billion merger between British Telecommunications Plc and MCI Communications Corp looks as good as agreed, crystallising the largest ever international business combination in record time.
Analysts and consultants said on Saturday that news of a London news conference at 8 a.m. EST (1300 GMT) on Sunday means the boards needed minimal time to wrap up the deal after the negotiations were reported on Friday.
MCI announced it would hold a news conference in New York at 2 p.m. EST (1900 GMT).
"At this point it really does sound like a done deal," said consultant Jeffrey Kagan of Kagan Telecom.
At the conference BT executives are likely to announce a $40 per share stock and cash offer valuing the 80 percent of MCI that it doesn't already own at $22.1 billion, and the entire company at $28 billion, analysts said.
If BT, with a market capitalisation of around 22.2 billion stg ($36.3 billion) uses mainly stock to foot the bill, it could mean MCI shareholders would own up to 37 percent of the combined company.
As a single company BT/MCI would be a true colossus, with revenues of $38 billion, 182,000 employees and a market value of $64 billion.
In the international big league it would be behind only Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp of Japan and AT&amp;T Corp of the United States. In Europe, it would be roughly the same size as Deutsche Telekom AG.
MCI directors, meeting on Saturday in "The Mausoleum," the name MCI staff give to their granite-domed Washington headquarters, have reason to be well pleased with the deal.
Analysts say MCI management will be left in charge of the U.S. market, and be given more money to fight in new markets and defend existing ones in the new deregulated environment.
"It is inconceivable to me that BT would change the MCI management," Kagan said.
For MCI the deal brings a 30 percent fillip to a stock price that had languished for almost two years, but for BT the benefits may be more symbolic than actual, analysts say.
"What does BT get for its $22 billion?" asked David Goodtree of Forrester Research.
"You only need a global strategy to serve big businesses and they already have their Concert venture to serve that market. Other markets are regional," he said.
Economies of scale would be hard to find. Both companies already squeeze their suppliers to the limit, their brands are already strong in their respective markets, and geography and local market knowledge will continue to dictate fortunes.
According to one source close to the deal, staff numbers are not going to be cut as part of the deal, although existing job and cost cutting initiatives will continue.
A final hurdle, long thought insuperable to such a deal, is U.S. regulatory objections. But regulatory experts say the Federal Communications Commission itself opened a loophole earlier this year.
The FCC made a ruling that said bidders from truly open markets would be allowed to exceed the 25 percent limit on foreign ownership of U.S. media and communication assets.
"BT's home U.K. market is the most open in Europe and arguably the most open in the world," said Bill Gaik, telecommunications director for Deloitte &amp; Touche Consulting.
MCI Communications Corp said on Sunday its $20 billion merger with British Telecommunications Plc will give the combined company great strength in international calling, consulting and in U.S. local calling.
"Collectively we have the size and strength to compete with any telecommunications company in the world," MCI Chief Financial Officer Doug Maine told Reuters in an interview.
Maine, also a director at the new combined firm Concert, said putting together MCI's Systemhouse with BT's Syntegra would give huge power in consulting and systems integration.  
"This is a scale game and this really positions us to compete with the likes of EDS (Electronic Data Systems Corp ) and Andersen (Consulting)...", Maine said.
Analysts agreed MCI had a lot to offer BT in consulting.
"BT is getting its lunch eaten in U.K systems intergration," said Danny Briere of consultantcy Telechoice.
Maine predicted the deal could help hasten the end of the creaking international settlements system, which restricts the carriers and rates used on most of the world's international call connections and which keeps calls expensive.  
"It positions us to take advantage what will probably be the coming collapse of the international correspondent relations market, which is the settlement system..." he said.
The system is under siege because of liberalization is opening up domestic markets in several key countries like Germany, and new carriers domestically will want to get into the international calling market too.
Analysts say that the more the international market opens up, the more calling rates for customers will fall.  
Maine said there is big money to be made in the $90 billion a year U.S. local market as well, partly through MCI Metro, MCI's business market local calling subsidiary.
"If you want to look at return on capital there is no better investment BT could make than investing in the local market where we have 46 percent EBITDA margins," Maine said.
EBITDA is earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization.
"BT will invest through MCI into the local market and earn considerable returns on the capital, far more than I believe they could investing in their own market," Maine said.  
He also expected that MCI's aggressive management team would be a great asset to BT, particularly in the U.S. market.
Maine said that on top of all the business advantages there would be a great deal of money saved by cutting out overlaps and inefficiencies between the two companies.
"Financially we have the synergies...$2.5 billion dollars over the next five years," Maine said.  
Maine, who will be getting a board position at Concert, said that he was determined to make sure that investor relations (IR) efforts were kept up in the U.S. to avoid the shareholder base switching over too much to the U.K.
"I believe its partly a result of the fact that the sell-side analysts who tend to follow the company tend to be those in the larger company. When you lose the sell side analysts you lose the involvement of the institutional sales forces," Maine said.
Telechoice's Briere said that the new company would tighten up a lot of areas which didn't work in the existing 20 percent stakeholding partnership.
"Huge area will disappear now, where they had been duplicating effort," said Briere. He saw it as the right decision, and a brave one to make the partnership work.
"Now there will be no excuses," he said. -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1610
British Telecommunications Plc stock and cash share offer is worth between $36 and $39.60 per MCI share at Friday's closing BT share price, MCI chief financial officer Doug Maine told Reuters.
The deal is an offer of 0.54 new American Depositary Shares (ADS) in the new combined group, named Concert, for every MCI share. Each Concert ADS is equivalent to one BT American Depositary Share and $6 cash.
BT ADS's closed at $55-1/2 in New York, giving a value of $30 per MCI share plus $6 cash per share before the effect of a buyback by BT which is part of the deal, Maine said.  
BT said Concert will make a buyback of up to 10 percent of its shares after the closing. The maximum buyback would increase the value of the deal to MCI shareholders to $39.60 per MCI share.
"The buyback is very important to us," Maine said, adding that it was designed to offset some of the skewed stock ownership patterns which often happen in a transnational merger.
Maine said that the 80 percent of MCI shares held by owners other than BT would translate into a holding of 33 percent in the combined Concert company.  
The terms value MCI at a total $25.2 billion before the effect of the buyback, but as BT already owns 20 percent it need only issue Concert stock and cash worth $20.1 billion.
The new Concert company will have 9.5 billion shares in issue, including 3.1 billion new shares issued for MCI.
Maine said the buyback would be available to all shareholders, and didn't expect problems with U.K. tax law.
British tax complexities have been an obstacle recently to some companies' planned distributions of cash to shareholders in Britain.
MCI shareholders will receive the full BT dividend for fiscal 1998 providing the merger closes before BT's year end of March 31 1998.  Maine said that U.S. shareholders would be as much as 25 percent better off from the dividend proposals.
"A dividend from a U.K. company is worth more to a U.S. taxpayer than a dividend from a U.S. company because of the way the ACT (advance corporation tax) works, and because in the U.K. you don't double tax dividends," Maine said.
BT said it is planning a 6.1 percent increase in U.K. dividends for fiscal 1997, but did not give the figures for American Depositary Share dividends.  
Each BT ADS is worth 10 ordinary BT shares, so the 19.85 pence U.K dividend for fiscal 1997 translates to 1.98 stg per ADS, translated into dollars at the exchange rate prevailing at the record date in August 1997.
For fiscal 1996, BT paid $2.92 per ADS.  -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1610
British Telecom and MCI Communications Sunday formally announced their agreement for the British company to acquire the rest of MCI in a deal worth more than $20 billion that will create a worldwide telecommunications powerhouse.
The merged company, to be called Concert Plc, creates the world's second-largest telecommunications group, behind Japan's NTT, and presents a powerful rival to U.S. leader AT&amp;T.
British Telecom already owned 20 percent of Washington,D.C.-based MCI, the No. 2 U.S. long telecommunications company. The deal values all of MCI at a total $25.2 billion, but as British Telecom already owns 20 percent, it will issue Concert stock and cash worth $20.1 billion for the 80 percent it does not own.
The deal would be the largest between a British and American company.
"This is not a pebble we're throwing onto a quiet pool. It is a big rock, and it's going to make a big splash," Sir Iain Vallance, chairman of British Telecommunications Plc, told a news conference.
"Mergers don't always work, but this one will," Vallance added.
Industry analysts said a combined company would be a good fit in the ultra-competitive U.S. long-distance phone industry, where MCI's major competitors are AT&amp;T and Sprint. AT&amp;T, which would be the hardest hit by a financially muscular enlarged rival, said Friday it was confident any MCI/British Telecom deal would receive proper scrutiny by the U.S. government.
MCI Chief Executive Bert Roberts said he was confident the combination with British Telecom would win the approval of federal regulators, noting that "the U.K. is the most competitive telecommunications market in the world."
He added that the deal would result in lower expenditures for both companies because "costs will be reduced by building networks once, not twice."
In an attempt to keep one step ahead of rivals as world telecoms markets are liberalised, British Telecom is taking on a partner with a powerful position in the world's biggest telecommunications market, generating about 40 percent of the world's long-distance calls.
Concert Plc would be one of the world's largest telecommunications companies, with 43 million business and residential customers in 70 countries.
"The complementary strengths and skills of BT and MCI will enable Concert to take full advantage of the great opportunities provided by the forthcoming liberalisation of the telecommunications market in the U.S. and Europe," said Vallance.
"This is an industry with a voracious appetite for capital," Gerald Taylor, MCI president and chief operating officer, told an earlier news conference in London. "We have been living and working together for nearly three years ... we know our strengths and weaknesses ... I believe we will be a winning team."
Under the terms of the agreement, which has yet to be approved by regulatory authorities on either side of the Atlantic, MCI shareholders would receive 0.54 new American Depositary Shares in the new combined group for every MCI share. Each Concert ADS is equivalent to one British Telecom American Depositary Share and $6 cash.
British Telecom's ADSs closed at $55.50 in New York on Friday, giving a value of $30 per MCI share, plus $6 in cash per share before the effect of a buyback by British Telecom that is part of the deal, MCI Chief Financial Officer Doug Maine told Reuters.
British Telecom said Concert will buy back up to 10 percent of its shares after the deal closes. The maximum buyback would increase the value of the deal to MCI shareholders to $39.60 per MCI share. MCI's stock closed Friday at $30.25 on Nasdaq.
The new company, incorporated in Britain, would have headquarters in London and Washington and operate under the British Telecom and MCI brand names.
British Telecom has been looking for a major acquisition since its proposed merger with British rival Cable and Wireless failed in May. It had been keen to forge that deal because it would have given it access to the lucrative Asian telecoms market -- the world's fastest-growing market.
Analysts now expect British Telecom and MCI to start making overtures to major Asian players such as Japan's giant Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp.
One potential problem is a media joint venture between MCI and Robert Murdoch's News Corp. British Telecom would end up with MCI's 13 percent non-voting stake in News Corp, and this could cause regulatory difficulties in Britain, analysts say.
MCI Communications Corp said on Sunday its $20 billion merger with British Telecommunications Plc will give the combined company great strength in international calling, consulting and in U.S. local calling.
"Collectively we have the size and strength to compete with any telecommunications company in the world," MCI Chief Financial Officer Doug Maine told Reuters in an interview.
Maine, also a director at the new combined firm Concert, said putting together MCI's Systemhouse with BT's Syntegra would give huge power in consulting and systems integration.
"This is a scale game and this really positions us to compete with the likes of EDS (Electronic Data Systems Corp) and Andersen (Consulting)," Maine said.
Analysts agreed MCI had a lot to offer BT in consulting.
"BT is getting its lunch eaten in U.K systems integration," said Danny Briere of consultancy Telechoice.
Maine predicted the deal could help hasten the end of the creaking international settlements system, which restricts the carriers and rates used on most of the world's international call connections and which keeps calls expensive.
"It positions us to take advantage what will probably be the coming collapse of the international correspondent relations market, which is the settlement system," he said.
The system is under siege because liberalisation is opening up domestic markets in several key countries like Germany, and new carriers domestically will want to get into the international calling market too.
Analysts say that as the international market opens up, calling rates for customers will fall.
Maine said there is big money to be made in the $90 billion a year U.S. local market as well, partly through MCI Metro, MCI's business market local calling subsidiary.
"If you want to look at return on capital there is no better investment BT could make than investing in the local market where we have 46 percent EBITDA margins," Maine said.
EBITDA is earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortisation.
"BT will invest through MCI into the local market and earn considerable returns on the capital, far more than I believe they could investing in their own market," Maine said.
He also expected that MCI's aggressive management team would be a great asset to BT, particularly in the U.S. market.
Maine said that on top of all the business advantages there would be a great deal of money saved by cutting out overlaps and inefficiencies between the two companies.
"Financially we have the synergies...$2.5 billion dollars over the next five years," Maine said.
Maine, who will be getting a board position at Concert, said that he was determined to make sure that investor relations (IR) efforts were kept up in the United States to avoid the shareholder base switching over too much to Britain.
"I believe its partly a result of the fact that the sell-side analysts who tend to follow the company tend to be those in the larger company. When you lose the sell side analysts you lose the involvement of the institutional sales forces," Maine said.
Telechoice's Briere said that the new company would tighten up a lot of areas which didn't work in the existing 20 percent stakeholding partnership.
"Huge areas will disappear now, where they had been duplicating effort," said Briere. He saw it as the right decision, and a brave one to make the partnership work.
"Now there will be no excuses," he said.
The $20 billion merger of MCI Communications Corp. and British Telecommunications Plc will create a supercarrier posing a potent threat to rivals in the U.S. market place, industry analysts said Monday.
"In one company you have the resources of an AT&amp;T and the marketing savvy of an MCI," said consultant Jeffrey Kagan of Kagan Telecom.
The new company, Concert will have a market value of $54 billion, roughly the same as AT&amp;T Corp., and could spur more mega-mergers among U.S. carriers. MCI is currently the second largest U.S. long distance company behind AT&amp;T and has about 20 percent of the market.
"Its already going pretty fast. We have had four deals of over $10 billion since April. But we are going to get more," said analyst Guy Woodlief of Dean Witter Reynolds.
The regional Bells as well as GTE Corp., AT&amp;T Corp. and Sprint Corp. will all have to re-examine their market strategies and see where they may be vulnerable.
"It clearly ups the competitive ante for the whole industry," said analyst Julie Kennedy of Goldman Sachs.
Concert will push harder into the $90 billion local calling market, both through the MCI Metro venture it already has in major U.S. cities, and through resale of regional Bell circuits, as soon as possible.
"If BT is more prepared to take early losses than MCI is, you could see a renewed emphasis on local markets," Woodlief said, adding he expected to see marketing pushed harder.
AT&amp;T will have to concentrate hard now that it is looking eye-to-eye at a rival its own size.
"Two years out MCI could take the top spot from AT&amp;T domestically, which would have been unthinkable just one short year ago. Three years out you won't recognize this industry," Kagan said.
There are plenty of vital assets, like state-of-the-art nationwide networks in the hands of carriers who don't have enough money to make the most of them, analysts say.
"WorldCom Inc. is still definitely on the block," said David Goodtree, an analyst at consultancy Forrester Research.
WorldCom is in the process of buying business network provider MFS Communications Co. in a $13.3 billion deal. MFS has barely finished buying Internet access provider UUNet when the Worldcom deal was announced.
"Conventional wisdom says GTE or Bell Atlantic (Corp.) would buy WorldCom, but a dark horse would be Cable and Wireless Plc," Goodtree said. Britain's C&amp;W said Monday it would build a trans-Atlantic cable system with MFS.
GTE was a rumored bidder for MCI, while Bell Atlantic and Nynex Corp. agreed to merge in April. None of them, however, owns a national long distance network.
GTE already is offering long distance calling. Bell Atlantic and Nynex, and the other regional Bells will not legally be able to offer long distance until a legal impasse over U.S. telecommunications reform is solved.
The Federal Communications Commission's attempts to implement the 1996 Telecom Act have been stalled by a legal challenge. The FCC had set rules to govern the resale of Bell circuits to new rivals in the local calling market.
Debt-strapped Tele-Communications Inc., the largest U.S. cable television company, is another candidate for takeover as cable networks and phone networks combine.
"Another company ripe for acquisition is TCI. They don't have enough cash to do what they want to do," said Goodtree.
He suggested that AT&amp;T or Sprint would want to buy TCI. Sprint is already a partner with TCI and two other cable firms in a national venture called Sprint Spectrum to bundle local and long distance telephone, wireless and cable TV.
MCI shares added just 50 cents to $30.75 on Nasdaq on Monday, well down from the about $39 per share the deal is worth, reflecting concerns the FCC may block the deal and that approval in any case would take a year.
The deal's actual value varies with the movements of British Telecom shares. British Telecom American depositary shares on the New York Stock Exchange soared $6.125 to $61.625.
If the deal does go through, Concert could get even bigger, with more alliances likely by the time the regional Bells can get into long distance.
"I would assume within 36 months you will have one or more partners from the regional Bells joining the Concert alliance," said Joseph Kraemer, a consultant for A.T. Kearney.
Whatever happens, the market perception of the types of deals that can be done has changed.
"What you witnessed yesterday was the birth of a supercarrier," said Kagan.
Worries about regulatory hurdles and a lengthy 12 months to completion took the edge off market euphoria over MCI Communications Corp's merger with British Telecommunications Corp, analysts said on Monday.
MCI shares were trading on Monday morning just 1/4 firmer at 30-1/2, well adrift of a theoretical value that oscillated around $39 per share, based on the price of BT American depositary shares.  
"The arbs are probably demanding between 15 and 20 percent on this deal because of the lengthy time to closing and the uncertainties of U.S. regulatory approval," said analyst Richard Klugman of PaineWebber.
The deal is an offer of 0.54 new American depositary shares in the new combined group, named Concert, for every MCI share. Each Concert ADS is equivalent to one BT American depositary share and $6 cash.  
Analysts noted a yawning gap between the value of the deal taken by using BT shares in London and the ADS shares, and a fuzzy debate about how much of the $5.60 BT special dividend should be deducted from the ADS price.
"It depends on what you use as the implied exchange rate," said analyst Julie Kennedy of Goldman Sachs. At Monday's one pound equals $1.64, the ADS shares look to be too far ahead.
In any case the final calculations will seesaw with changes in both BT's stock price and the exchange rate.  
Given the broader uncertainties, arbitragers didn't expect to push up the shares to the point where they would have to go over the details looking for the last few cents.
"MCI is trading where is should, in line with BT based on a nine to 12 month transaction, and figuring MCI holders not getting the special (BT) dividends," one arbitrager said.
Analysts say the market is not expecting much of the possible buyback of up to 10 percent of Concert shares, which could take place after the deal closes.
Klugman said that though a buyback spreads a given level of earnings over fewer shares, the cost of purchase show up in operating earnings as higher interest charges.
By how much earnings per share improves hinges on how much cheaper debt is than equity, analysts say.  -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1610
The merger of MCI Communications Corp and British Telecommunications Plc will spur still more mega-mergers among U.S. carriers, seeking safety in size as markets coalesce.
"It's already going pretty fast. We have had four deals of over $10 billion since April. But we are going to get more," said analyst Guy Woodlief of Dean Witter Reynolds.
Regional Bells, GTE Corp, AT&amp;T Corp and Sprint Corp will all have to re-examine their market strategies and see where they may be vulnerable.  
There are plenty of vital assets, like state-of-the art nationwide networks, in the hands of carriers who don't have enough money to make the most of them, analysts say.
"WorldCom Inc  is still definitely on the block," said David Goodtree, an analyst at consultancy Forrester Research.
WorldCom is in the process of buying business network provider MFS Communications Co in a $13.3 billion deal. MFS had barely finished buying Internet access provider UUNet when the Worldcom deal was announced.  
"Conventional wisdowm says GTE or Bell Atlantic (Corp ) would buy WorldCom, but a dark horse would be Cable and Wireless Plc," Goodtree said. C&amp;W on Monday said it would build a transatlantic cable system with MFS.
GTE was a rumored bidder for MCI, while Bell Atlantic and NYNEX Corp agreed to merge in April. None of them owns a national long distance network.
GTE already is offering long distance calling, and the other two plan to, once the legal impasse over U.S. telecommunications reform is solved.  
With cable TV networks integrating with telephony, Tele-Communications Inc is a candidate, some say.
"Another company ripe for acquisition is TCI. They don't have enough cash to do what they want to do," said Goodtree.
He suggested that AT&amp;T or Sprint would want to buy TCI. Sprint is already a partner with TCI and two other cable firms in a national venture called Sprint Spectrum to bundle local and long distance telephone, wireless and cable TV.
Concert, as the combined MCI/BT will be called, will be able to assert its strength fairly rapidly after the deal closes, expected in nine to 12 months.  
"It clearly ups the competitive ante for the whole industry," said analyst Julie Kennedy of Goldman Sachs.
Concert will push harder into local markets, both through the MCI Metro venture it already has in major U.S. cities and through resale of regional Bell circuits.
"If BT is more prepared to take early losses than MCI has, you could see a renewed emphasis on local markets," Woodlief said, adding he expected to see marketing pushed harder.
AT&amp;T will have to concentrate hard now it is looking eye-to-eye at a rival its own size.
"In one company (Concert) you have the resources of an AT&amp;T and the marketing savvy of an MCI," said consultant Jeffrey Kagan of Kagan Telecom.
"Two years out MCI could take the top spot from AT&amp;T domestically, which would have been unthinkable just one short year ago. Three years out you won't recognize this industry," said Kagan.
MCI Communications Corp., embracing merger partner British Telecommunications Plc  in a $20 billion match, is growing increasingly distant toward media tycoon Rupert Murdoch and their joint offspring.
At the same time, BT and MCI are seeking Asian telecom partners for Concert, their new global company.
MCI said on Sunday it would cut its stake in a U.S. satellite joint venture with Murdoch's News Corp from 50 percent to 20 percent.
MCI Chief Executive Bert Roberts told Reuters that no major new launches were expected from the $400 million media joint venture with Murdoch's News Corp, and that MCI would sell to Murdoch a $700 million satellite license if it could.
MCI has a stake of just under 9 percent in News Corp, which it bought for $1.35 billion, and has an option to splash out an extra $1 billion to take this to 13.5 percent.
"It is unlikely you will see us increasing our investment (in News Corp)" Roberts told Reuters in an interview. He said that News Corp was aware of MCI's position.
This is all a world away from the first flush of enthusiasm when Murdoch and Roberts announced a broad-ranging alliance in May 1995.
The plan was to take the Australian magnate's publishing and television expertise and put it together with MCI's communications network and marketing skill, especially in the emerging market of the Internet.
But so far, the venture has produced some duds.
MCI's electronic malls on the Internet are now closed, and News Corp's ideas of producing supermarket tabloids to lure middle-aged readers to the Internet have been shelved.
Low-level cross-promotion, like advertising MCI calling cards in Murdoch's U.S. TV Guide, have continued.
The crux of the problem, analysts say, is that there never was much overlap between MCI's blue-chip business clients and Murdoch's blue-collar sports and publishing expertise.
"BT/MCI is going after the High Street, not Melrose Place," said Danny Briere, an industry analyst at consultancy Telechoice.
The satellite offspring American Sky Broadcasting (ASkyB) has been a problem child, expensive and slow to develop in comparison with some rivals.
In January, MCI and News Corp said they would offer digital television direct to the home across the U.S. market within two years, using the $700 million license MCI won in an auction.
But the same month, AT&amp;T announced an alliance with General Motors Corp.'s Hughes Electronics  DirecTV, a company that was already offering digital satellite services, and which now has two million subscribers.
MCI is clearly taking a second look.
"We would be willing, consistent with our lowering our investment position (in ASkyB), to move those to News Corp. That will take FCC approval," Roberts said.
BT Chairman Sir Iain Vallance said he expected to look hard for new partners to fill out the global telecommunications alliance in Asia.
"I think we will be more attractive to Asian partners than we would had we stayed separate," Vallance told Reuters in an interview. He declined to say which companies he had his eye on, but sources close to the company say Japan's NTT Corp. is considered the real prize.
Vallance said any partner would tie up closely to the business venture first.
"I think it is more likely that, in the first instance, we would invite partnership in Concert Communications Services rather than the parent itself," he said.
The source said that Concert would rely on chief executive Sir Peter Bonfield and his close links to the Japanese market to lure NTT aboard. Bonfield is a former head of ICL, a British computer company majority owned by Fujitsu Ltd. -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1610
British Telecom and MCI Communications on Sunday announced a $20 billion merger, using the largest cross-border takeover deal in history to spawn a global telecommunications powerhouse.
The merged company, to be called Concert Plc, creates the world's second-largest telecommunications group, based on market capitalisation, behind Japan's NTT Corp.
Valued at $54 billion based on Friday's closing stock prices, Concert is neck-and-neck with U.S. long-distance leader AT&amp;T Corp., which is MCI's arch-rival in the super-competitive U.S. market.
For customers, the deal promises better service and lower international calling charges, while for businesses it means a company that can support them wherever they are. For for shareholders, it means faster earnings growth, analysts said.
"This is not a pebble we're throwing onto a quiet pool. It is a big rock, and it's going to make a big splash," Sir Iain Vallance, chairman of British Telecommunications Plc, told a news conference in New York.
The deal values all of Washington,D.C.-based MCI at a total $25.2 billion. But as British Telecom already owns 20 percent, it will issue Concert stock and cash worth $20.1 billion for the 80 percent it does not own. Holders of this MCI stake will thus control 33 percent of the stock in the combined company.
Because the companies have already worked together for three years, they expect the merged company to function well.
"Mergers don't always work, but this one will," Vallance added.
AT&amp;T, which would be the hardest hit by a financially muscular enlarged rival, said it was confident any MCI/British Telecom deal would receive proper scrutiny by the U.S. government and called on both U.S. and European regulators to condition approval of the deal on a further freeing of competition in British Telecom's home market.
Already strong in long distance, MCI hopes to use BT's service and back-up expertise, plus plenty of cash, to help take a big chunk of the $100 billion a year U.S. local calling market from the regional Bells.
That market is expected to gradually open to competition following legislation earlier this year. Since 1984 it had been the monopoly of the seven regional Bells.
MCI Chief Executive Bert Roberts said he was confident the combination with British Telecom would win the approval of federal regulators, noting that "the U.K. is the most competitive telecommunications market in the world."
He added that the deal would result in lower expenditures for both companies because "costs will be reduced by building networks once, not twice." The companies expect to save $1.5 billion in costs over five years.
Employees, usually tense during mergers, can relax.
"Minimal job cuts, that is the joy of this. MCI will operate in the Americas, and BT will operate in the U.K and the rest of the world," Vallance told Reuters.
Concert Plc would be one of the world's largest telecommunications companies, with 43 million business and residential customers in 70 countries.
"The complementary strengths and skills of BT and MCI will enable Concert to take full advantage of the great opportunities provided by the forthcoming liberalisation of the telecommunications market in the U.S. and Europe," said Vallance.
Under the terms of the agreement, which has yet to be approved by regulatory authorities on either side of the Atlantic, MCI shareholders would receive 0.54 new American Depositary Shares in the new combined group for every MCI share. Each Concert ADS is equivalent to one British Telecom American Depositary Share and $6 cash.
British Telecom's ADSs closed at $55.50 in New York on Friday, giving a value of $30 per MCI share, plus $6 in cash per share before the effect of a buyback by British Telecom that is part of the deal, MCI Chief Financial Officer Doug Maine told Reuters.
British Telecom said Concert will buy back up to 10 percent of its shares after the deal closes. The maximum buyback would increase the value of the deal to MCI shareholders to $39.60 per MCI share. MCI's stock closed Friday at $30.25 on Nasdaq.
The new company, incorporated in Britain, would have headquarters in London and Washington and operate under the British Telecom and MCI brand names.
British Telecom has been looking for a major acquisition since its proposed merger with British rival Cable and Wireless failed in May. It had been keen to forge that deal because it would have given it access to the lucrative Asian telecoms market -- the world's fastest-growing market.
Analysts now expect British Telecom and MCI to start making overtures to major Asian players such as Japan's giant Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp.
But while seeking an Asian partner, MCI is putting another one on a backburner.
MCI is to cut its stake in a U.S. satellite venture with Australian media tycoon Rupert Murdoch to 20 percent from 50 percent, and will not increase its stake in Murdoch's News Corp as originally expected.
"It is unlikely you will see us increasing our investment (in News Corp)," Roberts told Reuters.
MCI paid $1.35 billion for a stake of just under 9 percent, and could increase it to 13 percent with another $1 billion investment.
Roberts added that if U.S. regulatory permission could be obtained, he may even sell the $700 million license that goes with the U.S. direct-to-home broadcast satellite to Murdoch.
British Telecom and MCI Communications on Sunday announced a $20 billion merger, using the largest cross-border takeover deal in history to spawn a global telecommunications powerhouse.
The merged company, to be called Concert Plc, creates the world's second-largest telecommunications group, based on market capitalization, behind Japan's NTT Corp.
Valued at $54 billion based on Friday's closing stock prices, Concert is neck-and-neck with U.S. long-distance leader AT&amp;T Corp., which is MCI's arch-rival in the super-competitive U.S. market.
For customers, the deal promises better service and lower international calling charges, while for businesses it means a company that can support them wherever they are. For for shareholders, it means faster earnings growth, analysts said.
"This is not a pebble we're throwing onto a quiet pool. It is a big rock, and it's going to make a big splash," Sir Iain Vallance, chairman of British Telecommunications Plc, told a news conference in New York.
The deal values all of Washington,D.C.-based MCI at a total $25.2 billion. But as British Telecom already owns 20 percent, it will issue Concert stock and cash worth $20.1 billion for the 80 percent it does not own. Holders of this MCI stake will thus control 33 percent of the stock in the combined company.
Because the companies have already worked together for three years, they expect the merged company to function well.
"Mergers don't always work, but this one will," Vallance added.
AT&amp;T, which would be the hardest hit by a financially muscular enlarged rival, said it was confident any MCI/British Telecom deal would receive proper scrutiny by the U.S. government and called on both U.S. and European regulators to condition approval of the deal on a further freeing of competition in British Telecom's home market.
Already strong in long distance, MCI hopes to use BT's service and back-up expertise, plus plenty of cash, to help take a big chunk of the $100 billion a year U.S. local calling market from the regional Bells.
That market is expected to gradually open to competition following legislation earlier this year. Since 1984 it had been the monopoly of the seven regional Bells.
MCI Chief Executive Bert Roberts said he was confident the combination with British Telecom would win the approval of federal regulators, noting that "the U.K. is the most competitive telecommunications market in the world."
He added that the deal would result in lower expenditures for both companies because "costs will be reduced by building networks once, not twice." The companies expect to save $1.5 billion in costs over five years.
Employees, usually tense during mergers, can relax.
"Minimal job cuts, that is the joy of this. MCI will operate in the Americas, and BT will operate in the U.K and the rest of the world," Vallance told Reuters.
Concert Plc would be one of the world's largest telecommunications companies, with 43 million business and residential customers in 70 countries.
"The complementary strengths and skills of BT and MCI will enable Concert to take full advantage of the great opportunities provided by the forthcoming liberalization of the telecommunications market in the U.S. and Europe," said Vallance.
Under the terms of the agreement, which has yet to be approved by regulatory authorities on either side of the Atlantic, MCI shareholders would receive 0.54 new American Depositary Shares in the new combined group for every MCI share. Each Concert ADS is equivalent to one British Telecom American Depositary Share and $6 cash.
British Telecom's ADSs closed at $55.50 in New York on Friday, giving a value of $30 per MCI share, plus $6 in cash per share before the effect of a buyback by British Telecom that is part of the deal, MCI Chief Financial Officer Doug Maine told Reuters.
British Telecom said Concert will buy back up to 10 percent of its shares after the deal closes. The maximum buyback would increase the value of the deal to MCI shareholders to $39.60 per MCI share. MCI's stock closed Friday at $30.25 on Nasdaq.
The new company, incorporated in Britain, would have headquarters in London and Washington and operate under the British Telecom and MCI brand names.
British Telecom has been looking for a major acquisition since its proposed merger with British rival Cable and Wireless failed in May. It had been keen to forge that deal because it would have given it access to the lucrative Asian telecoms market -- the world's fastest-growing market.
Analysts now expect British Telecom and MCI to start making overtures to major Asian players such as Japan's giant Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp.
But while seeking an Asian partner, MCI is putting another one on a backburner.
MCI is to cut its stake in a U.S. satellite venture with Australian media tycoon Rupert Murdoch to 20 percent from 50 percent, and will not increase its stake in Murdoch's News Corp as originally expected.
"It is unlikely you will see us increasing our investment (in News Corp)," Roberts told Reuters.
MCI paid $1.35 billion for a stake of just under 9 percent, and could increase it to 13 percent with another $1 billion investment.
Roberts added that if U.S. regulatory permission could be obtained, he may even sell the $700 million license that goes with the U.S. direct-to-home broadcast satellite to Murdoch.
The long-heralded wireless revolution is arriving in dozens of cities across the United States this week, with new tiny digital mobile phones offering clear connections, better battery life and few dropped calls.
For consumers it means lower prices, greater choice, and new add-on features like voice mail and paging built into the phone. For wireless firms new and old it means a huge fight to grab and keep customers in much more competitive markets.
"Fundamentally, wireless services will get cheaper," said David Roddy, chief telecommunications economist of Deloitte and Touche Consulting.
On Tuesday PrimeCo, a consortium of three regional Bells and AirTouch Communications Inc. will announce its new digital Personal Communications Services offering in a dozen cities across the country, covering 32 million people.
PrimeCo will start services in Chicago, Richmond and Norfalk in Virginia, the Texas cities of Houston, Dallas/Fort Worth, San Antonio and Austin, New Orleans and all of Florida.
"We are offering people a value proposition, and it will be a hassle-free experience," said PrimeCo spokesman Reg Rowe.
On Thursday Omnipoint Corp. will announce its own PCS service in metropolitan New York, fighting existing cellular providers AT&amp;T Corp., and merger partners Bell Atlantic Corp. and NYNEX Corp..
Eventually, Omnipoint will cover broad areas in the Northeast, where 40 million people live.
PCS refers to systems using licenses auctioned by the Federal Communications Commission in 1995. Two or three PCS providers will enter every city in the next three years to compete with two existing cellular service companies.
"We're already starting to spot bare bones pricing as companies vie for market share," Roddy said.
Building PCS networks across the country will cost at least $30 billion, and new entrants have to grab customers quickly, even at a loss, to get cash flowing in to start paying the interest charges. Bondholders will be watching closely.
"In some areas it could turn into a bloodbath. It's difficult to find a business plan that says five carriers can serve a given market and make money," Roddy said.
Comparing price is tough because of the variables of phone cost, monthly cost, per minute airtime and so on, but scales are expected to be similar to that offered by American Personal Communications, an affiliate of Sprint Corp..
APC offers customers in the Washington DC/Baltimore area phones for between $150-$200, a $15-a-month flat fee with 15 minutes free and a 31-cent-per-minute call charge.
Cellular's old pricing structure of year-long contracts, free phones but pricy airtime is changing.
"Nobody's doing contracts anymore, and one-cent phones are on their way out," said an Omnipoint spokesman.
APC's PCS service launched in November 1995 was the first in the country, undercutting cellular rivals by 30 percent.
In the first seven months of operation, APC gathered over 100,000 customers, many of them new to wireless. But as cellular rivals cut prices too, they also drew in extra customers, showing the depth of the potential marketplace.
Cellular providers are now upgrading their services too.
AT&amp;T in October launched its Digital PCS, which is not based on PCS license frequencies but does offer similar features. These include call waiting, voicemail-to-pager, and the benefits of doubled battery life and small handset size.
"About a third of our new customers signing on nationally are choosing Digital PCS," said AT&amp;T vice president Jane O'Donaghue, in the first hint of how the campaign is going.
The cost is $25 per month with 30 minutes of free airtime and a phone costing between $150 and $250.
Confusingly, AT&amp;T will start offerings its real PCS service next year. While it currently covers 76 million people with Digital PCS, its real PCS network when complete in 1998 will give virtually complete national coverage, reaching 212 million customers.
PrimeCo, which includes Bell Atlantic, NYNEX and U S West as well as AirTouch, has a special feature in its phones for customers who want to avoid running up big bills.
Customers can set a maximum monthly bill, and the phone will alert them when they near that figure.
"'First bill shock' has been a problem with cellular phones," said PrimeCo's Rowe.
Wireless companies will find niches to avoid head-on pricing, with some concentrating on the mobile professional, and others on pre-paid wireless calling.
Nevertheless, with crowded markets, consumers will have to sit down and work out which is the best value of all the offerings available.
"Its going to be a pretty confusing marketplace," said Roddy.
PrimeCo, the mobile telephone venture owned by AirTouch Communications Inc and three regional Bells, expects a tougher fight with Sprint Corp in the wireless market than with AT&amp;T Corp .
PrimeCo on Tuesday launched Personal Communications Services (PCS) in 16 cities, offering tiny phones with more features, longer battery life and clearer sound than cellular.
"With AT&amp;T we believe we have a clearly discernible quality advantage, with Sprint..we felt it was important to be to market first," chief executive Ben Scott told Reuters.  
PrimeCo and Sprint both use the same technology, called code division multiple access (CDMA), so it would be much harder to claim a quality advantage, Scott said.
"They (Sprint) have a good brand for long distance, it remains to be seen whether we can have a better brand for wireless services," Scott said.
AT&amp;T, Sprint and Primeco -- owned by Bell Atlantic Corp, NYNEX Corp, U S West Inc as well as AirTouch -- are the only three firms which spent enough on Federal PCS licenses in 1995 to build national networks.  
While every PCS operator starting up will make easy comparisons with analog cellular, the real fights will begin in a year or two when there are two or three PCS operators and two digital cellular operators in every market, analysts said.
The better the brand, the less any competitor will have to resort to cutting prices, according to business models. Winning the marketing war will be at least as important as the technical wizardry that allows the phones to work.  
By mid 1997, Scott expects PrimeCo will be spending about as much on advertising as AT&amp;T Corp does. ATT doesnt break out its ad spending, but is thought by analysts to spend at least $100 million a year.
"As an alliance our spending will be very competitive with those levels (of AT&amp;T)," he said.
PrimeCo has already spent $1 billion building its PCS network, on top of $1.1 billion for licenses. When the network is complete the total bill may reach $3.6 billion.  
Nevertheless, Scott said PrimeCo is on target to reach a breakeven on earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization in 1999.
AT&amp;T Corp in October launched Digital PCS, which does not use PCS license frequencies but a digital version of cellular services. However it does offer features similar to PCS, including call waiting, voicemail and long battery life.
AT&amp;T will start offerings its real PCS service next year.
Arcane arguments continue to rage in the industry about which of the myriad technical standards is best, but all agree that PCS in all its forms is far better than analog cellular, which is what the vast majority of U.S. users still have.
American Personal Communications, an affiliate of Sprint, was the first to offer PCS in the country, starting last November with a service in Washington and Baltimore.
However this service uses time division multiple access (TDMA), a technology which is currently incompatible with the CDMA network Sprint plans to build elsewhere across the country with its cable TV partners.
-- New York Newsroom 212 859 1610
Fast growing telephone reseller Excel Communications Inc said on Wednesday that it expects record earnings and sales growth for the third quarter and the year, and has plans to expand into new services.
"We should have another record quarter and another record year," Jack McLaine, Excel chief financial officer, told Reuters in an interview.
McLaine said the company had plans to offer Internet access, home security monitoring, video service, local telephone services and eventually, wireless telephone.  
Excel reported a 350 percent rise in earnings per share in the second 1996 quarter to $0.36 from $0.08 a year earlier. The company is so far only covered by one analyst, so no consensus of expectations was available.
Excel doesn't own a single phone line itself, but uses the long distance network of WorldCom Inc to reach customers. WorldCom's planned merger with MFS Communications Co Inc , makes entering new markets easier. "Its definitely easier if you can go to one company and buy the product where you will get nationwide coverage rather than have to go various regional carriers to package it together," McLaine said.  
"The move between WorldCom and MFS is a brilliant deal strategically. We have a good relationship with WorldCom and we look forward to talking with them about what these new products are," he said.
Excel is one of around 400 telephone service resellers which have been successfully eating into the market share of industry leaders like AT&amp;T Corp. They now account for $12 billion of the $80 billion long distance market.
Analysts say the MFS WorldCom merger will allow these aggressive competitors into high value markets which are not normally available to companies without owned facilities.  
Excel said its sales approach -- using independent sales representatives to sell to their friends, family and associates -- will be powerful in new markets.
"Our relationship sales base is much stronger than telemarketing or direct mail programs, because the sales person knows the customer, and is able to sit down with them .. and explain the product," he said.
In the second quarter Excel said it had 220,710 sales representatives against 98,450 a year earlier. They earn a commission based on the size of the phone bill of those they sign up.
Excel's first new resold product is paging, which it has previously announced it is launching next week. It will be using the paging network of PageMart Wireless Inc. Internet service should follow in 1997, McLaine said. -- New York Newsroom  212 859 1712
