McDonald's Corp. said Tuesday it created a new position of chairman of its U.S. operations, in a move analysts said was sparked by intense competition and soft sales from existing stores in the domestic market.
McDonald's named Jack Greenberg, 54, to the new post of chairman, McDonald's U.S.A. He remains vice chairman of the Oak Brook, Ill.-based company, but will relinquish the chief financial officer post.
Greenberg will continue to report to Michael Quinlan, McDonald's chairman.
"The signal they are trying to send is, 'we clearly recognise that we have problems in the U.S. and we are going to do something about it'," NatWest Securities analyst Damon Brundage said of Greenberg's appointment.
Reflecting the mature and intensely competitive U.S. market, analysts said they expected McDonald's third-quarter same store sales will be down compared with a year ago. Same store data measure sales from units open at least a year.
"They have not had a single positive month in the U.S. this year," Brundage said of its same store sales. McDonald's does not disclose its same store sales.
"Margins have been under pressure for over a year in the U.S.," added Schroder Wertheim analyst Wayne Daniels.
Greenberg's new post indicates that McDonald's was not pleased with the direction of its domestic business, Daniels said. "They are trying to shake things up and put a little more focus on being aggressive in responding to the competition," he added.
The company has been introducing new offerings such as its Arch Deluxe hamburger earlier this year and the recent launch of Deluxe Grilled Chicken, Fish Filet and Crispy Chicken sandwiches.
McDonald's said Greenberg's appointment was aimed at strengthening U.S. management.
"While these changes are evolutionary, they will bring more management firepower where we need it, both for the short and long-term," Quinlan said in a statement.
As part of the management changes, Edward Rensi, McDonald's U.S.A president, will report to Greenberg. But Greenberg was quick to say he and Rensi have a good working relationship.
"Ed and I are good friends. We work well together. He's very enthusiastic about this," Greenberg said in a telephone interview. "We all want this business to do well."
Despite the pressure in the United States, McDonald's international business, which accounts for more than half of its operating income, continues to be strong, analysts said.
"International is a wide-open growth opportunity for McDonald's," Daniels said.
International profit growth is expected to contribute to an expected 12 percent gain in earnings for McDonald's overall in the third quarter, according to analyst estimates.
Given the intense competition between McDonald's, Wendy's International Inc. and Grand Metropolitan Plc.'s Burger King, Greenberg faces a tough job as head of the U.S. operations, analysts said.
"He is going to parachute into ... what looks to be one of the most challenging operating roles in the U.S. fast-food restaurant business," Brundage said.
Greenberg, 54, said he believed McDonald's was well positioned to compete in the domestic market.
"We've got more locations than anybody else. We've got the most powerful brand in the world... We've got the largest marketing budget. We've got enormous purchasing power," he added.
McDonald's operates more than 19,200 restaurants worldwide, including about 12,000 in the United States.
While Greenberg joined McDonald's in 1982 as chief financial officer, he said he has field experience with its restaurants. "I spent a year in the field in restaurants and became a regional manager for a year as well," Greenberg said.
In other management moves, McDonald's also named Michael Conley, currently senior vice president and controller, as chief financial officer, succeeding Greenberg.
By strengthening its management team with the new post of chairman of its domestic business, McDonald's Corp is attempting to address head-on its problems in the intensely competitive U.S. market.
"The signal they are trying to send is, 'we clearly recognize that we have problems in the U.S. and we are going to do something about it'," NatWest Securities analyst Damon Brundage said.
Those problems include declining same store sales in the mature and intensely competitive U.S. market, analysts said.  
Analysts said they expect McDonald's third-quarter same store sales to be down compared with a year ago.
"They have not had a single positive month in the U.S. this year," Brundage said. McDonald's does not disclose same store data measuring sales from units open at least a year.
"Margins have been under pressure for over a year in the U.S.," added Schroder Wertheim analyst Wayne Daniels.
Naming Jack Greenberg, who remains vice chairman of the company, as chairman of McDonald's U.S.A. indicates the fast-food giant is not pleased with the direction of its domestic business, Daniels said.  
"They are trying to shake things up and put a little more focus on being aggressive in responding to the competition," Daniels added.
As part of the management changes, Edward Rensi, McDonald's U.S.A president, will report to Greenberg.
"Ed and I are good friends. We work well together. He's very enthusiastic about this," Greenberg said in a telephone interview. "We all want this business to do well."
Despite the pressure in the United States, McDonald's international business, which accounts for more than half of its operating income, continues to be strong, analysts said.  
"International is a wide-open growth opportunity for McDonald's," Daniels said.
Given the intense competition between McDonald's, Wendy's International Inc and Grand Metropolitan plc's Burger King, Greenberg faces a tough job as head of the U.S. operations, analysts said.
"He is going to parachute into...what looks to be one of the most challenging operating roles in the U.S. fast-food restaurant business," Brundage said.
But Greenberg, 54, said he believes McDonald's is well positioned to compete in the U.S. market. "We've got more locations than anybody else. We've got the most powerful brand in the world...We've got the largest marketing budget. We've got enormous purchasing power," he added.
McDonald's operates more than 19,200 restaurants worldwide, including about 12,000 in the United States.
While Greenberg joined McDonald's in 1982 as chief financial officer, he said he has field experience with its restaurants. "I spent a year in the field in restaurants and became a regional manager for a year as well," Greenberg said.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
Stiff competition and high ingredient costs will likely result in flat to lower earnings for several U.S. food companies that will soon report quarterly results.
Quaker Oats Co is expected to report flat earnings for the third quarter as its Snapple beverage line continues to be a drag on the company. "We're looking for a flattish quarter and that will be once more due to the very heavy spending behind Snapple and probably a double-digit (volume) decline for Snapple," Goldman Sachs analyst Nomi Ghez said.  
Last month, Quaker said a new promotional campaign for Snapple, which included a nationwide sampling effort, came too late to reap any financial benefits for this year. Snapple accounts for about 10 percent of Quaker's annual sales.
Cereal giant Kellogg Co said recently it projects earnings for the third quarter will be about 20 percent below last year due to competitors' sales promotions.
Stiff competition in the cereal aisle is expected to result in a loss in the fiscal fourth quarter for Ralcorp Holdings Inc, which makes private label products.  
Lower profit margins, partly due to higher cattle costs, likely will result in a decline in third quarter earnings for meat processor IBP Inc, analysts said. Donaldson, Lufkin and Jenrette analyst William Leach said IBP's meat export sales are expected to be lower in the quarter.
CPC International Inc is projected to report only a modest rise in its third quarter earnings due to high corn prices that hurt its milling business, analysts said.
"If it weren't for the corn refining business, (CPC's) profits would be up a lot more," Schroder Wertheim analyst Robert Cummins said.  
Ghez of Goldman Sachs said she expects a drop in grain prices will bring CPC back to double-digit earnings growth in the fourth quarter.
Also on the positive side, Sara Lee Corp, a food and consumer products company with businesses from meat to pantyhose, is expected to report double-digit earnings growth for its fiscal first quarter. These results will reflect Sara Lee's focus on higher margin products, Oppenheimer analyst Leslie McCall said.
However, profit margins for Sara Lee's packaged meats business were under pressure in the quarter, added SBC Warburg
analyst Chris Jakubik.
Company     Qtr   First Call Mean estimate  Yr-Ago EPS
CPC	   Q3	     $1.00 a share	 $0.96
IBP	   Q3	     $0.53		   $0.88
Kellogg     Q3	     $0.85		   $1.05
Quaker Oats Q3	     $0.46		   $0.45
Ralcorp     Q4     loss  $0.19	 profit  $0.09
Sara Lee    Q1	     $0.41		   $0.36
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
Monsanto Co. said Thursday it is considering several options for the future, including splitting into two separate, publicly traded corporations -- one a life sciences company and one a chemical business.
Other options being weighed by the St. Louis-based company are to sell or merge its chemical businesses with other firms or to keep the chemical operations and restructure them.
"In recent years, the strategies and needs of the chemical and life sciences businesses have become quite different," Chairman Robert Shapiro said in a statement.
Wall Street applauded the possible sale or spin-off of the chemical business, which had been expected, sending Monsanto's stock to a new 52-week high of $42.75 early in the day. The shares later traded at $42, up $1.375.
Analysts said Monsanto's life science businesses -- including agricultural chemicals, biotechnology, food additives and pharmaceuticals -- likely would have a higher valuation as a separate company than if Monsanto remained intact.
"The key here is that the chemical business does not have the growth potential as the ag-biotech and the ag-chemical and the drug component could," NatWest Securities analyst Mark Wiltamuth said.
Monsanto Chief Economist Nicholas Filippello said in a telephone interview that no options for the chemical operations had been ruled out.
He added that a decision was expected to be made as soon as possible, but did not give a timeframe. "As soon as practical," he said.
Monsanto had been expected to shed its chemical businesses, which are affected by economic cycles and the price of commodity raw materials, since the sale late last year of its worldwide styrenics plastics business.
In recent months, it has been the strength of Monsanto's agricultural business that has propelled the stock upward.
Spinning off the chemical businesses as a separate company was the option that most analysts favoured, since it would not have the tax implication of an outright sale.
"I would say the chances of keeping it (chemicals) and restructuring it are pretty slim," Dain Bosworth analyst Bonnie Wittenburg said.
The chemical businesses that may be sold or spun off include nylon and acrylic fibers, Saflex plastic interlayer, which is sold to glass manufacturers, and speciality chemicals.
"The chemical operations ... would be very viable as a standalone company," said NatWest analyst Andrew Cash.
Cash said Monsanto's acrylic fiber, nylon and Saflex businesses have limited competition in the United States and very favourable cost structures.
"It would be a focused company with good technology ... and a lot of interest in the assets from a stock market perspective, if they choose to spin it off," Cash said.
However, agricultural chemicals would remain as one of the crown jewels of the life sciences division.
Monsanto's popular Roundup weed killer is key to Monsanto's agricultural biotechnology business. The company has developed crops that are genetically altered to resist Roundup.
The life science operations also would include food additives and Monsanto's G.D. Searle pharmaceutical division. In a recent report, NatWest said it expected Monsanto to keep Searle, which some analysts previously thought would be sold.
In 1995 Monsanto's chemical sales of $3.69 billion accounted for about 40 percent of the company's total sales of $8.96 billion. The chemical businesses' operating profit of $357 million was 30 percent of the total profit of $1.17 billion.
In contrast, agricultural profit of $523 million accounted for nearly 45 percent of the total.
Shedding its chemical businesses would leave Monsanto Co as a pure play in the high-growth life sciences area with attractive agricultural biotechnology and pharmaceutical holdings.
"This entity is likely to (have) a higher valuation by itself than with the chemical businesses intact," NatWest Securities analyst Mark Wiltamuth said Thursday.
"The key here is that the chemical business does not have the growth potential as the ag biotech and the ag chemical and the drug component could," he added.  
Earlier, Monsanto said it might spin off its chemical businesses, sell or merge them with other companies, or keep and restructure the operations.
The news sent the stock up 1-3/8 at 42 at mid-day, after setting a new 52-week high of 42-3/4.
"It has become increasingly clear, especially over the last couple of years, that the directions and the needs of the life sciences businesses and the chemical businesses were quite different," Nicholas Filippello, Monsanto chief economist, said in a telephone interview. "We feel that we are doing this from a position of strength."  
Analysts said the St. Louis-based company had been expected to shed its chemical businesses since the sale late last year of its worldwide stryrenics plastics business.
"I would say the chances of keeping it (chemicals) and restructuring it are pretty slim," said Dain Bosworth analyst Bonnie Wittenburg.
The chemical businesses that may be sold or spun off include nylon and acrylic fibers, Saflex plastic interlayer that is sold to glass manufacturers, and specialty chemicals.
"The chemical operations...would be very viable as a stand alone company," NatWest analyst Andrew Cash said.  
Cash said Monsanto's acrylic fiber, nylon and Saflex businesses have limited competition in the United States and very favorable cost structures.
"It would be a focused (chemical) company with good technology...and a lot of interest in the assets from a stock market perspective if they choose to spin it off," Cash added.
Agricultural chemicals would remain as one of the crown jewels of the life sciences division, analysts said.
Agricultural chemicals, including Roundup herbicide, is key to Monsanto's agricultural biotechnology. The company has developed crops that are genetically altered to resist the use of Roundup in the fields to kill weeds.
The life science operations also would include food additives and the G.D. Searle pharmaceutical division. In a recent report, NatWest said it expected Monsanto to keep Searle, which some analysts previously thought would be sold.
While Monsanto is expected to spin off or sell its chemical operations, rather than keep and restructure them, Filippello said all options are being studied. He added that a decision is expected soon, but did not give a timeframe.
"As soon as is practical," he added.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
Archer Daniels Midland Co. Monday said it agreed to plead guilty to two counts of federal charges of price fixing in the sale of agricultural products and to pay record fines totalling $100 million.
Under the agreement, which is subject to court approval, ADM will pay $70 million to settle a charge of fixing prices for lysine, a feed additive for livestock, and $30 million in connection with citric acid, a food and beverage additive.
While the $100 million in fines were the largest ever in a criminal antitrust action, they will have only a minimal financial impact on the Decatur, Ill.-based agricultural products giant.
"This is not going to affect their balance sheet in any meaningful way," said NatWest Securities analyst David Nelson.
ADM has about $1.3 billion in cash and short-term securities on hand and another $1.1 billion in long-term securities it could sell if it needed to, analysts said.
But the settlement left unclear the fate of two top ADM executives who had been expected to face indictments in the government's four-year investigation of price-fixing for the food additives.
In a statement, ADM did not mention Vice Chairman Michael Andreas or Terrance Wilson, a group vice president in charge of corn refining. The additives are derived from corn.
ADM had said in a proxy statement that indictments in the lysine probe were being considered against Wilson and Andreas, the son of ADM Chairman Dwayne Andreas.
"That's intriguing, that there is no mention (of) the individuals," said antitrust attorney Joe Sims, a partner in the Washington office of Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue who is not involved in the ADM antitrust case.
Sims called the wording of ADM's statement "ambiguous."
A government source said the Justice Department's antitrust investigation was "ongoing." Department officials declined to comment.
ADM did not return a phone call requesting comment on the status of possible indictments against the executives.
In its statement, ADM said the agreement brought an end to the government probe into "alleged misconduct" by the company, including its practices in the market for high-fructose corn syrup, a widely used sweetener that is one of ADM's most important products.
Analysts said the high-fructose corn syrup case could have been the biggest potential liabilty for ADM, given the size of that market. ADM previously settled civil cases brought by its customers and agreed to pay $25 million in the lysine case and $35 million to buyers of its citric acid.
A civil case brought by high-fructose corn syrup customers is pending.
"The important news here is just that the criminal investigation is behind them," said Bonnie Wittenburg, an analyst at Dain Bosworth, a Minneapolis-based brokerage.
Investors reacted positively to the settlement and sent ADM shares up 75 cents to $21.375 on the New York Stock Exchange, a 52-week high.
The federal probe of alleged price-fixing in the food and feed additive markets was first disclosed by ADM in June 1995. At that time, ADM said it was subpoenaed for documents and testimony as part of a probe of the lysine, citric acid and high-fructose corn syrup markets.
A former ADM executive, Mark Whitacre, acted as a government informant for about three years in the investigation. Whitacre, who was president of ADM's BioProducts Division, was fired in August 1995 when the company accused him of stealing $9.5 million.
Whitacre has denied those charges and has said he plans to file a wrongful dismissal lawsuit against ADM.
ADM said the plea agreement resulted from negotiations between Justice Department officials and a special committee of seven independent board members.
ADM said the special committee was created in 1995 to respond to the department's investigation into ADM's alleged anti-competitive activity and related civil litigation.
Analysts also said the fate of Michael Andreas was not expected to impact the succession at ADM. "That issue was settled a long time ago. Mick is not a successor," said George Dahlman at Piper Jaffray, a Minneapolis-based brokerage, referring to Michael Andreas.
In an interview in January, Dwayne Andreas said he believed there were eight people who might succeed him some day, including his son. But he said at the time there was no succession plan at the company. ADM's proxy statement lists Dwayne Andreas' age at 78.
Archer Daniels Midland Co's $100 million agreement with the U.S. Justice Department will likely have minimal financial impact on the agribusiness giant, which has about $1.3 billion on hand.
"This is not going to affect their balance sheet in any meaningful way," said NatWest Securities analyst David Nelson.
But the settlement leaves unclear for the moment the fate of two top ADM executives, who had been expected to face indictments in a nearly four-year antitrust investigation into lysine, citric acid and high fructose corn syrup.  
ADM had said in a proxy statement in advance of its October 17 annual meeeting that indictments in the lysine probe were being considered against the company, Michael Andreas, vice chairman, and Terrance Wilson, a group vice president in charge of corn refining.
A government source, however, said the investigation is "ongoing."
ADM did not return a phone call requesting comment on the status of possible indictments against the executives. The Justice Department declined comment.  
"That's intriguing, that there is no mention (of) the individuals," said antitrust attorney Joe Sims, a partner in the Washington office of Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue. Sims is not involved in the ADM antitrust case.
While the $100 million in fines is a record for Justice in an antitrust case, analysts said ADM has an estimated $1.3 billion in cash, cash equivalents and short-term and marketable securities. The company has another $1.1 billion in long-term marketable securities.
ADM agreed to pay $70 million to settle antitrust charges for lysine and $30 million for citric acid.  
Beyond those two products, the settlement also puts an end to Justice's antitrust probe of high fructose corn syrup, a widely used sweetener. ADM did not pay any fines for this product, which posed the largest potential liability given the size of that market.
Previously, ADM settled civil cases brought by its customers and agreed to pay $25 million for lysine, a feed additive, and $35 million for citric acid, which is used in food and beverages.
A civil case brought by a class of high fructose corn syrup customers is pending.  
"The important news here is just that the criminal investigation is behind them," Dain Bosworth analyst Bonnie Wittenburg said.
The fate of Michael Andreas, son of Chairman Dwayne Andreas, is not expected to impact succession at the Decatur, Ill.-based company.
Piper Jaffray analyst George Dahlman said analysts have ruled Michael Andreas out for the chairman's post since he has been expected to face price-fixing charges.
In an interview in January, however, Dwayne Andreas said he believed there were eight people who could possibly succeed him some day, including his son. He said at the time there was no current succession plan at ADM.
The stock market reacted positively to the settlement, sending ADM's stock up 3/4 to a new 52-week high of 21-3/8. ADM's stock has also been bolstered in recent weeks by lower corn prices that have improved its grain-processing margins.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
Archer Daniels Midland Co. Monday said it agreed to plead guilty to two counts of federal charges of price fixing in the sale of agricultural products and to pay record fines totaling $100 million.
Under the agreement, which is subject to court approval, ADM will pay $70 million to settle a charge of fixing prices for lysine, a feed additive for livestock, and $30 million in connection with citric acid, a food and beverage additive.
While the $100 million in fines were the largest ever in a criminal antitrust action, they will have only a minimal financial impact on the Decatur, Ill.-based agricultural products giant.
"This is not going to affect their balance sheet in any meaningful way," said NatWest Securities analyst David Nelson.
ADM has about $1.3 billion in cash and short-term securities on hand and another $1.1 billion in long-term securities it could sell if it needed to, analysts said.
But the settlement left unclear the fate of two top ADM executives who had been expected to face indictments in the government's four-year investigation of price-fixing for the food additives.
In a statement, ADM did not mention Vice Chairman Michael Andreas or Terrance Wilson, a group vice president in charge of corn refining. The additives are derived from corn.
ADM had said in a proxy statement that indictments in the lysine probe were being considered against Wilson and Andreas, the son of ADM Chairman Dwayne Andreas.
"That's intriguing, that there is no mention (of) the individuals," said antitrust attorney Joe Sims, a partner in the Washington office of Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue who is not involved in the ADM antitrust case.
Sims called the wording of ADM's statement "ambiguous."
A government source said the Justice Department's antitrust investigation was "ongoing." Department officials declined to comment.
ADM did not return a phone call requesting comment on the status of possible indictments against the executives.
In its statement, ADM said the agreement brought an end to the government probe into "alleged misconduct" by the company, including its practices in the market for high-fructose corn syrup, a widely used sweetener that is one of ADM's most important products.
Analysts said the high-fructose corn syrup case could have been the biggest potential liabilty for ADM, given the size of that market. ADM previously settled civil cases brought by its customers and agreed to pay $25 million in the lysine case and $35 million to buyers of its citric acid.
A civil case brought by high-fructose corn syrup customers is pending.
"The important news here is just that the criminal investigation is behind them," said Bonnie Wittenburg, an analyst at Dain Bosworth, a Minneapolis-based brokerage.
Investors reacted positively to the settlement and sent ADM shares up 75 cents to $21.375 on the New York Stock Exchange, a 52-week high.
The federal probe of alleged price-fixing in the food and feed additive markets was first disclosed by ADM in June 1995. At that time, ADM said it was subpoenaed for documents and testimony as part of a probe of the lysine, citric acid and high-fructose corn syrup markets.
A former ADM executive, Mark Whitacre, acted as a government informant for about three years in the investigation. Whitacre, who was president of ADM's BioProducts Division, was fired in August 1995 when the company accused him of stealing $9.5 million.
Whitacre has denied those charges and has said he plans to file a wrongful dismissal lawsuit against ADM.
ADM said the plea agreement resulted from negotiations between Justice Department officials and a special committee of seven independent board members.
ADM said the special committee was created in 1995 to respond to the department's investigation into ADM's alleged anti-competitive activity and related civil litigation.
Analysts also said the fate of Michael Andreas was not expected to impact the succession at ADM. "That issue was settled a long time ago. Mick is not a successor," said George Dahlman at Piper Jaffray, a Minneapolis-based brokerage, referring to Michael Andreas.
In an interview in January, Dwayne Andreas said he believed there were eight people who might succeed him some day, including his son. But he said at the time there was no succession plan at the company. ADM's proxy statement lists Dwayne Andreas' age at 78.
A federal judge Tuesday accepted Archer Daniels Midland Co.'s price-fixing guilty plea and ordered it pay $100 million in fines, but the action did not put an end to the scandal at the farm products giant.
Shortly before U.S. District Court Judge Ruben (corrects from Rueben) Castillo accepted ADM's guilty plea to two counts of price fixing, U.S. Justice Department officials in Washington said they were continuing their investigation of two company officials.A "This is not a good day for corporate America," Castillo said in accepting the company's guilty pleas and confirming separate fines of $70 million and $30 million -- by far the largest ever in a price-fixing case.
The judge said he recognised that some parties might criticise the fines as being too low, but said he believed they would serve as a deterrant to any company that is tempted to fix prices.
"No American company is above the law," Castillo said.
Under the plea agreement Castillo accepted, ADM will pay a $70 million fine for fixing prices of lysine, a feed additive, and $30 million for fixing prices on citric acid, an additive used in food, beverages and other products.
Earlier in Washington, Deputy Assistant Attorney General Gary Spratling said federal authorities were still gathering evidence in the case involving two ADM officials, Vice Chairman Michael Andreas, and Terrance Wilson, a vice president in charge of ADM's corn refining division.
Attorney General Janet Reno, who joined Spratling at a news conference, also said the settlement should send a message worldwide to corporations that if they engage in collusive behaviour that hurts U.S. consumers, "there will be vigorous investigation and tough, tough penalties."
U.S. Attorney James Burns of the Northern District of Illinois said that under the agreement, Archer Daniels officials are required to cooperate with the Justice Department in its ongoing investigation.
"You should stay tuned," said Burns. "There will be more to come."
The company, meanwhile, said its profits plunged in the latest quarter after it took a $174.4 million charge related to the fines and other litigation settlements arising from the lysine and citric acid cases.
ADM said its net income for the three months ended Sept. 30 fell to $3.6 million, or 1 cent a share, from $163.1 million, or 29 cents a share.
The company's stock was unchanged at $21.625 in late trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Archer Daniels Midland Co, which pleaded guilty to price fixing this week, will face tough criticism at its annual meeting Thursday from shareholders seeking to make ADM's board more independent.
"There needs to be dramatic reform at this company, at...both the board and the management level," said Edward Durkin, director of special programs at the United Brotherhood of Carpenters.
The carpenters union is among four institutional shareholders pressing for changes in ADM's board.  
Despite the settlement with the U.S. Justice Department, including the payment of $100 million in fines, corporate governance issues remain at ADM, according to Jon Lukomnik, New York City deputy controller for pensions.
"I think people are looking at this (the Justice settlement) as if it's the last scene in a five-act play. It is not," Lukomnik said.
Going forward, Lukomnik said he is looking for ADM to, over time, enact steps to make its board more independent and to set a succession plan for the eventual retirement of Chairman Dwayne Andreas, aged 78.  
The chairman's son, Vice Chairman Michael Andreas, is among two executives still being investigated by the Justice Department as the price-fixing probe continues. Also being investigated is ADM Group Vice President Terrance Wilson.
"Dwayne Andreas is not young. A person they were grooming to be a successor is the target of an investigation," Lukomnik said, referring to Michael Andreas, who had been seen in the past as a possible successor to the chairman's post.
A shareholder proposal calling for a more independent board at ADM is garnering a significant number of votes.  
The California Public Employees Retirement System (CalPERS) said earlier a survey of votes cast thus far indicated that 47 percent are in favor of that measure.
CalPERS co-sponsored the proposal with the Florida Retirement System Trust Fund.
"Our primary focus is the proposal," Brad Pacheco, a spokesman for CalPERS, said. "But i think we also need to see some increased oversight (of management by the board)."
Other proposals include a measure by the carpenters to hold directors personally liable for gross negligence. The New York City Fire Department Pension Fund proposed confidential voting for directors when there is no competing proxy.
At last year's annual meeting, Chairman Dwayne Andreas kept a lid on shareholder comments. When Durkin of the carpenters union tried to gain the floor, he was told by the chairman, "This meeting runs according to my rules."
Durkin, who will attend this year's annual meeting, said he was hopeful shareholders would be able to voice their concerns this year.
He added the company had sent him a fax outlining the agenda, when issues will be raised and how much time will be allotted for comments. "There needs to be some basic rights allowed to the (share) owners," Durkin said.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
Archer Daniels Midland Co., which pleaded guilty to price fixing this week, will face tough criticism at its October 17 annual meeting from shareholders seeking to make ADM's board more independent.
"There needs to be dramatic reform at this company, at...both the board and the management level," said Edward Durkin, director of special programmes at the United Brotherhood of Carpenters.
The carpenters union is among four institutional shareholders pressing for changes in ADM's board.
Despite the settlement with the U.S. Justice Department, including the payment of $100 million in fines, corporate governance issues remain at ADM, according to Jon Lukomnik, New York City deputy controller for pensions.
"I think people are looking at this (the Justice settlement) as if it's the last scene in a five-act play. It is not," Lukomnik said.
Going forward, Lukomnik said he is looking for ADM to, over time, enact steps to make its board more independent and to set a succession plan for the eventual retirement of Chairman Dwayne Andreas, aged 78.
The chairman's son, Vice Chairman Michael Andreas, is among two executives still being investigated by the Justice Department as the price-fixing probe continues. Also being investigated is ADM Group Vice President Terrance Wilson.
"Dwayne Andreas is not young. A person they were grooming to be a successor is the target of an investigation," Lukomnik said, referring to Michael Andreas, who had been seen in the past as a possible successor to the chairman's post.
As previously reported, a shareholder proposal calling for a more independent board at ADM is garnering a significant number of votes.
The California Public Employees Retirement System (CalPERS) said earlier a survey of votes cast thus far indicated that 47 percent are in favour of that measure.
CalPERS co-sponsored the proposal with the Florida Retirement System Trust Fund.
"Our primary focus is the proposal," Brad Pacheco, a spokesman for CalPERS said. "But i think we also need to see some increased oversight (of management by the board)."
Other proposals include a measure by the carpenters to hold directors personally liable for gross negligence. The New York City Fire Department Pension Fund proposed that shareholders' votes for directors remain confidential when there is no competing proxy.
At last year's annual meeting, Chairman Dwayne Andreas kept a lid on shareholder comments. When Durkin of the carpenters union tried to gain the floor, he was told by the chairman, "This meeting runs according to my rules."
Durkin, who will attend this year's annual meeting, said he was hopeful shareholders would be able to voice their concerns this year.
He added the company had sent him a fax outlining the agenda, when issues will be raised and how much time will be allotted for comments. "There needs to be some basic rights allowed to the (share) owners," Durkin said.
The Justice Department said its price-fixing investigation continues. ADM has agreed to cooperate with probes involving citric acid as well as high fructose corn syrup.
Hoffman-La Roche Inc, the Nutley, N.J. unit of Roche Holding Ltd of Switzerland, said it has been cooperating with the Justice investigation of citric acid, which is used in food, beverages and other products.
A.E. Staley, a unit of Tate and Lyle Plc of the United Kingdom, said it is not a target in the high fructose corn syrup probe and is cooperating with that investigation.
Just days after pleading guilty to price fixing and agreeing to pay $100 million in fines, Archer Daniels Midland Co. lost two key executives Thursday, as the giant agricultural products company remained dogged by controversy.
ADM said Michael Andreas, vice chairman and son of influential Chairman Dwayne Andreas, took a temporary leave, and Terrance Wilson, a vice president in charge of corn refining, retired for medical reasons relating to progressive heart disease.
Michael Andreas and Wilson are being investigated by the Justice Department in connection with a price-fixing scheme.
The Decatur, Ill.-based company, which advertises itself as "Supermarket to the World," has said previously that indictments were being considered against Wilson and Michael Andreas.
On Tuesday, ADM pleaded guilty to two counts of pricing-fixing and agreed to pay $100 million in fines to the federal government, the largest penalty ever in a criminal antritust case.
That day, Deputy Assistant Attorney General Gary Spratling said federal authorities were still gathering evidence in the case involving Wilson and Michael Andreas.
William Leach, an analyst with Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, said some had expected Wilson and Michael Andreas to step down. "I'd say it's hardly unexpected given the circumstances," he said.
The announcement that Michael Andreas was taking leave and Wilson had retired came after the company's shareholder meeting Thursday at its central Illinois headquarters here. No mention of the investigation of the two executives was made by the company during the meeting.
Dwayne Andreas, like other ADM officials who spoke at the meeting, used mostly euphemisms when referring to ADM's guilty pleas to two counts of pricing-fixing and an agreement to pay $100 million in fines to the U.S. government.
"I acknowledge to you that this occurred on my watch as chairman of your company," Dwayne Andreas told shareholders at the annual meeting here. "You have my apology and my commitment that things are arranged so that this will never happen again."
One of the few direct mentions of the antitrust investigation came in response to a question from Ed Durkin of the United Brotherhood of Carpenters, an institutional shareholder.
Durkin asked why ADM had not notified shareholders officially of its guilty pleas to two counts of price fixing and the $100 million plea. Richard Reising, corporate secretary and general counsel, said the company did not consider it necessary given the amount of publicity the antitrust settlement received.
ADM board member Brian Mulroney, former Prime Minister of Canada, told shareholders the "consensual resolution" with the Justice Department was reached after negotiations with the board's special committee of independent directors.
"This has been a terribly unfortunate experience for the company and we as a committee deeply deplore it," Mulroney said."It is our intention to ensure that the company learns from mistakes in the past and acts so that they never happen again," Mulroney said.
A proposal requiring the board be composed of a majority of independent directors was defeated, but received 42 percent of the votes cast.
Other shareholder proposals addressing corporate governance issues did not pass. ADM's slate of 12 directors was approved by about 89 percent of the votes cast, the company announced.
The new board, which was reduced in number from 17, was hailed by ADM as a more independent body since Dwayne Andreas is the only company executive remaining on the board.
The antitrust investigation sparked criticism from some large shareholders who questioned the independence of ADM's board of directors and its ability to oversee management.
In a statement released following the meeting, Charles Valdes, chairman of the the California Public Employees Retirement System (Calpers), said "Calpers will continue to meet with directors and pursue the wishes of shareholders that want a majority of independent directors and increased oversight of the ADM board."
Archer Daniels Midland Co.'s Chairman Dwayne Andreas apologised to shareholders Thursday for the "difficult situations" that the company faced over the past year.
Andreas, like other ADM officials who spoke at the meeting, used mostly euphemisms when referring to ADM's guilty pleas to two counts of pricing-fixing and an agreement to pay $100 million in fines to the U.S. government.
"I acknowledge to you that this occurred on my watch as chairman of your company," Andreas told shareholders at the annual meeting here. "You have my apology and my commitment that things are arranged so that this will never happen again."
A proposal requiring the board be composed of a majority of independent directors was defeated, but received 42 percent of the votes cast.
Other shareholder proposals addressing corporate governance issues did not pass. ADM's slate of 12 directors was approved by about 89 percent of the votes cast, the company announced.
The new board, which was reduced in number from 17, was hailed by ADM as a more independent body since Andreas is the only company executive remaining on the board.
William Bell of the Florida Retirement System Trust Fund said he hoped the 42 percent of the votes cast in favour of the outside director measure would send a signal to ADM about shareholder concerns regarding the independence of the board.
"I think it's a positive number," Bell told reporters after the meeting. The Florida trust fund and the California Public Employees Retirement System (Calpers) co-sponsored the independent board proposal.
In a statement released following the meeting, Charles Valdes, chairman of the Calpers, said "Calpers will continue to meet with directors and pursue the wishes of shareholders that want a majority of indpependent directors and increased oversight of the ADM board."
During the meeting, no mention was made of a pending U.S. Department of Justice investigation of Michael Andreas, vice chairman and son of Dwayne Andreas, and Terrance Wilson, a group vice president in charge of corn refining.
These two executives are eligible for stock options under an incentive plan that was approved by stockholders Thursday, the company said in response to a question.
The antitrust investigation sparked criticism from some large shareholders who questioned the independence of ADM's board of directors and its ability to oversee management.
One of the few direct mentions of the antitrust investigation came in response to a question from Ed Durkin of the United Brotherhood of Carpenters, an institutional shareholder.
Durkin asked why ADM had not notified shareholders officially of its guilty pleas to two counts of price fixing and the $100 million plea. Richard Reising, corporate secretary and general counsel, said the company did not consider it necessary given the amount of publicity the antitrust settlement received.
ADM board member Brian Mulroney, former Prime Minister of Canada, told shareholders the "consensual resolution" with the Justice Department was reached after negotiations with the board's special committee of independent directors.
"This has been a terribly unfortunate experience for the company and we as a committee deeply deplore it," Mulroney said.
"It is our intention to ensure that the company learns from mistakes in the past and acts so that they never happen again," Mulroney said.
He referred to the investigation of ADM as a "shadow" that was cast on the future of the company.
"While some matters still await resolution, I am pleased to tell you today that we have begun to cast off that shadow and move the company forward into the future...," Mulroney said.
At Archer Daniels Midland Co.'s annual meeting last year, Chairman Dwayne Andreas declined to give shareholders the floor, saying, "This meeting runs according to my rules."
This year, however, shareholders are pressing for different rules.
Four institutional shareholders will have the floor at Thursday's meeting here to present proposals dealing with corporate governance -- or how the board of directors oversees corporate management at ADM, which on Tuesday pleaded guilty to two counts of price fixing and agreed to pay $100 million in fines, by far the highest penalty ever for violating antitrust laws in the United States.
In its guilty plea, the company admitted it fixed prices for lysine, a feed additive, and citric acid, widely used in foods, beverages and other products.
The shareholder vote at this year's meeting is expected to be close for one proposal that calls for ADM's board to be composed of a majority of independent directors with no personal or business connections with the company.
A survey of early votes showed that about 47 percent were in favour of the measure, the California Public Employees Retirement System (Calpers) said on Wednesday. Calpers, the nation's largest public retirement system, known for its shareholder activism, co-sponsored the proposal with the Florida Retirement System Trust Fund.
"This proposal is prompted by our belief that the employment, business and family relationships of any corporate director has the potential to raise conflicts of interest that may limit the vigilance and diligence of the board," the co-sponsors said in a supporting statement contained in ADM's proxy materials for the meeting.
The independence of ADM's board has been an issue since it was disclosed in late June 1995 that the company was the target of a federal price-fixing investigation. Despite the settlement with the Justice Department, some major shareholders continue to voice concern about the board's ability to oversee ADM's management.
Of particular concern to some is that the department continues to investigate two top ADM executives -- Vice Chairman Michael Andreas, the son of Chairman Dwayne Andreas, and Terrance Wilson, group vice president in charge of corn refining. Lysine, citric acid and other ADM products are refined from corn.
"There needs to be dramatic reform at this company, at both the board and the management level," said Edward Durkin, director of special programmes at the United Brotherhood of Carpenters union, which is sponsoring a proposal this year to hold directors personally liable in cases of gross negligence.
In addition, the New York City Fire Department Pension Fund has proposed that confidential ballotting be allowed in shareholder votes, except in cases where there is a contested board election.
Since last year's meeting, ADM has agreed to cut its 17-member board down to 12 members. All current company executives have left the board, with the exception of Dwayne Andreas.
Some institutional shareholders have questioned the independence of ADM's nominees as outside directors. One nominee, Mollie Hale Carter, is the daughter of H.D. Hale, a former board member who retired from ADM this year. Other nominees include former Secretary of Agriculture John Block and former Ambassador Richard Burt.
At last year's meeting, which was punctuated with rounds of applause for ADM executives, the board defended its independence. Brian Mulroney, a board member and former prime minister of Canada, said at the time that ADM's independent directors "are fully independent and have the utmost integrity."
McDonald's Corp said its new restaurant openings for 1996 and 1997 likely will be at the low-end of its targeted range of 2,500 to 3,200 units.
"We will hit the low end of our projected range (with) 2,500-plus restaurants (in 1996)," McDonald's spokesman Chuck Ebeling told Reuters. "We're just doing our planning for next year, but we expect to do 2,500 plus next year."
This would be the first time in at least three years that McDonald's failed to beat its expansion projections, as it cuts back on limited menu -- or satellite -- units.  
In 1995, McDonald's opened 2,430 units, beating the projection for that year of 2,300. In 1994, it opened 1,800 units, beating the projection of about 1,400 to 1,700.
McDonald's has nearly 20,000 restaurants worldwide.
"We've been ratcheting up the level of development every year since around 1991," Ebeling said.
Ebeling said McDonald's this year plans to open about "600-plus" satellite units worldwide, down from its original plan of 700 to 1,000 satellites. The biggest decline will be seen in the United States.  
"We recognize we need higher volume restaurants to meet the kind of profitability that we'd like for ourselves and our franchisees," Ebeling said.
Merrill Lynch analyst Peter Oakes said the profitability of some satellite units, which are often built in non-traditional sites such as shopping malls, has been uncertain. "In the big picture, the financial performance of satellites appears to be spotty," Oakes said.
Ebeling said U.S. satellite units will account for about one-third of the total for these smaller sites, down from 60 percent as originally planned.  
Overall, Ebeling said about one-third of McDonald's restaurant openings will still be in the United States.
Bear, Stearns analyst Joseph Buckley added he would not be surprised to see McDonald's shift its restaurant opening strategy to further emphasize the international market.
McDonald's said operating income outside the United States contributed 59 percent to consolidated income for the quarter.
Earlier, McDonald's reported third quarter income of $0.62 a share, $0.01 below the consensus estimate, but above the $0.56 it earned last year.
McDonald's said its U.S. operating income was down five percent in the quarter, which it blamed partly on an intensely competitive operating environment.
Same-store sales in the United States, measuring results for units open for at least one year, were negative in the third quarter and for the first nine months of the year.
But U.S sales may be picking up, Oakes added.
"I think (U.S. same-store sales) are starting to hit bottom," Oakes said. "Thus far in October, it (seems) like they have picked up and are in the flattish range."
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
McDonald's Corp. on Friday reported a 10 percent rise in net income, despite a weak U.S. operating environment that was offset by growth overseas.
The fast-food giant, which has nearly 20,000 restaurants worldwide, said net income rose to $440 million from $400 million. Earnings per share gained 11 percent, with fewer shares outstanding, to 62 cents a share from 56 cents.
Earnings for the quarter, however, were about 1 cent below what analysts had expected.
McDonald's, based in Oak Brook, Ill., said operating earnings in the United States fell five percent in the third quarter while company revenues rose only one percent.
"Our U.S. restaurants are operating in a complex, dynamic and difficult marketplace and recent operating performance has fallen short of our goals," Chairman Michael Quinlan said in a statement.
McDonald's said U.S. same store sales -- measuring results for units open at least one year -- were negative for both the third quarter and nine-month period.
But U.S. sales may be picking up, said Merrill Lynch analyst Peter Oakes. "I think (U.S. same store sales) are starting to hit bottom," Oakes said. "Thus far in October, it (seems) like they have picked up and are in the flattish range."
McDonald's recently reorganized its management to address disappointing results in the United States.
Outside the United States, McDonald's operating earnings grew 11 percent in the quarter as revenue jumped 13 percent.
It said growth in earnings was strongest in Hong Kong, England, Italy, Spain, Sweden and Taiwan. Results in Mexico remained weak due to the sluggish economy, it said.
While McDonald's continues to expand its global reach, the company said its new restaurant openings for 1996 and 1997 likely will be at the low-end of its targeted range of 2,500 to 3,200 units.
"We will hit the low end of our projected range (with) 2,500-plus restaurants (in 1996)," McDonald's spokesman Chuck Ebeling said. "We're just doing our planning for next year, but we expect to do 2,500 plus next year."
This would be the first time in at least three years that McDonald's failed to meet its expansion projections, as it cuts back on limited menu, or satellite, units.
In 1995, McDonald's opened 2,430 units, beating the projection for that year of 2,300. In 1994, it opened 1,800 units, beating the projection of about 1,400 to 1,700.
McDonald's has nearly 20,000 restaurants worldwide.
"We've been ratcheting up the level of development every year since around 1991," Ebeling said.
Ebeling said McDonald's this year plans to open about "600-plus" satellite units worldwide, down from its original plan of 700 to 1,000 satellites. The biggest decline will be seen in the United States.
"We recognise we need higher volume restaurants to meet the kind of profitability that we'd like for ourselves and our franchisees," Ebeling said.
Merrill Lynch analyst Peter Oakes said the profitability of some satellite units, which are often built in non-traditional sites such as shopping malls, has been uncertain. "In the big picture, the financial performance of satellites appears to be spotty," Oakes said.
Ebeling said U.S. satellite units will acount for about one-third of the total for these smaller sites, compared with 60 percent as originally planned.
Overall, Ebeling said about one-third of McDonald's total restaurant openings will still be in the United States.
Monsanto Co, which exceeded analysts' expectations for its third quarter, warned analysts not to increase earnings estimates for the full year, according to Nicholas Filippello, chief economist.
"I warned them (analysts) not to increase expectations for the full year," Filippello said, adding the First Call mean of analysts' estimates is $1.48 a share, compared with $1.25 a year ago.
"We're urging people not to increase the number," he added.  
Earlier, Monsanto reported third quarter earnings of $0.28 a share, up from $0.23 a year ago and above the First Call mean of $0.24.
Filippello said certain factors, including the timing of bulk aspartame sweetener shipments and an adjustment in the full-year tax rate, contributed to third quarter earnings exceeding First Call expectations.
Looking ahead, Filippello said Monsanto continues to weigh options for its chemical business, as reported earlier this month.  One possibility is to spin the chemicals operation off as a separate publicly traded company.  
Or chemicals could be spun off and then merged with another company, Filippello added. The "spin-off/merger option," he said, would be preferrable from a tax standpoint from an outright sale of the chemical operations.
But he said it was too early to speculate which options was likely to take place.  "I think it's too early to speculate," Filippello said.
If Monsanto shed its chemical operations, it would be left with a life sciences business consisting of agricultural products, pharmaceuticals and food ingredients.  
Filippello said Monsanto is considering ways to make food ingredients "an important part of this life sciences company." But it remains to be seen how much growth in food ingredients would be accomplished internally or if the company would undertake licensing, partnerships and possible acquisitions, he added.
The life sciences business would include the G.D. Searle pharmaceutical company, which analysts in the past had expected Monsanto to sell.
"There is no interest at this point in selling Searle," Filippello said. "Searle clearly is an appreciating asset at this point...Our expectation at this time is that value is going to continue increase over time."
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
Quaker Oats Co. said Thursday its profits more than doubled in the latest quarter despite a drop in sales due to lower prices for breakfast cereals and heavy spending on its struggling Snapple beverage line.
Concerns over Snapple, which Quaker bought nearly two years ago for $1.7 billion, sent the company's stock down $1.75 to $34.625 on the New York Stock Exchange.
"The stock is declining because they didn't announce any restructuring in Snapple, and some people had speculated they would," said William Leach, analyst at Donaldson, Lufkin and Jenrette.
Overall, Quaker Oats reported net income for the third quarter of $133 million, or 98 cents a share, up from $61.5 million, or 45 cents per share, last year. The latest's quarter's results, however, included a $133.6 million pretax gain on the sale of its frozen foods business and $23 million in pretax restructuring charges.
Excluding these factors, Quaker's third quarter net income was 53 cents a share, which was well above Wall Street estimates of 46 cents a share, according to First Call, which tracks analysts' estimates.
Chairman William William Smithburg said Snapple was expected to report an operating loss for 1996.
"Clearly, the biggest challenge facing the company is Snapple's disappointing performance," Smithburg said. "The integrated sampling and advertising campaign that ended in mid-September generated some excitement behind the brand this summer, but we're still disappointed."
While he declined to give a specific projection, he said the 1996 operating loss for Snapple likely will be narrower than the loss it reported in 1995, although the business will not generate a profit.
Excluding goodwill and other charges, Snapple's loss for 1995 was about $6 million, according to analysts' estimates.
Smithburg said Quaker executives believe Snapple can show a cash profit, which is the goal for next year. He added that results for Snapple could improve next year, even if sales volume were flat.
Quaker said several alternatives were being considered for Snapple. Those options include making Snapple into a regional brand or perhaps selling the beverage operations.
The company said its overall third-quarter sales slipped to $1.44 billion from last year's $1.55 billion, which included $72.3 million in sales from divested businesses.
Total beverage sales fell 11 percent to $593.4 million, while beverage operating income dropped 43 percent to $34.0 million. In the United States and Canada, beverage income was $57.5 million, excluding a $16.6 million restructuring charge, down 15 percent from last year.
Quaker said Gatorade sports drink, the company's single best-selling brand, had a 20 percent rise in operating profit in North America.
Despite an unseasonably cool summer, which hurt sales of the drink, Gatorade is having another good year, Smithburg said in a teleconference.
U.S. sales of Gatorade will hit about $1 billion by the end of October, compared with sales of just over $1 billion for all 1995. That is "kind of an important milestone for us," Smithburg said.
Quaker said U.S. and Canadian foods' operating income of $92.6 million, excluding a $6.4 million restructuring charge, was up 7 percent from last year. These profits rose in spite of price decreases in ready-to-eat cereals.
Smithburg said Quaker's ready-to-eat cereals, such as Life and Cap'n Crunch, had a 14 percent rise in volume in the third quarter. Value-priced bagged cereals, which carry the Quaker name, are growing at more than 20 pecent.
The company said North American foods sales increased 2 percent to $687.3 million. International foods sales rose 9 percent to $152.9 million, with increases in Latin America, Europe and the Pacific. International foods operating income was $2.8 million, down from $3.7 million.
McDonnell Douglas Corp. Friday announced the sudden resignation of the head of its aerospace business, Herbert Lanese, sparking speculation that disagreements over cost-cutting tactics might have hastened his departure.
Lanese, who joined the aircraft and aerospace firm in 1989 as senior vice president of finance, left the firm in an apparent disagreement with President Harry Stonecipher.
"Although Herb and I were in total agreeemtn regarding business objectives and strategy, we had sharp differences involving management and leadership styles," Stonecipher said in a statement. "After two years of working together, it became obvious to me that these differences could not be reconciled."
Merrill Lynch analyst Byron Callan called Lanese's departure "a bolt out of the blue."
"Herb had been tasked with reducing costs at McDonnell Douglas at the military aircraft business," Callan said. "It may well have been (a dispute over) how do you go about doing that."
Lanese, who became president of McDonnell Douglas Aerospace in March, 1996, after serving as deputy president since July 1995, had a difficult job from the start, analysts said. His focus on cost-cutting meant he had to tackle the thorny issue of reducing employment.
"When well over 50 percent of your costs are people, cost-cutting is a euphemism for cutting people," PaineWebber analyst John Modzelewski said. "It's the hardest thing that you can do."
Job security became the crux of labor troubles at McDonnell Douglas, with a strike by the International Association of Machinists that lasted from June 5 until Sept. 11 of this year.
Cost-cutting is "where his (Lanese's) expertise lay with the company," said Mike Schoen, assistant director of business at District 837 of the Machinists union. "And we weren't ready to be cut corners on."
Slashing costs and raising capital, however, were hallmarks of Lanese's career when he was chief financial officer of McDonnell Douglas. Analysts credited him with a financial turnaround, which included raising cash and slashing debt, that led to record earnings.
"Singlehandedly, he was the person that I think was majorly responsible for the change in McDonnell Douglas," Modzelewski said.
Nalco Chemical Co Chairman Ted Mooney said he is comfortable with analysts' estimates for fourth quarter earnings from continuing operations of $0.50 to $0.51 per fully diluted share, up from $0.45 from continuing operations a year ago.
"We're comfortable with that," Mooney said in a telephone interview.  
Looking ahead, the water treatment and process chemicals company expects to increase earnings by a double-digit rate.
"Our overall goal is to grow double-digit, and we certainly think we can do that many more years than not," Mooney said. "Next year, we don't see as atypical as yet."
Earlier this week, Nalco reported third quarter earnings of $0.52 per fully diluted share from continuing operations, up 16 percent from $0.45 a year ago.
To increase its business, which is roughly equally divided between water treatment and process chemicals, Nalco will continue to make strategic acquisitions, Mooney said.  
Earlier today, Nalco, based in Naperville, Ill., agreed to acquire Nutmeg Technologies Inc, a Connecticut-based water treatment company with $9 million in annual sales.
"They (Nutmeg) are operating in an area that is growing rapidly and also have some very fine people," Mooney said.
Technical personnel in the water treatment business are a key asset given the range of customers served, from manufacturers to hospitals. Nalco's technology treats both water intake as well as water that is discharged.
Nalco also provides process chemicals to a variety of industries, such as paper-making.  
Nalco is also split in half between the United States and foreign markets, currently operating in about 20 countries.
With a global presence, Nalco, with about $1.4 billion in annual sales, is able to pursue opportunities wherever they arise, Mooney said. One down side, however, is that such globalization also makes it suspectible to regional economic downturns.  
For example, Nalco's European division, which accounts for 25 percent of its foreign business, faces tough economic conditions there. And as a U.S. company, Nalco's European profits suffer when converted into a stronger U.S. dollar.
"We are growing in dollar terms, if at all, very slowly in Europe right now," Mooney said.
Balancing that weakness in Europe, Nalco is growing by about double-digits in the United States, which accounts for about half the business.  
Nalco's business in the Asia/Pacific market, which accounts for 12 to 13 percent of company revenue, currently is growing at 15 to 20 percent. In Latin America, which also accounts for 12 to 13 percent of Nalco's business, growth is running at 15 to 20 percent, Mooney said.
"Wherever in the world it is, we'll go after that opportunity," Mooney said.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
Kellogg Co. on Friday reported a drop of more than 30 percent in its third quarter profits as its cereal volume dropped in an intensely competitive market.
Kellogg, which makes Corn Flakes, Frosted Flakes, Rice Krispies, Fruit Loops and Special-K, is fighting back, launching marketing plans for the fourth quarter that are aimed at boosting its sales.
"We'll be taking what we believe are appropriate actions," Kellogg spokesman Richard Lovell said.
The company, the world's biggest maker of ready-to-eat breakfast cereals, said its net income for the third quarter fell to $159.5 million, including a $21.3 million charge, from $230 million a year ago. On a per share basis, Kellogg's earnings dropped 29 percent to 75 cents, with fewer shares outstanding, from $1.05 last year.
Kellogg said its overall sales slipped 9 percent to $1.68 billion from $1.84 billion as continued weak prices for breakfast cereals offset a 1 percent gain in worldwide sales volume.
"As previously forecast, our third quarter performance was influenced significantly by competitive conditions in the U.S. cereal category," Kellogg Chairman Arnold Langbo said in a statement.
Analysts estimate that Kellogg's domestic cereal sales volume fell 9 percent to 10 percent in the third quarter.
"We can't detail it. It was a challenging quarter in the U.S. and our volume was down," Lovell added.
Kellogg said its fourth quarter 1996 earnings likely will show a slight rise from the 77 cents it earned a year ago. First quarter 1997 earnings, however, may not match the 99 cents earned in the 1996 period.
"It's a challenging comparison," Lovell said.
Kellogg's stock fell on concern over U.S. cereal sales volume and the outlook for earnings, dropping $1 at $64.50 a share, on the New York Stock Exchange. Earlier, it set a new 52-week low of $64.125.
Kellogg said the U.S. cereal market overall was sluggish, with sales growing about 1.5 percent, measuring grocery stores, mass merchandisers and all other outlets.
Looking ahead, Kellogg refused to outline what promotional programmes it was planning for the fourth quarter.
Analysts said they did not expect the Battle Creek, Mich.-based cereal giant to return to deep-discount coupons or buy-one, get-one-free promotional giveaways.
"It's sort of left to speculation what they're going to do," SBC Warburg analyst Chris Jakubik said.
"There is no indication that, at this time, they have shifted from their long-term strategic goal, which is to reduce inefficient promotions," added BT Securities analyst John O'Neil.
Kellogg reduced prices on about two-thirds of its breakfast cereals in June. Other major manufacturers also cut prices this year as they battled for market share and tried to jump-start consumer purchases.
But those price cuts alone apparently were not enough to jump-start consumer purchases, according to Smith Barney analyst David Rabinowitz.
"The message there is that prices have to come down further," Rabinowitz said.
According to Information Resources data, U.S. ready-to-eat cereal sales in grocery stores fell 1.6 percent to 2.6 billion pounds for the 52 weeks ended Aug. 11, according to the most recent data available, compared with a year earlier.
Kellogg's sales volume declined in that period by 4.1 percent to 881.3 million pounds for a market share of about 34.4 percent, Information Resources said.
Facing declining U.S. cereal volumes in an intensely competitive market, Kellogg Co said it is launching promotional programs to boost its sales.
"We'll be taking what we believe are appropriate actions," Kellogg spokesman Richard Lovell said Friday.
Kellogg refused to outline what those programs might include. Analysts said they don't expect the cereal giant to return to deep-discount coupons or buy-one, get-one-free promotional giveaways.  
"It's sort of left to speculation what they're going to do," SBC Warburg analyst Chris Jakubik said.
"There is no indication that, at this time, they have shifted from their long-term strategic goal, which is to reduce inefficient promotions," added BT Securities analyst John O'Neil.
Whatever form the marketing actions take -- perhaps offering additional modest coupons in Sunday newspaper supplements or some form of price promotion -- the programs will be launched in the current fourth quarter.  
Kellogg, like other major cereal makers, cut cereal prices earlier this year in an effort to attract consumers back to the cereal aisle.
But those price cuts alone apparently were not enough to jump-start consumer purchases, according to Smith Barney analyst David Rabinowitz.
"The message there is that prices have to come down further," Rabinowitz added.
The drop in U.S. cereal sales contributed to a decline in third quarter operating earnings of $0.85 a share, before a $0.10 charge, compared with $1.05 last year.  
Kellogg's decision to launch promotions follows a decline in its third quarter U.S. cereal sales volume, which analysts estimate at nine to 10 percent.
"We can't detail it. It was a challenging quarter in the U.S. and our volume was down," Lovell said.
Kellogg's sales volume declined due to intense competition in the United States, as other producers continued coupons and other promotions in a sluggish cereal market. Kellogg said third quarter U.S. cereal industry sales grew 1.5 percent, measuring all retail outlets.
"As previously forecast, our third quarter performance was influenced significantly by competitive conditions in the U.S. cereal category," Arnold Langbo, chairman, said in the third-quarter earnings statement.
According to Information Resources data, U.S. ready-to-eat cereal sales in grocery stores only fell 1.6 percent to 2.6 billion pounds for the 52 weeks ended August 11, according to the most recent data available, compared with a year ago.
Kellogg's sales volume declined in that period by 4.1 percent to 881.3 million pounds for a market share of about 34.4 percent, Information Resources said.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
McDonnell Douglas Corp said Wednesday it was cooperating with a federal investigation into the sale of $5 million of used machine tools to China, which diverted the equipment to the site of a military plant.
"We're confident that the current investigation will show that McDonnell Douglas violated no laws in the sale of this surplus equipment to the Chinese," said Larry McCracken, vice president of corporate communications.
He said the machine tool sale was not directly linked to a 1994 agreement for 40 aircraft to be co-produced by the St. Louis-based aerospace company and its Chinese partner.  
McCracken said he did not know the focus of the federal investigation into the machine tools, which had been shipped to China between November 1994 and February 1995. But he acknowledged that there were allegations the Chinese had intended all along to divert the equipment for military use.
The sale to China of certain equipment, such as machine tools and presses, requires U.S. government approval and assurances that it will not be used for military purposes.
"We believe that we followed all the rules and regulations...," McCracken said.  
The problem with the machine tools focuses on when McDonnell Douglas learned that some equipment had been shipped to Nanchang, where China has a military plant, instead of being stored in Beijing, as stipulated by the U.S. export license.
McCracken said the company learned of the diversion in March 1995 when investigating the whereabouts of the shipment, and then notified the U.S. Government.  
Nanchang, where some of the equipment was found, was also the site of a Chinese commercial plant. McCracken said it is possible the Chinese could have misunderstood the regulations governing  all of the machine tools.
According to a report in the New York Times Wednesday, U.S. government officials say there was evidence that some company officials may or should have been aware before March 1995 that China would not house the equipment in Beijing.  
In response to that allegation, McCracken reiterated that McDonnell officials did not learn of the shipments to Nanchang until March 1995.
As for allegations that McDonnell Douglas officials should have known about the shipments, McCracken said the equipment was meant for a joint venture between China and another U.S. aerospace firm.
That joint venture was never established.
McCracken said negotiations followed between McDonnell Douglas, the Chinese government and U.S. officials, and the export license for the machine tools was amended in February 1996. Under the amended license, the equipment was shipped to Shanghai to be used to build commercial aircraft under the McDonnell Douglas co-production agreement.
Merrill Lynch analyst Byron Callan said he does not expect the investigation to have an impact on McDonnell Douglas's aircraft business.
"I don't think it's a big deal from a corporate point of view," Callan said.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
Archer Daniels Midland Co., which earlier this month pleaded guilty to two counts of price fixing, took steps Thursday to ease the reins out of the hands of its 78-year-old chairman, Dwayne Andreas.
ADM, which faced strong criticism from big shareholders at its annual meeting on Oct. 17, said it formed a four-member office of the chief executive, a post that has been held solely by Andreas.
"The fact that they (ADM) listed the ages is signalling something: They're setting this up as part of their succession plan and ... there is more to come," Dain Bosworth analyst Bonnie Wittenburg said.
ADM also named replacements for two other executives who left the company earlier this month and remain targets for possible criminal indictments in the federal probe -- Vice Chairman Michael Andreas, the son of Dwayne Andreas, and Terrance Wilson, who had been group vice president in charge of corn refining.
The giant agricultural products company said the newly formed office of the chief executive will consist of Dwayne Andreas, James Randall, president, age 72, Charles Bayless, 61, president of ADM's processing division, and G. Allen Andreas, 53, a nephew of Dwayne Andreas and counsel to the executive committee of the board of directors.
Jon Lukomnik, New York City's deputy controller for pensions, which hold about 3.4 million ADM shares, applauded the executive realignment as a means to address succession. But he said more changes were needed within ADM's top ranks.
"There remains another issue, which is corporate culture," said Lukomnik.
New York City pension funds have been among several institutional shareholders pressing for changes in ADM's board and management in the wake of the U.S. antitrust investigation that targeted the company.
A shareholder proposal requiring that the Decatur, Ill.-based company's board be composed of a majority of independent directors was defeated at the annual meeting, but received an usually heavy 42 percent of the votes cast.
On Oct. 14, ADM agreed to pay $100 million in fines and pleaded guilty to fixing prices of lysine, a feed additive, and citric acid, an additive used in foods, beverages and other products.
Among the four-member office of the chief executive, Allen Andreas stands out given his experience building ADM's business in Europe, said Merrill Lynch's Leonard Teitelbaum.
"It goes a long way to putting the events of the last several months behind the company," Teitelbaum said of the management changes.
ADM made no mention of the antitrust investigation, which is continuing, although the company has been given immunity from further prospecution in return for its cooperation.
Earlier this month, ADM said Michael Andreas took a temporary leave and Wilson retired for health reasons. In its proxy statement for the annual meeting, ADM said indictments were being considered against the younger Andreas and Wilson.
The new vice chairman is Gaylor Coan, 60, an outside director, who heads Gold Kist Inc., a farmer-owned cooperative in Atlanta, Ga., that is the second-largest poultry processor in the United States and one of the largest shareholders of ADM.
ADM also named Larry Cunningham, 52, as president of ADM's corn processing division and a group vice president, in addition to his dutues as president of ADM's protein specialities.
The company's lysine and citric acid products are both derived from corn.
Archer Daniels Midland Co likely will face criminal charges in a U.S. government price-fixing investigation after three companies pleaded guilty, legal experts said Tuesday.
"It puts them (ADM) on notice that their alleged co-conspirators are cooperating with the government, providing both documents and oral testimony," said Robert Stephenson, an attorney with Cotsirilos, Stephenson, Tighe &amp; Streicker in Chicago. "The table stakes have significantly increased that ADM will be charged."  
An ADM spokeswoman said the company declined to comment. The other three firms  admitted to conspiracy in price-fixing of lysine, a feed additive.
Stephenson has no direct involvement in the ADM case but is experienced in antitrust cases.
Earlier the Justice Department said Ajinomoto Co Inc and Kyowa Hakko Kogyo Co Ltd of Tokyo and the U.S. unit of Sewon Co Ltd of South Korea admitted conspiring to fix prices to eliminate competition in the world lysine market. They also agreed to cooperate fully with the investigation by providing witnesses and documents.  
"If they (the government) have signed some of the potential defendants to plea agreements that include a commitment to cooperate, that puts tremendous pressure on the remaining potential defendant, of which ADM is obviously one," said Joe Sims, an attorney with Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue.
At this point, he added, ADM may decide to enter a plea or may face indictment.
"Either one of those things can come reasonably promptly," said Sims, an antitrust expert who is not directly involved in the ADM case. "I would not be surprised to see something in the next 30 days."  
If ADM should decide to enter a plea, analysts said it could easily afford the $10 million fines that were levied against Ajinomoto and Kyowa.
"Those are not the kinds of fines that are going to break the company," Piper Jaffray analyst George Dahlman said.
He added that, as of March 1996, ADM had about $3.0 billion in working capital.
In a separate proceeding, ADM has agreed to pay $25 million to settle a civil lysine price-fixing lawsuit brought by its customers as part of an overall $45 million settlement that also involves Ajinomoto and Kyowa Hakko.  
The guilty pleas by Ajinomoto, Kyowa Hakko and Sewon came about 14 months after ADM acknowleged the government had asked it for documents and testimony in an antitrust investigation. That probe included high-fructose corn syrup, citric acid and lysine.
Since the beginning, ADM has denied any wrongdoing and has said it cooperated fully with the investigation.
One wrinkle in the case, however, has been the controversy surrounding Mark Whitacre, a former president of ADM's BioProducts Division, who acted as a government informant in the probe for about three years. Whitacre was fired by ADM last year over allegations he embezzled millions of dollars from the company.
Stephenson said the guilty pleas by Ajinomoto, Kyowa Hakko and Sewon diminish the government's need to rely on Whitacre as a witness against ADM.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
Kellogg Co. pledged again Friday to halt the erosion of its leading share of the $9 billion U.S. cereal market, but did not say what steps it planned to take.
The uncertainty over its future strategy made some investors nervous, and the stock was down 75 cents to $67 in afternoon trading after earlier falling as low as $65.50 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Earlier, company executives met with analysts to discuss its strategy to stop market share erosion, but offered few details.
"I was unimpressed with the company's presentation," BT Securities analyst John O'Neil said.
Kellogg pledged to stop any further crumbling of its U.S. market share, which has dropped to between 32.5 and 33 percent from what it considers to be a normal level of 35 percent, analysts said.
Kellogg, the leader in the U.S. ready-to-eat cereal market, said it will not tolerate any further market share erosion, a company spokesman said, but did not give any specifics.
"He (Chairman Arnold Langbo) indicated we remain committed to our long-term strategy of lower cereal prices and reducing inefficient price promotion spending, introducing strong new products, cutting costs," Kellogg spokesman Richard Lovell said. "That's the long-term way to go."
In the short term, analysts said, Kellogg is hoping that competitors cut back on their promotions, taking the pressure of its market share.
"The first thing they are going to do is hope the competition will cut back (on) promotions," O'Neil said. "Their initial strategy is a passive one."
But if competitors, such as rival General Mills Inc., do not cut back on discount coupons and other consumer enticements, analysts said Kellogg will have to respond in kind.
Kellogg officials were not immediately available.
"Their primary goal for 1997 is to get volume moving back up again," Schroder Wertheim analyst Robert Cummins said. "In regard to the U.S. cereal business, it is going to cost them some money to do that."
For now, Kellogg is not expected to increase its marketing push too much, given its pledge to report modestly better fourth quarter earnings compared with last year's results of $166.7 million, or 77 cents a share.
"They're very concerned about their credibility after the third quarter and are not likely to do anything that will prevent them from making that very modest increase in fourth quarter earnings," Smith Barney analyst David Rabinowitz said.
Third quarter earnings per share were down 20 percent, which Kellogg blamed on competition in the U.S. cereal market.
Kellogg has said 1996 earnings will be below the $761.6 million, or $3.48 a share, it earned in 1995. The consensus of analysts' estimates for 1996 is $3.07 a share, according to First Call.
Kellogg has said it expects earnings in first quarter of 1997 to be lower than in the first quarter of 1996. Earnings for all of 1997 are expected to be up by a low double-digit percentage from disappointing 1996 results.
Compounding Kellogg's problem is the slow growth in the U.S. cereal market, despite a round of price cuts by major companies earlier this year.
Kellogg said the U.S. cereal market overall grew by about 1.5 percent in the third quarter.
"The price cuts didn't work. It didn't help their (Kellogg's) volume or industry volume," Cummins said. "(That) backs up my contention that consumers who want to eat cereal are eating cereal, whether its $5 a box, which they complain about, or $2 a box, which they would prefer."
U.S. cereal leader Kellogg Co is hoping its competitors cut back on their promotional efforts, but failing that it may be forced to increase costly marketing efforts next year.
"The first thing they are going to do is hope the competition will cut back (on) promotions," said BT Securities analyst John O'Neil, who attended a meeting between Kellogg and analysts on Friday.
"Their initial strategy is more of a passive one," he added.  
But if competitors such as rival General Mills Inc do not cut back on discount coupons and other consumer enticements, Kellogg will have to respond in kind, analysts said.
"Kellogg is resolved to rebuild their market share," Smith Barney analyst David Rabinowitz said.
Kellogg, the leader in the $9.0 billion U.S. ready-to-eat cereal market, has seen its market share slip to between 32.5 percent and 33 percent due to competitive pressure.
"They consider 35 percent to be normal," said Schroder Wertheim analyst Robert Cummins.  
Analysts who met with Kellogg said the company did not outline its market share strategy, except to say it does not intend to return to deep-discounts and giveaways.
"They say they will do what is necessary to regain their market share, but for now will avoid the deep discounts," SBC Warburg analyst Chris Jakubik said.
Kellogg officials were not immediately available for comment.
Still, analysts say the Battle Creek, Mich.-based firm, which earlier this year was forced to cut prices to respond to the competition, cannot sit and do nothing.  
"I think Kellogg is more likely to increase promotions (in 1997) and target promotional efforts behind new products," O'Neil added.
For now, Kellogg is not expected to increase its marketing push too much, given its pledge to report modestly better fourth quarter earnings compared to last year's $0.77 a share.
"They're very concerned about their credibility after the third quarter and are not likely to do anything that will prevent them from making that very modest increase in fourth quarter earnings," Rabinowitz said.
Third quarter earnings were down 20 percent, which Kellogg blamed on competitive pressures.
Compounding Kellogg's problem is the slow growth in the U.S. cereal market, despite a round of price cuts by major companies earlier this year. Kellogg said the market overall grew by about 1.5 percent in the third quarter.
"The price cuts didn't work. It didn't help their (Kellogg's) volume or industry volume," said Schroder Wertheim's Cummins. "(That) backs up my contention that consumers who want to eat cereal are eating cereal, whether its $5 a box, which they complain about, or $2 a box, which they would prefer."
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
The green fields of agricultural biotechnology are turning into a legal battle ground as companies file suits and countersuits against each other to protect their stakes in the budding business.
Biotech players are "suing each other over control of the technology," said Ray Goldberg, professor of Agriculture and Business at the Harvard Graduate School of Business. "They are going to redefine how they work together."
At stake are rights to produce and sell genetically enhanced crops. After more than a decade of research, biotech crops are beginning to be commercialized. They include corn and cotton that produce their own pesticides and soybeans that can withstand the use of certain herbicides.
In the end, analysts and company executives say, many of the lawsuits are expected to be settled out of court, resulting in agreements to license and swap technology.
"It is very unlikely, because stakes are very high, that the seed companies will really let this work its way entirely through the court system," said Dain Bosworth analyst Bonnie Wittenburg.
"Ultimately (companies) will cross-license, trade rights and use these pieces of protected technology as assets and trade them back and forth," added Timothy Martin, a spokesman for Pioneer Hi-Bred International Inc.
Pioneer, which provides the leading share of seed for corn, the biggest U.S. crop, has been sued for alleged patent infringement by DeKalb Genetics Corp.
Pioneer's defence is that it has a U.S. patent pending, which if approved could supersede DeKalb's claims. Pioneer said the application for that patent was filed before DeKalb's.
The case illustrates how new and pending patents complicate the legal landscape for agricultural biotechnology as seed and biotech development companies seek protection for their gene portfolios, production methods and the biotech crops themselves.
"The patent positions are not yet clear. The patents that have been issued leave some room for different interpretations," said Michael Sund, vice president of communications and investor relations for Mycogen Corp.
Mycogen and Monsanto Co. have sued each other for alleged patent infringement, and Mycogen is considering appealing some recent rulings in Monsanto's favour, Sund said.
Despite the legal complications, companies are expected to continue full-steam to commercialize biotech crops.
"They've made the decision to go ahead," said Piper Jaffray analyst George Dahlman.
Mycogen, for example, this year commercialized in limited quantities three corn hybrids that contain the Bt gene, which enables the plant to produce a substance that is toxic to the European core borer, a major pest.
Sund said the hybrids have performed well, as expected, in fighting off the corn borer. "Performance has been everything we hoped for," he added.
A genetically enhanced cotton that contains the Bt gene to fight bollworm has come under some tough scrutiny this year after a heavy infestation of the pest in some areas of Texas prompted farmers to use chemical sprays on the crop.
Monsanto, which collaborated with Delta and Pine Land Co. to produce Bollgard cotton, maintained that the biotech crop still performed well. Monsanto said Bollgard cotton had to be sprayed less than traditional cotton.
The collaboration between Monsanto and Delta and Pine Land is but one example of the partnerships that are being forged in agricultural biotechnology.
Monsanto has an ownership stake in DeKalb and Pioneer has a research collaboration with Mycogen.
These partnerships -- like the lawsuits -- underscore one key aspect of the biotechnology business: no one party has all the key pieces to the puzzle.
"No one single firm has the monopoly on the germ plasm," Goldberg said. "No one single firm has the monopoly on the science."
American Trans Air (ATA), which recently announced plans to cut back its jet capacity and some scheduled service, expects to forge additional alliances with other air carriers.
"We clearly think that code-sharing is an opportunity for this company to expand the markets in which it can participate," Kenneth Wolff, chief financial officer of Amtran Inc, parent of ATA, said in a telephone interview Wednesday.
In late May, ATA and Chicago Express Airlines agreed to a code-sharing agreement.  
Under these agreements, the airlines put their codes on each other's flights in computerized reservation systems.
"In general, it has exceeded our expectations, although this was a relationship which we both went into expecting some good things," Stanley Pace, president of the Indianapolis-based company, said of the alliance with Chicago Express. "The benefits have been much more substantial than we both thought they would be."
Looking ahead, ATA will continue to serve vacation destinations from Indianapolis, Milwaukee and Chicago's Midway Airport with charter and scheduled service.  
But Pace added that expansion of its service will be made more "thoughtfully" than in the past when the carrier underwent rapid growth.
In the second quarter, Amtran lost $0.20 a share, compared with a year-ago profit of $0.29, due to aggressive scheduled service expansion that was not as profitable as it had hoped.
ATA said last week it is cutting back some of its scheduled service, particularly from Boston to destinations like Orlando, Fla., and Nassau, Bahamas.
ATA also has said it is reducing lease obligations for Boeing Co 757 jets to boost its operating efficiency.  
These steps are expected to improve Amtran's profitability, although Pace said the next two quarters will be a transition period for the company.
Pace declined to comment on near-term earnings projections. According to First Call, the mean analyst estimate for the third quarter is $0.28, based on a wide range from breakeven to $0.55 a share. A year ago it earned $0.31.
"We're going to strengthen the bottom line fairly quickly over the next two quarters so that we have a solid foundation...to resume deliberate, systematic, thoughtful and profitable growth through 1997 and into 1998," Pace said.
Company executives acknowledged that some consumers postponed buying tickets on ATA following the May 11 ValuJet Inc crash in the Florida Everglades.
To allay consumer concerns, Pace said ATA emphasized its safety record of flying 23 years without any serious accidents.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
Monsanto Co, which produces genetically altered soybeans, on Wednesday defended the scientific tests that back its safety claims for the crop.
"We did something like 1,800 tests to evaluate those soybeans," said Karen Marshall, manager of public affairs for Monsanto. "These soybeans are absolutely safe."
The environmental group Greenpeace has continued to protest the genetically altered soybeans and has criticized  Monsanto for allegedly not testing the biotech crop for exposure to the herbicide Roundup.  
Monsanto's genetically altered Roundup Ready soybeans are resistant to the Roundup herbicide, allowing farmers to spray Roundup on the fields to kill weeds without harming the crop.
But use of Roundup to kill weeds could result in residue on the harvested soybeans.
Marshall of Monsanto, however, said Roundup residue is not an issue since tolerance levels for the herbicide had been previously established and did not need to be established by testing.
Therefore, Monsanto's testing of biotech crop focused on genetic alteration.  
"What we figured would be the new piece of information was the one protein that we added to the plant, itself," she said.
Marshall said Roundup Ready soybeans have been reviewed and approved by regulatory bodies in Argentina, Mexico, Canada, Japan, the European Union and United States.
She added that Roundup Ready soybeans have also received food safety approvals in the United Kingdom, the Netherlands and most recently Denmark, and are under consideration in Switzerland.
Merrill Lynch analyst Douglas Groh said that while concerns about the Roundup Ready soybeans must be addressed, he does not expect any impediments to market the crops.
"In some form or fashion, Monsanto will be able to commercialize the work that they've done," said Groh, who focuses on agribusiness and biotech companies.
He added that residue on the soybean crop should not be an issue since Roundup breaks down over time to "environmentally benign" substances that do not pose a threat.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787
Diana Corp said Thursday that its decision to spin off its various business holdings and keep only its Sattel Communications Inc unit should attract analyst coverage of the firm.
"The analysts on Wall Street were not interested in picking up coverage of the company" because of its diverse holdings, said Sattel spokesman Tony Squeglia.
No analysts actively follow Diana, he said, which in addition to Sattel includes telecommunications equipment distribution and meat and seafood businesses.  
Diana said Thursday it would retain Sattel Communications, which provides telephone and Internet switching equipment, and would change its name to Sattel.
The other businesses -- including Atlanta Provision Co Inc, C&amp;L Communications Inc and Valley Communications Inc -- will be grouped together in a yet-to-be-named company that will trade on the Nasdaq.
Atlanta Provision, a meat and seafood distributor, remains for sale, although a deal is not imminent. "I know they are in discussions with potential buyers, but there is nothing close," Squeglia said.  
After the split, he added, the core businesses of the new company will include Atlanta Provision, which currently accounts for about 80 percent of Diana's total revenues.
Diana's plans to split into two companies follows its announcement earlier this year that it would restructure to make Sattel a pure play, or a primary business focus.
"We did a survey of shareholders and found that many of the shareholders who hold the stock today...bought Diana as a proxy for Sattel," Squeglia said in a telephone interview. "So there's a lot of interest in the one operating unit called Sattel Communications."  
He reiterated that Sattel, for its fiscal second quarter ended in September, is expected to have roughly $4.0 million in sales and to be modestly profitable. In the fiscal first quarter, Sattel's revenues were roughly $840,000.
The increase in revenues between the first and second quarters reflects recent sales of its DSS switches, which are used in long-distance telecommunications services.
Diana is expected to report results for its second quarter -- which for the entire firm ended in October -- on November 26.
Diana's decision to split into two companies was applauded by the market. Diana's shares traded as high as 41-3/4 Thursday, and were up 3/8 at 37-1/4 late in afternoon trading.
"We're obviously pleased at the way the market has reacted," Squeglia said.
Diana shares have traded in a wide range, from a 52-week low of 11-3/4 to a high of 114-1/4. Diana has repeatedly declined to comment on its stock movements.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787
Former Archer Daniels Midland Co. executive Mark Whitacre, who acted as an informant in an antitrust case against the company, Friday sued ADM, seeking back wages and punitive damages.
In a lawsuit filed in U.S. District Court, Whitacre also formally denied charges previously brought by ADM that he allegedly stole $9.0 million from the agribusiness company.
"ADM's claim that Whitacre was fired for embezzlement is merely a pretext," the lawsuit says.
"Whitacre was in fact fired for assisting the FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation) with its investigation into ADM," the lawsuit continues.
Last month, ADM pleaded guilty to two counts of fixing prices of lysine, a feed additive and citric acid, which is used in food and beverages. It agreed to pay $100 million in fines, a record for U.S. antitrust cases.
In his lawsuit, Whitacre seeks a judgment against ADM of more than $50,000 and punitive damages of more than $50,000. Potential damages, if awarded, could be much greater, perhaps in the tens of millions of dollars, sources close to the case said.
In September, Whitacre had said he planned to file an $80 million wrongful discharge lawsuit against ADM.
Legal experts said it is common practice in lawsuits to seek damages above or below $50,000.
ADM did not respond to requests for comment on the lawsuit.
In his lawsuit, Whitacre is claiming lost wages from August 1995, when he was fired as president of ADM's BioProducts Division, until October 1995, when he was hired as chief executive officere of Biomar International Inc.
Whitacre earned $320,000 a year at ADM plus stock options.
In his lawsuit, Whitacre charged ADM with denying him the right to exercise company stock options, defamation of his character and mental and emotional distress.
Whitacre has admitted to attempting suicide last year after his role as an FBI mole became known.
He also said he was forced to sell his home in the Decatur, Ill., area for only $400,000, even though it had been recently appraised for $1 million. Whitacre said in the lawsuit he had invested about $1.3 million on the home.
Whitacre is now a resident of Chapel Hill, N.C.
His attorneys, Richard Kurth of Kurth &amp; DeArmond of Danville, Ill., and Bill Walker of Granite City, Ill., were not immediately available to comment.
The lawsuit was not handled by Chicago attorney James Epstein of the firm Epstein, Zaideman &amp; Esrig, who has been representing Whitacre. Asked if he has fired Epstein from the case, Whitacre replied, "no comment."
Epstein was not available to comment.
Former Archer Daniels Midland Co executive Mark Whitacre, who acted as an informant in an antitrust case against the company, on Friday filed suit against ADM seeking back wages and punitive damages.
In a suit filed in U.S. District Court for the Central District of Illinois, Whitacre also formally denied charges previously brought by ADM that he allegedly stole $9.0 million from the agribusiness company.
"ADM's claim that Whitacre was fired for embezzlement is merely a pretext," the lawsuit says.  
"Whitacre was in fact fired for assisting the FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation) with its investigation into ADM," the suit continues.
Last month, ADM pleaded guilty to two counts of fixing prices of lysine, a feed additive and citric acid, which is used in food and beverages. It agreed to pay $100 million in fines, a record for U.S. antitrust cases.
In his suit, Whitacre seeks a judgment against ADM of more than $50,000 and punitive damages of more than $50,000. Potential damages, if awarded, could be much greater, perhaps in the tens of millions, sources close to the case said.  
In September, Whitacre had said he planned to file an $80 million wrongful discharge suit against ADM.
Legal experts said it is common practice in suits to seek damages above or below $50,000.
ADM did not respond to requests for comment on the suit.
In his suit, Whitacre is claiming lost wages from August, 1995, when he was fired as president of ADM's BioProducts Division, until October 1995 when he was hired as chief executive officere of  Biomar International Inc.
Whitacre earned $320,000 a year at ADM, plus stock options.  
In his suit, Whitacre charges ADM with denying him the right to exercise company stock options, defamation of his character and mental and emotional distress.
Whitacre has admitted to trying to kill himself last year after his role as an FBI mole became known.
He also claimed that he was forced to sell his home in the Decatur, Ill., area for only $400,000, even though it had been recently appraised for $1.0 million. Whitacre also said in the suit he had invested about $1.3 million on the home.
Whitacre is now a resident of Chapel Hill, N.C.
Whitacre's attorneys, Richard Kurth of Kurth &amp; DeArmond of Danville, Ill., and Bill Walker of Granite City, Ill., were not immediately available for comment.
The lawsuit was not handled by Chicago attorney James Epstein of the firm Epstein, Zaideman &amp; Esrig, who has been representing Whitacre. Asked if he has fired Epstein from the case, Whitacre replied, "no comment."
Epstein was not available for comment.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787
Despite losing out on two potential aircraft deals, McDonnell Douglas Corp's stock remains near its 52-week high, reflecting a strong balance sheet and expectations it will make an acquisition.
"The company is generating on the order of about $1.0 billion to $1.25 billion of free cash flow annually, which translates into between $5 and $7 a share," said BT Securities analyst Wolfgang Demisch, who has a buy rating on the stock.
That could enable the company to buy back shares or make a long-awaited defense acquisition, he added.  
Although it lost out on the race to build a next generation fighter for the Pentagon and rival Boeing Co was awarded a 103-plane AMR Corp deal, McDonnell Douglas shares remain relatively strong.  Shares were down $0.25 at $52.625 a share on Monday, $4.125 below a 52-week high of $56.75 but more than $10 above a low of $42.125.
In fact, losing out on the potential $2.2 billion in jet fighter contracts -- which could eventually be worth as much as $500 billion to the ultimate winner -- could prompt McDonnell Douglas to pursue an acquisition aggressively to build its defense business, analysts added.  
CS First Boston analyst Peter Aseritis said he expected the company's "board and management to take a fairly proactive stance...to do something in the merger and acquisition area."
Analysts also shrugged off Boeing getting the plane order from AMR's American Airlines, saying McDonnell Douglas was not a serious contender after it cancelled development of its next generation commercial plane, known as the MD-XX.
"They were never in the running," Merrill Lynch analyst Byron Callan said of McDonnell Douglas.  
"The events don't affect near-term earnings in either case," Goldman Sachs analyst Howard Rubel said of the lost jet fighter and American Airlines deals.
McDonnell Douglas management said the Pentagon business would have been a significant long-term program for it.  But analysts said the company still has a chance to capture future military sales, particularly with acquisitions to build its portfolio, which now includes the F-18 fighter jet, C-17 military cargo plane and Apache helicopter.  
"The things to keep in mind are, the joint strike fighter is a long ways away.  It doesn't affect McDonnell Douglas' business portfolio near term," Callan said.
Callan added it is possible the new fighter jet might not be developed due to U.S. government budget pressures. And, in the interim, McDonnell Douglas could make its existing fighter jets more affordable and more capable.
Analysts dismissed the ideas that takeover speculation has been boosting McDonnell Douglas shares.  Earlier this year, McDonnell Douglas was reported to be in preliminary merger talks with Boeing, but a deal never materialized.  "I don't think the people who own the stock today are looking at McDonnell Douglas as a takeover candidate," Callan said.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787
Deere &amp; Co. Tuesday reported record fourth-quarter and annual earnings as demand grew for its agricultural, industrial, commercial and consumer equipment worldwide.
Net income jumped 15 percent to $173.9 million, or 68 cents a share, for the quarter ended Oct. 31, from $150.6 million, or 57 cents a share, in the year-ago period. Revenues rose 7 percent to $2.9 billion from $2.7 billion.
"The company's operating margins remain strong as our focus on continuous improvement and growth is having a positive impact throughout our businesses," Deere Chairman Hans Becherer said in a statement.
But fourth quarter profits were less than some analysts had expected, although results did include a $15 million after-tax write-off to integrate and consolidate various Mexican operations.
Deere's stock dropped $2.625 to $44 on the New York Stock Exchange.
"Deere came in a little light on a reported basis," NatWest Markets analyst Thomas Burns said.
Profits for the fiscal year rose 16 percent to $817.3 million, or $3.14 a share, from $706.1 million, or $2.71 a share, last year. Revenues climbed 9 percent to $11.2 billion from $10.3 billion.
One area of weakness was Deere's commercial and consumer equipment business, such as lawn and landscaping products.
Worldwide commercial and consumer equipment operating profits fell to $1 million for the fourth quarter from $35 million last year, and to $118 million for the full fiscal year from $165 million a year ago. Deere blamed the drop on lower sales volume and increased promotional and growth expenditures.
"The one big operational shortfall that was very, very disappointing and was a surprise to us was the commercial and consumer business," Dain Bosworth analyst J. Blair Brumley said.
Moline, Ill.-based Deere said export sales from the United States continued to grow, by 20 percent to $1.58 billion for 1996 from $1.31 billion last year.
Overseas sales for the year remained very strong, rising by 26 percent to $2.75 billion, topping $2.5 billion for the first time in the company's history, Deere said.
Worldwide agricultural equipment operating profits jumped to $202 million for the fourth quarter from $135 million in the year-ago period.
Worldwide demand for John Deere agricultural equipment remains very strong, Becherer said.
Overseas agricultural equipment sales, which were strong during 1996, are expected to continue to increase in 1997 due to sales in Ukraine and Kazakhstan.
Industrial equipment operating profit fell to $34 million for the fourth quarter from $36 million last year. Deere cited increased development expenses associated with improving the fuel efficiency and emissions performance of new engines.
Net income of Deere's financial services subsidiaries was $47.6 million for the quarter vs. $41 million a year ago.
Looking ahead, Deere said it expected worldwide physical volume of sales to dealers on a comparable basis to increase by about 5 percent in 1997 compared with 1996.
The higher minimum wage signed into law Tuesday will be welcome relief for millions of workers, but it may also translate into higher prices for hamburgers, pizzas and other fast-food items, some restaurant chains said.
The 90-cent-an-hour increase will have little short-term impact on many fast-food chains that already pay workers rates above the federally mandated minimum.
But in the long run, industry officials fear that workers already earning above the new minimum wage, which will rise to $5.15 an hour next year, will be looking for more.
"What we're concerned about is the ripple effect it brings," said Bruce Cotton, chief spokesman for Long John Silver's Restaurants Inc. in Lexington, Ky.
"Our average crew wage is about $5.20 (an hour) so short-term there is not going to be any impact," said Denny Lynch, spokesman for Wendy's International Inc., which operates about 4,300 restaurants in the United States.
President Clinton signed into law the first increase in the minimum wage in five years, boosting it by 50 cents to $4.75 on Oct. 1 and 40 cents more to $5.15 on Sept. 1, 1997.
The White House estimates the new law will mean a raise for about 10 million American workers, many of them in restaurants and stores.
Most small businesses had opposed the increase, saying it would prompt them to hire fewer people, particularly young people looking for entry-level jobs.
But some economists argued that the negative effects of an increase in the wage, first imposed by the federal government in 1938 at 25 cents an hour, would be minimal.
To help get the bill through the Republican-controlled Congress, a package of about $22 billion in tax breaks aimed mostly at small businesses was added to the measure.
As a result of the higher minimum wage, American Restaurant Partners L.P., which operates 62 Pizza Hut restaurant franchises, expects its total wage costs will rise $500,000 over the next 12 months.
"If you raise someone who started in the last two months (to the new minimum wage level), you also have to raise everybody else," said Terry Freund, chief financial officer of American Restaurant Partners.
To compensate, the Wichita, Kan.-based restaurant operator hopes to raise prices by about 3 percent. The risk, Freund added, is that higher prices will keep some customers away or prompt them to scale back on the pizzas or other items they normally order.
Beyond the minimum wage requirements, competition for workers -- from cooks to delivery drivers to counter staff -- has forced many fast-food chains to pay up to hire good help, particularly in metropolitan markets. That competition is being driven by an increase in restaurant openings, particularly fast-food and casual dining establishments.
"There are neighbourhoods where we have to pay $6.00 an hour to $6.50 or $7.00 to get" good workers, Wendy's Lynch said. "The competition is setting the wage."
Fast-food industry executives said there has been competition for workers since the late 1980s, although the increase in restaurant openings is making the search for employees more intense.
Another problem for fast-food chains is wage competition from other employers. A fast-food worker, for example, may be able to earn $50 or $60 a night in tips at a casual dining establishment, executives said.
"For QSRs (quick service restaurants) ... it's even tougher to keep the kids," said Roger Lipton, president of Lipton Financial Services.
Former Archer Daniels Midland Co. executive Mark Whitacre said Tuesday he was no longer cooperating with the U.S. government in its price-fixing probe, adding yet another wrinkle to the complex antitrust case.
Whitacre, a government informant for about three years in the federal investigation of his former employer, was indicted Tuesday along with two other ex-ADM executives for conspiring to fix prices of the feed additive lysine.
Also indicted were Michael Andreas, former executive vice president and vice chairman of ADM, and Terrance Wilson, a former group vice president. Michael Andreas is also the son of ADM Chairman Dwayne Andreas.
"I have decided not to participate in the government's coverup any longer," Whitacre told Reuters.
Asked to comment on the indictment against him, Whitacre said, "I have no comment other than when all the evidence comes out in this case, the only people that will have questions yet to answer will be the Justice Department and the FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation) itself."
The Justice Department did not respond to Whitacre's statement.
Legal experts said it was common for federal informants and cooperative witnesses to be indicted, though they often receive lenient treatment and light sentences in return for their cooperation.
"If the informant got too good a deal, it would diminish his credibility," said James Shapiro, a former assistant U.S. Attorney in Chicago who has no direct knowledge of the case involving ADM and Whitacre.
Whitacre's decision to stop cooperating with the government could jeopardise his treatment by the Justice Department. But antitrust attorney Champ Davis of the Chicago firm Davis, Mannix and McGrath, said Whitacre's previous cooperation could still be taken into consideration.
"He can argue, I think, that he was cooperative up to a point," said Davis, who is not involved in the ADM case. "(That) is a factor that ought to be taken into account."
By no longer cooperating -- and presumably not agreeing to testify on behalf of the government in upcoming trials against the defendants -- Whitacre could weaken the government's case somewhat, legal experts said.
"It would weaken the government's case (against Michael Andreas and Wilson) to some extent, not to have the guy who made the tapes to interpret them," Shapiro said.
While he was cooperating with federal investigators, Whitacre had said that he made hundreds of tape recordings of ADM executives allegedly in price-fixing discussions.
But the government's case was unlikely to be derailed since the tapes still could be used, Shapiro said.
In October, ADM pleaded guilty to two counts of fixing prices of lysine, a feed additive, and citric acid, which is used in food, beverages and other products. ADM also agreed to pay a $100 million fine.
A lawsuit Whitacre filed against his former employer in November stated that the government's case against ADM was based "in large part upon the information obtained from Whitacre."
Whitacre gave no further reasons for his decision to stop cooperating with the government. But he has been involved in several legal tangles since the ADM price-fixing probe first came to light in June 1995.
In August 1995, ADM fired Whitacre, who had been head of its BioProducts division, for allegedly stealing $9 million from the company. Whitacre has denied those charges, saying the money allegedly involved off-the-books bonuses that he received that were approved by company management.
ADM has sued Whitacre over the $9 million. Whitacre filed a wrongful dismissal suit last month against ADM.
The Justice Department has been conducting a separate investigation into the money that Whitacre received and allegations of off-the-books payments by ADM.
Monsanto Co's board of directors, at its regularly scheduled meeting on Friday, is expected to decide the fate of the chemical business that the company has said it wants to shed, analysts said.
A Monsanto spokeswoman on Thursday confirmed the Monsanto board is meeting on Friday, but she declined to comment on what it might do.
"I can confirm that the board is meeting tomorrow," she said. "I cannot ever presume board discussions, actions or vote, and we won't comment on that sort of speculation."  
In October, Monsanto said it was considering several options, including possibly spinning off its non-agricultural chemical business.
The remainder of Monsanto would be a life sciences company with core businesses of agricultural chemicals such as its flagship Roundup herbicide, biotech operations and the G.D. Searle pharmaceutical unit.
Another possible option for Monsanto would be to sell or merge the chemical business with other firms.  
"Probably a spinoff is likely," said PaineWebber analyst Paul Raman. "There is a significant tax liability of selling it (the chemical business). The capital gains tax on it could be about $500 million plus or minus."
Among the possible suitors mentioned for Monsanto's chemical business was Hercules Inc, analysts said. They added that Monsanto could be interested in the Tastemaker food and beverage flavors business held by Hercules and its joint venture partner, Mallinckrodt Inc.  
Hercules and Mallinckrodt have previously said they were seeking a buyer for Tastemaker. But a Mallinckrodt spokeswoman said no offers had been received for Tastemaker and no agreements had been signed.
The Monsanto spokeswoman declined to comment. Hercules was not available for comment.
Should Monsanto opt to swap its chemical business for assets of another company it would reduce its tax liability, analysts said.  
Whatever action Monsanto takes, analysts said they expect the board of directors to decide the course of action at the meeting on Friday.
"This is the last board meeting of the year. It is a planned meeting," Merrill Lynch analyst Doug Groh said.
Speculation that Monsanto was near a long-anticipated final decision on its chemical businesses helped boost the stock, which ended the day up 2-1/4 at 41-3/4.
Analysts have previously said that shedding the chemical operation, which are profitable, would enable Monsanto's life sciences business to trade at a higher multiple.
((Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787))
Oneok Inc. and Western Resources Inc. on Thursday agreed to a $660 million deal that combines their natural gas assets and gives Western Resources access to a broader base of customers for its electricity and security services.
The deal reflects the moves within the utility industry to prepare for further deregulation.
Under the agreement, Oneok will take all the natural gas assets of Western Resources, making it the ninth largest gas distribution company in the United States serving 1.4 million customers. Tulsa-based Oneok is the parent of Oklahoma Natural Gas Co.
Western Resources, based in Topeka, Kan., will become the largest equity holder in Oneok, receiving about 3 million new shares of Oneok common stock and preferred stock that will be convertible, upon necessary regulatory approvals, into about another 19.3 million shares of Oneok common. Its total stake in Oneok is about 45 percent.
The deal is expected to close by mid-1997, following approval by Oneok shareholders and federal and state regulatory authorities.
"They (Oneok) are a total gas company. They understand the gas business better than we do," Western Resources president David Wittig said in a telephone interview.
By swapping its gas assets, Western Resources will be able to focus its efforts on growing its electricity and home-security businesses, both of which involve a customer base of home owners and 24-hour monitoring of consumers.
Oneok's 735,000 customers could become potential clients of Western Resources' services.
"Western Rseources has been becoming a nationwide marketer of retail energy -- electricity and/or gas -- and home security," Everen Securities analyst Dan Rudakas said. "This combination gives them direct access to another 735,000 gas customers, which in the future ... would be potential electric customers and also electronic home security customers."
The companies said the alliance will position the companies to take advantage of the expected deregulation of the electricity industry, allowing customers to buy electrical power from several sources instead of just the local utility. That type of deregulation is already taking place in the natural gas industry.
"Eventuallly there will be total competition in electricity and in gas," John Hayes Jr, Western Resources chairman, told a teleconference. "We are just preparing for the future."
The companies said Oneok's independence would be preserved by standstill provisions in the agreement that define the rights and responsibilities of the respective companies for at least the next 15 years.
Western Resources will receive a preferred dividend of 1.5 times the underlying common dividend, which now stands at 30 cents a share, but no less than $1.80 per preferred share per year for the first five years.
George K. Baum analyst Dennis Hudson said Western Resources' natural gas assets earned that company about $20 million in 1995. As part of Oneok, the assets likely will earn more, given that company's expertise in gas distributions and synergies from its existing gas business.
With its stake in Oneok, Western Resources will still benefit from a portion of the gas earnings, as well as future gas alliances that Oneok might enter into in the future.
"Oneok would continue to search for opportunities to acquire more customers on the gas side. We're most supportive of that," Wittig said.
He added that Western Resources continues to look for ways to expand its electricity and home-security businesses.
((Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787))
Western Resources Inc said its alliance with natural gas company ONEOK Inc could boost its earnings by $0.10 to $0.15 a share in the first full year of operations.
"We could see earnings be improved by maybe $0.10 or $0.15 a share in the first full year of operation," David Wittig, Western Resources president, said in a telephone interview.
The Western Resource-ONEOK alliance is expected to become effective in mid-1997, making calendar 1998 the first full year of operation.  
According to First Call, the consensus earnings estimate for Western Resources is $2.63 a share in 1996, down from $2.71 a year ago.
In addition, Western Resources, which is swapping its natural gas assets in return for about a 45 percent stake in ONEOK as part of the alliance, is expected to see its cash flow increase by $35 million in the first full year.
"The best way to look at this transaction is on a cash basis," Wittig said. "And we expect this transaction to improve our cash flow in the first full year of operations by around $35 million."  
The alliance also reflects Western Resources' strategy to become a brand-name supplier of electricity and home-security products nationwide, while its natural gas assets become part of a larger, focused gas company.
"They (ONEOK) are a total gas company. They understand the gas business better than we do," Wittig said.
In addition, ONEOK's 735,000 gas customers present a marketing potential for Western Resources' electricity and home-security businesses. With ONEOK as a partner, Western Resource hopes to offer gas supplies to customers nationwide.  
Western Resources, based in Topeka, Kan., continues to look for acquisitions to expand its electricity and home security businesses.
Western Resources' planned acquisition of utility Kansas City Power &amp; Light Co is pending. In home security, Western Resources, which holds about a quarter of ADT Ltd, has made five acquisitions related to that business this year, Wittig said.
"Obviously, we're acquisitive," he added.
Wittig said electricity and home-security businesses are similar, beyond the common customer base of households.
"You are providing a service on a 24-hour basis," he said. "You are monitoring a home when you are selling electricity (and with home-security services)," he added.
((Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787))
Quaker Oats Co. is looking to shed its Snapple beverage business and, in the process, may also end up selling the Gatorade sports drink line, its single largest brand, analysts said Friday.
"I think it's up for sale," Prudential Securities analyst John McMillin said of Quaker's beverage division.
Speculation that Quaker may get rid of Snapple, which has posted operating losses since it was purchased for $1.8 billion two years ago, boosted Quaker's stock, which gained $2 and closed at $38.125 on the New York Stock Exchange.
"We've been saying since this summer that there was a high probability that Quaker would pursue a restructuring, and beyond just Snapple," CS First Boston analyst Michael Mauboussin said.
He said that a possible restructuring at Quaker likely would include selling some assets, which Mauboussin said were currently under-valued.
"Gatorade being the crown jewel, clearly," he added.
Rumours regarding an outright purchase of Quaker or various parts of its businesses have swirled around the Chicago-based company for about three years. Quaker has consistently declined to comment on any speculation.
"I will simply tell you that it is our policy not to comment on rumours and speculation," Quaker spokesman Ronald Bottrell said Friday.
The speculation gained credibility, analysts said, when the Wall Street Journal reported Friday that Quaker might sell Gatorade and Snapple, with prices quoted between $3 billion and $4 billion.
"I would have said (the chance of Quaker selling its beverage business was) less than 50-50 before I read the article," BT Securities analyst John O'Neil said. "But I think if somebody offers them $4 billion ... they have to take it."
The Wall Street Journal said the most likely buyers for Quaker's beverage business were said to be Procter &amp; Gamble Co. and PepsiCo Inc.
Procter &amp; Gamble and PepsiCo both declined to comment.
"We have a long standing policy of not commenting on rumours," said Richard Detwiler, director of public relations for PepsiCo.
If Quaker sold its beverage businesses, its food businesses, including oatmeal, ready-to-eat cereal and pasta and rice dishes, could also attract buyers, analysts said.
The Wall Street Journal said Philip Morris Cos. Inc. might be interested in buying some of Quaker's food brands to bolster its Kraft Foods operation.
A Kraft spokesman did not return a call seeking comment.
It had been widely anticipated that Quaker would scale back Snapple to a regional brand, spin it off or sell it.
Quaker management, however, said earlier this year that Snapple's fruit-flavored and iced tea beverage business would remain a national brand.
"What he (Chairman William Smithburg) has been saying does not indicate that he is looking to sell the business right now," O'Neil of BT Securities said. "But he always comments that he will act to increase shareholder value."
Smith Barney analyst David Rabinowitz said selling off Quaker's businesses may yield the highest return to shareholders on a short-term basis. But "it doesn't have to happen," Rabinowitz said.
Analysts have said previously that they expected Quaker to write off additional goodwill for Snapple, which would be a non-cash charge.
The company said in a recent Securities and Exchange Commission filing that it will review Snapple for a possible charge to reduce its carrying value.
Quaker Oats Co. is looking to shed its Snapple beverage business and, in the process, may also end up selling the Gatorade sports drink line, its single largest brand, analysts said Friday.
"I think it's up for sale," Prudential Securities analyst John McMillin said of Quaker's beverage division.
Speculation that Quaker may get rid of Snapple, which has posted operating losses since it was purchased for $1.8 billion two years ago, boosted Quaker's stock, which gained $1.50 to $37.50 in early afternoon trading on on the New York Stock Exchange.
"We've been saying since this summer that there was a high probability that Quaker would pursue a restructuring, and beyond just Snapple," CS First Boston analyst Michael Mauboussin said.
He said that a possible restructuring at Quaker likely would include selling some assets, which Mauboussin said were currently under-valued.
"Gatorade being the crown jewel, clearly," he added.
Rumors regarding an outright purchase of Quaker or various parts of its businesses have swirled around the Chicago-based company for about three years. Quaker has consistently declined to comment on any speculation.
"I will simply tell you that it is our policy not to comment on rumors and speculation," Quaker spokesman Ronald Bottrell said Friday.
The speculation gained credibility, analysts said, when the Wall Street Journal reported Friday that Quaker might sell Gatorade and Snapple, with prices quoted between $3 billion and $4 billion.
"I would have said (the chance of Quaker selling its beverage business was) less than 50-50 before I read the article," BT Securities analyst John O'Neil said. "But I think if somebody offers them $4 billion ... they have to take it."
The Wall Street Journal said the most likely buyers for Quaker's beverage business were said to be Procter &amp; Gamble Co. and PepsiCo Inc..
PepsiCo also declined to comment.
"We have a long standing policy of not commenting on rumors," said Richard Detwiler, director of public relations for PepsiCo.
If Quaker sold its beverage businesses, its food businesses, including oatmeal, ready-to-eat cereal and pasta and rice dishes, could also attract buyers, analysts said.
The Wall Street Journal said Philip Morris Cos. Inc. might be interested in buying some of Quaker's food brands to bolster its Kraft Foods operation.
A Kraft spokesman did not return a call seeking comment.
It had been widely anticipated that Quaker would scale back Snapple to a regional brand, spin it off or sell it.
Quaker management, however, said earlier this year that Snapple's fruit-flavored and iced tea beverage business would remain a national brand.
"What he (Chairman William Smithburg) has been saying does not indicate that he is looking to sell the business right now," O'Neil of BT Securities said. "But he always comments that he will act to increase shareholder value."
Smith Barney analyst David Rabinowitz said selling off Quaker's businesses may yield the highest return to shareholders on a short-term basis. But "it doesn't have to happen," Rabinowitz said.
Analysts have said previously that they expected Quaker to write off additional goodwill for Snapple, which would be a non-cash charge.
The company said in a recent Securities and Exchange Commission filing that it will review Snapple for a possible charge to reduce its carrying value.
-- Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787
Conseco Inc. said Monday it would buy Pioneer Financial Services Inc., a health and life insurer, for about $417 million in stock, extending its acquisition spree.
Carmel, Ind.-based Conseco will also pay $60 million to retire bank debt and pay other costs, the companies said.
For Conseco, the Pioneer acquisition -- its seventh deal announced this year alone -- is aimed at building its offerings for senior citizens.
Conseco is already among the leading providers of supplemental health insurance, retirement annuities and life insurance for consumers aged 40 and older, analysts said.
"The (aged) 65-plus consumer is a key part of the current marketplace and also a rapidly growing piece of that 40-plus marketplace," added James Rosensteele, Conseco spokesman.
The companies said the merger would create the largest distribution organisation selling health and life insurance products in the markets where it operates.
"It's an excellent match," Conseco Chairman Stephen Hilbert said in a statement.
Under the transaction, Conseco would use a fraction of a share of its common stock worth $25 to $28, depending on the price in the days before the closing, to buy Pioneer Financial stock. Pioneer debt notes would also become convertible into Conseco stock.
Pioneer Financial jumped $5.50 to $24.50 in afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange, while Conseco stock was up 50 cents at $60 in consolidated trading.
The transaction is subject to approval by regulators and Pioneer Financial stockholders. It should be completed within 180 days, the companies said.
For Pioneer, a health and life insurance and annuities company based in Schaumburg, Ill., its agreement to join forces with Conseco reflects continued consolidation in the industry. Pioneer markets mainly to people 65 and older, small business owners and the self-employed.
"With the consolidation that's going on in the industry, you're going to have to be a mega-company to have the greatest efficiency and the greatest value to the customer," Everen analyst Frederick Sandburg said.
That consolidation is apparent in Conseco's track record of completing 16 acquisitions involving a total of 29 insurance companies since 1982.
Conseco is one of the nation's leading providers of supplemental health insurance, retirement annuities and universal life insurance.
Rosensteele said while acquisitions continued to be a part of Conseco's strategy, roughly half of the growth of its assets has been from new business generated by companies after they have been purchased.
Conseco said it would have $29 billion of assets and $32 billion of investments under management after completion of the Pioneer acquisition and other deals.
Beyond the portfolio of policies, the Pioneer acquisition also will add to Conseco's marketing efforts, particularly to senior citizens, analysts said. Pioneer has 90,000 agents, in addition to Conseco's 90,000 independent and career agents.
Founded in 1979, fast-growing Conseco has completed several acquisitions recently. In October, it completed the purchase of American Life Holdings Inc., a provider of annuities for retirement savings plans, for $165 million in cash.
On Aug. 26, Conseco agreed to acquire American Travellers Corp., a provider of long-term care insurance, for $793 million in stock, and Capitol American Financial Corp., which markets cancer insurance and other health coverage, for $650 million in cash and stock.
Also in August, Conseco completed the acquisition of Life Partners Group, a life insurer, for $600 million in stock, a deal that was announced on March 12.
Conseco Inc's $477 million planned purchase of Pioneer Financial Services Inc, its seventh acquisition announced this year, is aimed at building the company's product offerings for senior citizens.
Conseco is already among the leading providers of supplemental health insurance, retirement annuities and life insurance for consumers aged 40 and older, analysts said.
"The (aged) 65-plus consumer is a key part of the current marketplace and also a rapidly growing piece of that 40-plus marketplace," added James Rosensteele, Conseco spokesman.  
For Pioneer, a health and life insurance company based in Schaumburg, Ill., its agreement to join forces with Conseco reflects continued consolidation in the industry.
"With the consolidation that's going on in the industry, you're going to have to be a mega-company to have the greatest efficiency and the greatest value to the customer," EVEREN analyst Frederick Sandburg said.
That consolidation is apparent in Conseco's track record of completing 16 acquisitions involving a total of 29 insurance companies since 1982.  
In the latest deal, Pioneer shareholders will receive a fraction of a Conseco share worth $25 to $28 for each Pioneer share held.
Rosensteele said earnings from Pioneer operations will more than offset the dilutive effect of the Conseco shares to be issued in the deal. Conseco said previously it expects Pioneer to add about $0.15 per fully diluted share to its operating earnings in the first year.
Pioneer shares were up 5-7/8 at 24-7/8 at mid-day on Monday, and Conseco shares were up 2-1/8 at 61-5/8.  
Rosensteele said that while acquisitions continue to be a part of Conseco's strategy, roughly half of the growth of its assets has been from new business generated by companies after they have been purchased.
Conseco said it would have $29 billion of assets and $32 billion of investments under management after completion of the Pioneer acquisition and other deals.
Beyond the portfolio of policies, the Pioneer acquisition also will add to Conseco's marketing efforts, particularly to senior citizens, analysts said.  Pioneer has 90,000 agents, in addition to Conseco's 90,000 independent and career agents.  
"It really helps them (Conseco) in distribution capability," Dean Witter analyst Michael Lewis said.
Through its Bankers Life and Casualty unit, Conseco sells to senior citizens through career insurance agents.
((Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787))
The burger battle will continue in the United States next year as fast-food chains test new recipes and cook up promotions to draw more customers into their eateries -- and away from each other.
McDonald's Corp dominates the landscape with about 12,000 U.S. units and over 20,000 worldwide. But in spite of a new menu, its U.S. same-store sales are below year-ago levels.
"This will be their sixth consecutive quarter of lower comps (same store sales) in the U.S.," Dean Witter analyst David Adelman said, referring to the fourth quarter of 1996.
Wendy's International Inc, on the other hand, has seen U.S. same store sales rise five to six percent in the fourth quarter, following an eight percent gain in the third quarter. Spokesman Denny Lynch declined to comment.
"Wendy's..., although their margins have been squeezed, has the best traffic of the big three," said Roger Lipton of Lipton Financial Services.
Wendy's has about 4,425 U.S. units and 4,925 worldwide.
Burger King, a unit of Grand Metropolitan Plc, said its U.S. same-store sales rose 2.6 percent for fiscal 1996 ended September 30.
Burger King had 8,696 units worldwide at the end of fiscal 1996, including more than 6,600 in the United States.
At this point, Wendy's may have the most significant new product offering in 1997, a fresh pita sandwich that is currently being tested in 11 U.S. markets and may be rolled out nationally next year, analysts said.
"It's being given very serious consideration," Lynch said of pita sandwiches. "We're very pleased with the test."
Adelman said he expects the pita sandwich to be launched in the United States later in 1997, adding, "That's going to be a material event for (Wendy's)."
In 1996, McDonald's stole the menu spotlight by introducing its Arch Deluxe hamburger, garnished with lettuce, tomato and a mustard-mayonnaise sauce, as well new chicken and fish deluxe sandwiches.
In spite of those new menu items, McDonald's same store sales continued to show declines compared with a year ago.
McDonald's U.S. same store sales showed a negative comparison in the first nine months of 1996, spokesman Chuck Ebeling said, but he declined comment on the fourth quarter.
McDonald's has blamed the drop in its U.S. same store sales in part on an intensely competitive domestic market.
Looking ahead, analysts said the most significant event for McDonald's likely will be the start in 1997 of its 10-year exclusive marketing alliance with Walt Disney Co. That alliance gives McDonald's exclusive rights to marketing tie-ins -- such as toy giveaways -- to Disney movies.
Ebeling said the Disney alliance will be the "centerpiece" of McDonald's marketing efforts, "but not the only thing."
As for its menu, Ebeling said McDonald's will continue to focus on "delivering great food taste," but he did not comment on new items.
((Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787))
The burger battle will stay hot next year as fast-food chains test new recipes and cook up promotions to draw more customers into their eateries -- and away from each other.
McDonald's Corp. dominates the landscape with about 12,000 U.S. restaurants and more than 20,000 worldwide. But in spite of a new menu, its U.S. same-store sales, measuring sales from restaurants open at least a year, have been shrinking.
"This will be their sixth consecutive quarter of lower comps (same store sales) in the U.S.," Dean Witter analyst David Adelman said, referring to the fourth quarter of 1996.
Wendy's International Inc., on the other hand, has seen U.S. same store sales rise 5 percent to 6 percent in the fourth quarter, following an 8 percent gain in the third quarter. Spokesman Denny Lynch declined to comment.
"Wendy's..., although their margins have been squeezed, has the best traffic of the big three," said Roger Lipton of Lipton Financial Services.
Wendy's has about 4,425 U.S. restaurants and 4,925 worldwide.
Burger King, a unit of Grand Metropolitan Plc, said its U.S. same-store sales rose 2.6 percent for fiscal 1996 ended Sept. 30.
Burger King had 8,696 restaurants worldwide at the end of fiscal 1996, including more than 6,600 in the United States.
At this point, Wendy's may have the most significant new product offering in 1997, fresh pita sandwichs containing grilled chicken and salads. They are being tested in 11 U.S. markets and may be rolled out nationally next year, analysts said.
"It's being given very serious consideration," Lynch said of pita sandwiches. "We're very pleased with the test."
Adelman said he expected the pita sandwich to be launched in the United States later in 1997, adding, "That's going to be a material event for (Wendy's)."
In 1996, McDonald's stole the menu spotlight by introducing its Arch Deluxe hamburger, garnished with lettuce, tomato and a mustard-mayonnaise sauce, as well new chicken and fish deluxe sandwiches.
In spite of those new menu items, McDonald's same store sales continue to show declines compared with a year ago.
McDonald's U.S. same store sales were down in the first nine months of 1996, spokesman Chuck Ebeling said, but declined to comment on the fourth quarter.
McDonald's has blamed the drop in its U.S. same store sales in part on an intensely competitive domestic market.
Looking ahead, analysts said the most significant event for McDonald's likely will be the start of its 10-year exclusive marketing alliance with Walt Disney Co. That alliance gives McDonald's exclusive rights to marketing tie-ins, such as toy giveaways, to Disney movies.
Ebeling said the Disney alliance will be the "centerpiece" of McDonald's marketing efforts, "but not the only thing."
As for its menu, Ebeling said McDonald's will continue to focus on "delivering great food taste," but did not comment on new items.
Kansas City Southern Industries Inc said it is weighing options to finance its part of a joint $1.4 billion venture to control a Mexican rail line, a key link in its plans to offer Canada-to-Mexico service.
"We absolutely have the ability to finance this," Michael Haverty, president of the Kansas City Southern Railway subsidiary, said in a telephone interview on Thursday.
Financing concerns hit Kansas City Southern since it and partner Transportacion Maritima Mexicana SA de CV (TMM) were awarded control of the rail line this month.
Kansas City Southern holds 49 percent of the Laredo, Texas to Mexico City rail line, known as Line 1, with TMM holding 51 percent. Responsibility for financing the deal will be split along those lines as well, Havery said.
While financing has not been finalized, options include potential equity investments from partners, Haverty said, but added, "We would prefer to jealously guard the equity."
"We've also talked to some strategic partners about the possibility of loaning us money in exchange for commercial arrangements," he added.
Gruntal &amp; Co analyst Steven Lewins said one option would be to raise its portion of the financing in dollars, but pay for the Mexican rail stake in pesos. If the peso loses value, as he expects, that would create currency translation gains for the company and reduce Kansas City Southern's costs.
Recent concerns over financing and dilution of earnings has brought Kansas City Southern's shares from 50-3/8 on December 5, before the Mexican deal was formally announced, down to 44-3/4 on Friday, unchanged from the day before.
At this level, Lewins said he considers Kansas City Southern shares "buyable."
Haverty said the company told analysts it expects the deal to hurt its earnings in the first year, be "slightly" dilutive in the second and add to earnings in the third. Lewins cut his 1997 earnings estimate for Kansas City Southern on December 10 to $2.85 a share from $3.20 due to the Mexican deal.
The potential investment in Line 1 will not stop with the initial bid. Haverty said the partners may spend up to $900 million over five years to upgrade Line 1.
He stressed that the $900 million figure is a maximum, saying there are other alternatives including leasing equipment instead of purchasing.
But the challenge remains that only about 12 percent of the freight along the Mexico City to Laredo corridor moves by rail, with the remainder hauled by truck, compared with 20 percent moving by rail about 10 years ago. About 35 to 40 percent of U.S. freight moves by rail, Haverty added.
Haverty said he believes Kansas City Southern and TMM can increase the amount of Mexican freight moving by rail. He views Line 1 as the key component in his company's plans to build a "NAFTA railroad," referring to the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) that allows the flow of goods between the United States, Canada and Mexico.
((Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787))
Morton International Inc., the maker of Morton Salt, has gained a key European presence for two of its businesses due to planned acquisitions, its chairman said Thursday, and is likely to expand there with further purchases.
"We're prepared to look at specialty chemical investments anywhere in the world. There are more opportunities in Europe and Asia than in the U.S. right now," Morton Chairman S. Jay Stewart said in an interview.
Earlier this week, Morton said it plans to acquire Italian powder coatings company Pulverlac Spa and French salt company, Compagnie des Salins du Midi et des Salines de l'Est.
Morton International's major product is Morton Salt, known for the signature phrase, "When it rains, it pours."
"We had been looking for an opportunity to get a reasonably significant powder coatings base in Europe," Stewart said of the Pulverlac agreement.
Morton has other specialty chemicals operations overseas, including making packaging adhesives in Italy and the Netherlands.
Stewart said he saw good demand growth for powder coatings, which are now applied to metal parts for protection and coloration. That demand could expand greatly in the future if use of these coatings expands to plastics and wood, he added.
Morton said Pulverlac will join Morton's North American coatings business and the combined operations will have sales of more than $200 million.
Morton's total sales for fiscal 1996, ended June 30, were $3.3 billion, including $1.6 billion in specialty chemicals sales.
"The acquistion of Pulverlac is very much consistent with the company's focus on growing its specialty chemical operations," William Blair analyst Robert Bartels said.
Morton also established a European presence in its core salt business with a definitive agreement to acquire two-thirds of Salins du Midi for about $195 million. Morton said it will make a public cash tender offer in France for the remaining shares of Salins du Midi, bringing the total price to about $290 million.
Salins du Midi, with estimated 1996 sales of almost $270 million, will join Morton's salt group, resulting in combined sales of $870 million.
Salins du Midi, headquartered in Paris, supplies salt for food and agricultural products, water treatment, de-icing and industrial applications. Salins produces salt at nine sites in France and four in Spain.
Morton operates 22 salt facilities in the United States, Canada and the on the Island of Inagua in the Bahamas.
Stewart said the acquisitions are expected to close in the third or fourth quarters of fiscal 1997, which ends in June. The acquisitions are expected to add modestly to earnings in the first year of operation, which would be fiscal 1998, and then contribute more significantly a few years later.
Looking ahead, Stewart said specialty chemicals remains "a priority" for making acquisitions.
Morton is growing its salt and specialty chemicals businesses as it moves ahead with plans to merge its auto airbag business with Autoliv AB of Sweden. That merger is expected to be completed in calendar 1997.
Stewart said the current debate over potential safety hazards from airbags, which critics say may harm children and smaller adults, underscores what he saw as the value of the business combination.
The combined company would make not only airbags but also car passenger restraints, enabling it to capitalize on whatever safety systems are employed in the future, Stewart said.
Monsanto Co said Monday its pending acquisition of Holden's Foundation Seeds, a $1.0 billion deal that gives it access to the worldwide seed corn market, will dilute earnings for two or three years.
In the first year, dilution could be as much as $0.10 to $0.17 a share, Filippello said, but cautioned the number could be lower than that due to pending accounting issues.
"But by the end of the decade, this will be accretive even from an accounting standpoint," Nicholas Filippello, chief economist for Monsanto, said in a telephone interview.  
Variables in determining the amount of earnings dilution include charges Monsanto may take in the future related to the Holden's deal. Those charges may include write-offs of Holden's in-process research and development, which would reduce the amount of ongoing amortization from the deal.
Based on Monsanto's benchmark of measuring itself on an "economic value added" (EVA) basis, the acquisition is positive for the company, Filippello added.
"We are willing to accept some near-term dilution in (earnings per share) from an accounting standpoint if in fact we are creating value in a net added value sense," he said.  
EVA is derived by taking net income and subtracting a charge for the capital used to generate that income, Monsanto said in its 1995 annual report.
Earlier, Monsanto said it will buy Holden's,  Corn States Hybrid Service Inc and  Corn States International for up to $1.02 billion.
Filippello said Monsanto will pay up to $945.0 million for Holden's, which produces corn germplasm used by seed companies to create hybrid seeds. It will pay up to $75 million for Corn States and Corn States International, which are the exclusive worldwide marketing and sales representatives for Holden's.  
Both prices may later be reduced, Filippello added.
Analysts said Monsanto's acquisition of Holden's, which had been expected, is also a defensive move to block its competitors from gaining access to the seed company.
NatWest Securities analyst Mark Wiltamuth said he considers the planned acquisition of Holden's and Corn States "a strategic positive".
By buying Holden's, Monsanto gains an outlet for its genetic developments. Simply put, Monsanto can implant the genes it develops in the germplasm -- or parent seeds -- produced by Holden's.
Monsanto said more than 35 percent of the approximately 80 million acres of corn planted in the United Sates use genetic material developed by Holden's.
Filippello said the Corn States International acquisition also gives Monsanto access to some 300 million acres of corn worldwide.
The other positive for Monsanto is the ability to sell more of its flagship Roundup herbicide to farmers who plant genetically-enhanced seeds from Holden's. Monsanto has developed a gene that makes crops, like corn, resistant to use of its Roundup herbicide to kill weeds in the field.
Competitive pressures in the U.S. cereal market are expected to put a crunch on earnings for two companies -- one the branded leader and the other the largest maker of private-label cereals.
Analysts said Kellogg Co, the largest U.S. cereal maker, is expected to report flat fourth quarter earnings, although it may be able to eke out a rise of a penny or two.
Ralcorp Holdings Inc, which makes private-label -- or store brand -- cereal, is expected to report lower earnings for its fiscal first quarter, analysts added.
In both cases, earnings are pressured by price cuts and promotions in the intensely competitive U.S. cereal market.
Kellogg has seen its market share decline recently in the face of heavy promotions by its rival, General Mills Inc . General Mills last month reported an increase in its fiscal second quarter earnings to $1.00 a share from $0.92.
"(Kellogg's) domestic earnings are clearly going to be down on lower sales and some increase in marketing spending," said Goldman Sachs analyst Nomi Ghez.
She added Kellogg's market share appeared to have risen somewhat in December as it increased promotions.
Among the other food companies reporting quarterly earnings, poor pork and beef margins are expected to hurt fourth quarter earnings for meat processor IBP Inc.
"IBP will have down earnings, how far down we don't know," Piper Jaffray analyst George Dahlman said.
Quaker Oats Co is expected to report an operating profit for the fourth quarter compared with a year ago operating loss. Quaker, however, is expected to take a charge in the fourth quarter to reduce the carrying value of its Snapple beverage business.
"The issue for Quaker is how big of a charge they take for Snapple," said BT Securities analyst John O'Neil.
Quaker said in a recent Securities and Exchange Commission filing that it was reviewing Snapple for a possible charge to reduce the carrying value. A Quaker spokesman declined to comment on the possibility of a charge in the fourth quarter.
Sara Lee Corp is expected to report a double-digit earnings increase for its fiscal second quarter, with the biggest improvement in its meat and bakery division, said Donaldson, Lufkin and Jenrette analyst William Leach.
Analysts said CPC International Inc is expected to report a smaller than typical rise in its quarterly earnings, due to the previously reported impact of high corn costs.
Company     Qtr     First Call Mean EPS Estimate   Yr-Ago EPS
CPC Int'l   Q4		   $1.08			$1.02
IBP Inc     Q4		   $0.29			$0.59
Kellogg     Q4		   $0.77			$0.77
Quaker Oats Q4	  profit $0.12		loss  $0.18
Ralcorp     Q1		   $0.20*		     $0.46
Sara Lee    Q2		   $0.63			$0.55
*Ralcorp estimate based on analysts contacted by Reuters, not First Call
((Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787))
