British Governor Chris Patten challenged business on Thursday to defend the rule of law that had made Hong Kong a success, and to destroy fallacies that may harm the territory in the run-up to China's mid-1997 takeover.
"The rule of law is not an optional extra. It is what makes Hong Kong different, it is what makes Hong Kong successful," Patten told the Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce in a speech.
"Without it, a lot of you would not be here," he said.
Britain hands back Hong Kong to China in 264 days from now, ending a century and a half of colonial rule over an outpost that has become one of Asia's economic pearls.
China has promised Hong Kong substantial autonomy and the preservation of its capitalist system under a "one country, two systems" formula.
Patten and chamber chairman James Tien glossed over an image projected in local newspapers lately that the governor and the business community were at loggerheads over 1997-related issues.
Several times this year Patten chastised businessmen who pandered to Beijing's communist rulers to beg favours and thus invited China to encroach upon Hong Kong's autonomy.
Tien stressed at Thursday's gathering that the key business body backed the government on key policies. Patten thanked them, drawing applause, and said his critics were in a minority.
Tien said the chamber supported the pegging of Hong Kong's currency to the U.S. dollar, the rule of law, the independence of judges and the civil service, and the commitment to good government.
But he did not mention Britain's demand for Hong Kong's fully elected legislature to continue after the 1997 handover, a major plank of Patten's policy, or China's plans to scrap this legislature and replace it with an appointed "provisional" body.
Asked by one businessman if there were any conditions under which Patten would cooperate with the "provisional legislature", the governor flatly replied "No".
Patten stressed the value of a political opposition. He cited a poll in which three-quarters of executives questioned said opposition to government posed no threat to a territory's prospects and that Hong Kong's opposition was in fact too weak.
"I'm very grateful to the chamber for everything they've been doing to redress the balance," he said, drawing guffaws of laughter for his ironic reference to barbs that he has received from some local business leaders in recent months.
Patten exhorted business to speak out for Hong Kong's autonomy, opposition to corruption, and for basic freedoms. He also asked it to help destroy four big fallacies that he said harmed Hong Kong's prospects and image.
These were the notions that Hong Kong's economy needed stimulative intervention, that it was over-regulated and was losing its competitive edge, that welfare spending was too high, and that the rule of law was irrelevant to economic success.
"You can give Hong Kong a lead in defending the rule of law, open and accountable government... by helping to nail the fallacies I have described. When you speak up for Hong Kong, it makes a difference," Patten said.
The fact that over half the companies listed on the Hong Kong bourse had domiciles in places such as Bermuda or the Cayman Islands, he said, showed the value the business community attached to the rule of law.
In recent years many firms have hedged their 1997 risks by shifting their legal domiciles to overseas jurisdictions.
Hong Kong, wary about upsetting its future Beijing masters when dissenters use it as an escape route, kept silent on Monday about Chinese dissident Wang Xizhe following reports he had fled to the British colony.
Human rights activists in Hong Kong said Wang, 46, fled here from his home in China's neighbouring Guangdong province over the weekend, just days after the communist authorities in Beijing bundled a colleague into a labour camp.
He was expected to leave Hong Kong soon, they said, possibly by Monday night, and probably for the United States.
The U.S. Consulate declined to confirm or deny that Wang had asked for asylum. "We don't comment on asylum cases," consulate spokesman Patrick Corcoran said.
Wang would be the second Chinese dissident known to have fled to the United States via Hong Kong this year. Liu Gang fled last May after months of police harassment following a six-year prison stint for helping to lead the 1989 student protest movement.
"According to our information Wang is safe at the moment," Robin Munro, Director of Human Rights Watch Asia, told Reuters.
"I think it's likely he'll probably be going on somewhere else fairly soon," Munro said.
Munro said he was unable to say where Wang was heading, but other human rights sources in Hong Kong said he was seeking refuge in the United States.
Washington has been generous in granting asylum to Beijing's political critics since a military crackdown against the student-led democracy movement in Tiananmen Square in June 1989.
Scores, perhaps hundreds, of Chinese dissenters have fled to the West since then through Hong Kong, local activists say.
"I assume he was about to be arrested by the Chinese authorities. I can't think what else would have prompted such a rapid departure," Munro said, attributing Wang's move to the three-year sentence passed on dissident Liu Xiaobo last week.
Wang and Liu sparked reprisals against remaining dissidents last month when they wrote a letter demanding the impeachment of President Jiang Zemin for violating the constitution by placing the army under Communist Party, rather than state, control.
Human rights sources said it was unlikely Wang would speak publicly in Hong Kong but that he would explain himself when he reached his destination.
As Hong Kong prepares to revert to Chinese sovereignty next July 1, issues of human rights, and especially help for mainland dissidents, have become acutely sensitive.
"The Hong Kong government asks such people to keep quiet while they are here as the price for facilitating their smooth exit from the territory," one human rights source said. "And the Americans go along with that quiet, too," he said.
Munro saw the latest developments in China as a blow.
"It's extremely discouraging and quite deplorable the way the (Chinese) government has intensified its crackdown on the few remaining dissidents in China in recent weeks," said Munro.
He said the dissident movement in China had effectively been crushed, with all prominent dissidents either in jail or forced into exile.
"The saddest thing about it is that Wang appears to have concluded there's no way he could continue to struggle for change from within the country," Munro said.
Wang's activism dates from 1974 when he co-authored an attack in Guangdong on the radical 1966-76 Cultural Revolution.
He took part in the 1979 Democracy Wall movement in Beijing and produced his own dissident newsletters. He was twice imprisoned and spent some 17 years in jail and labour camps.
He was released on parole in 1993, and before he fled he had been under constant police surveillance.
Chinese dissident Wang Xizhe's flight to the United States via Hong Kong may be the last great escape of its kind, as China is sure to try to shut down the route next year, activists and analysts said on Wednesday.
Since Beijing sent tanks into Tiananmen Square in 1989 to put down a student-led protest movement, hundreds of Chinese dissidents have fled through Hong Kong in a secretive operation codenamed Yellowbird, activists said.
Wang, now in the United States, has not appeared in public yet, and it has not been confirmed that it was Yellowbird that helped him flee from the south China province of Guangdong last Friday.
But the underground escape route is bound to be sealed off when Hong Kong becomes a part of China next July 1, ending a century and a half of British colonial rule.
"China will have sovereignty here and technically it could prevent even a dissident who was given asylum by a foreign consulate here from actually leaving the territory," Robin Munro, director of Human Rights Watch Asia, told Reuters.
"So I expect that it's virtually going to come to an end as of July next year."
China on Tuesday loudly signalled its stance on future dissident tangles with Hong Kong. It branded Wang's escape an illegal frontier crossing and demanded that he and his abettors be punished for breaking the law.
"The judicial authorities are currently pursuing the legal responsibilities of Wang Xizhe and the plotters," foreign ministry spokesman Shen Guofang said in Beijing.
Very few in Hong Kong have any illusions that the territory will continue to be a conduit for dissidents to get out, or as a centre of pro-democracy anti-communist activism after 1997.
"Hong Kong will be subject to more pressure from the central government. Therefore it will be more difficult for dissidents to use Hong Kong as an escape route," said Peter Lee, a professor at the Chinese University of Hong Kong.
And those who help Chinese dissidents may have a tough time. "I think they will be liable to some kind of harassment and otherwise legal punishment," Lee said.
Lee Wing-tat, a legislator and key figure in the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of Patriotic Democratic Movements in China, an organisation that supports fleeing dissidents, said his group was likely to face trouble from China next year.
"A Chinese official made a statement a few months ago. He said if people participated in helping political dissidents escape from China, China will do something... My guess is some kind of punishment," Lee Wing-tat said.
But his group was pressing on with help for dissidents who are now exiled in Hong Kong and seeking asylum in the West.
"We will give them assistance, for example we will arrange some places for them to live, contact the Hong Kong government and foreign consulates, and arrange money for their family."
China's communist rulers have made clear they will not allow Hong Kong to become a centre of subversion.
China's Hong Kong policy boss Lu Ping said this year Beijing would not tolerate anti-constitutional preaching in Hong Kong.
Munro sees a bleak future for the Chinese dissidents in exile here after the handover and says they should all get out.
The three foremost candidates for Hong Kong's post-colonial leadership, who are now campaigning for support, made clear on Tuesday they would not upset Beijing by defending dissidents.
"There will be laws in Hong Kong and it is up to the chief executive to implement and obey the law... Whatever one does, it must be in the interests of of Hong Kong people," said shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa, considered China's favourite candidate.
Chinese communities across the globe will soon have their very own high-society magazine, rivalling the standards of glamour publications such as Cosmopolitan and Vanity Fair.
Imagine a world-class magazine which combines the flair and colour visuals of the U.S. Architectural Digest and the  New York Times magazine. None of it is in English but in Chinese. "The Chinese" will hit the newsstands on November 1.
With editorial operations based in Hong Kong, the magazine is owned by Thailand-based M. China International and Manager Media Group, which publish Asia Inc. monthly and the daily Asia Times in English.
The group's chairman, Sondhi Limthongul, a Thai with third generation Chinese ancestry, is extending his reach to rich ethnic Chinese readers and to the regional magazine sector.
The publication, with a launch circulation target of 56,000 copies, comes at a time of ballooning interest, fuelled by the sudden growth of China itself, in the diaspora of overseas Chinese communities, from Southeast Asia to New York and Los Angeles, to London, Paris and Amsterdam.
A rash of books has been published lately on this powerful diaspora of Chinese, many of whom descend from merchants who migrated from China centuries ago and who, together with more recent migrants, form a "bamboo network" of almost 60 million people.
"A lot of Chinese today are at the cutting edge of many industries and want a magazine to rediscover ourselves, to tell our own story in our own words, in our own pictures," editorial director Liu Heung Shing said.
Hong Kong-born Liu, a Pulitzer prize-winning former wire service photographer acclaimed for his photo coverage of China, Russia, India, is the magazine's driving force.
"I think many people like me feel ashamed when they pick up a Chinese magazine, because it's never quite there," said Liu.
"There's nothing really to buy. Just political magazines for dissidents. When you read them it's frustrating. The news is always sandwiched in between lots of half-truths," he said.
The publication targets a niche of well-heeled Chinese professionals or company owners, aged 28 to 50, mainly overseas educated, with an annual personal income of at least US$120,000 or a household income of at least $150,000.
"Ethnic Chinese will form the most powerful network of entrepreneurs in the world in the next decade. Fifty-four million ethnic Chinese worldwide, with assets of more than one trillion (dollars) are the most successful entrepreneurs in the world," writes John Naisbitt, author of a recent book, Megatrends Asia.
Features on the rich and famous personalities such as high-flying socialite David Tang, actress Gong Li, publisher and entrepreneur Jimmy Lai, as well as up-and-coming Chinese like Shanghai catwalk model Yao Shuyi, will be the magazine's staple diet.
It will be illustrated by bold colour visuals and advertisements for the flashy, expensive brand names for which Chinese around the world have a passion.
The Chinese diaspora forms powerful business networks, bonded by a unique sense of being Chinese even if not citizens of a Chinese state.
Hundreds of of thousands of ethnic Chinese have returned to East Asia from other parts of the world in recent years to take advantage of the unique economic boom powering the region.
The magazine intends to be apolitical. "The aim is to rediscover ourselves, without any political context," said Liu.
But it will spotlight and probe Chinese personalities in politics, be they in China, Taiwan, Hong Kong or in the diaspora overseas. "There is a Chinese sense and sensibility which has nothing to do with politics -- how they view the notion of the people called 'the Chinese'," said Liu.
"We want personalities rather than polemics. Be it Singapore's leader Lee Kuan Yew or an American Chinese running for governor in a U.S. state."
The English title is The Chinese. The Chinese title is the character "Zhong" which means "centre", the first character of "Zhong Guo" or "Middle Kingdom", one of China's names. The word derives from an ancient pictogram of an arrow piercing a target.
By using the simple word "zhong" for Chinese, the publishers avoid political connotations that would associate Chinese people with a specific territory.
Can the idea make money? Is there really a niche for such a publication in the cut-throat international magazines market?
"It's a competitive environment, but advertisers have now come to the idea that there is this group of people who are high income earners, clearly part of this fast-emerging economic community in Taiwan, Singapore, Malaysia and elsewhere.
"If you look at Vogue, Esquire or others, these are giants with a strong appeal to advertisers. But Chinese language publishing is still a virgin market," Liu said.
Hong Kong's post-1997 leadership campaign has begun in earnest with all the top candidates for the job as the territory's chief executive stating their positions on key issues in recent days.
The latest was Sir Ti Liang Yang, who on Monday made several policy statements including support for China's controversial plan to scrap the British colony's elected legislature.
With Britain's withdrawal and Hong Kong's reversion to Chinese rule 245 days away, would-be contenders to succeed Governor Chris Patten as the territory's top executive have sharpened their policy positions and revved up their campaigns.
"I think we have a real race in the sense that there is no chosen candidate in this contest," political expert Michael DeGolyer said on Tuesday.
DeGolyer, who heads a study on transition issues at a Hong Kong university, dismissed speculation that China had decided the outcome in advance and said rival Beijing factions were backing different Hong Kong personalities in the race.
"It's pretty clear they are backing different candidates in this contest," DeGolyer told a Hong Kong radio talk show.
The four main contenders among 31 nominees are Yang, shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa, businessman Peter Woo and ex-appeals court judge Simon Li.
Yang, who resigned as the territory's chief justice last month to vie for the chief executive slot, broke with government policy when he ended his silence on China's plans for the legislature, describing them as legal and necessary.
China plans to dissolve Hong Kong's elected Legislative Council (Legco) -- reversing Patten's democratic reforms -- and install an appointed "provisional legislature". Britain and Hong Kong's democratic camp hotly oppose the plan.
"In my view the provisional legislature has a legal basis and there is a necessity to establish it," Yang told reporters.
He said without it, there was a risk of a legal vacuum arising during the transition to Chinese rule.
But Yang rejected the idea of the new assembly operating in tandem with Legco in the run-up to the handover.
He also said the enactment of new laws on subversion and treason, to reflect the change of sovereignty, should be left to a future permanent legislature to handle.
Despite the campaign atmosphere, the territory's new leader will not be democratically elected but chosen by the secretive, Beijing-appointed Selection Committee, a panel of 400 people from Hong Kong that will make the choice next month.
The Beijing-controlled Hong Kong daily Ta Kung Pao on Tuesday called the process "a democratic election with Hong Kong characteristics", a play on China's label for its own political system, "socialism with Chinese characteristics".
Yang also said he was shedding his British knighthood and the corresponding title "Sir".
Over the past week all four front-runners have made clear they would not challenge China's tough line on key political issues such as the legislature, democracy, human rights and freedom of expression in Hong Kong.
The 11-year sentence handed down on Wednesday to Chinese dissident Wang Dan has awakened fears that critics of the Chinese administration in Hong Kong after the 1997 handover could face a similar fate.
Britain hands Hong Kong back to China in 243 days' time after more than 150 years of colonial rule.
The sentence imposed on Wang sparked a flurry of debate in Hong Kong on Thursday over the shape of future laws on subversion in the territory.
Hong Kong has for more than a century been a sanctuary for Chinese dissenters. Some 80 mainland dissidents who fled the communist mainland live in exile in the colony.
The territory also has a large home-grown anti-communist democracy movement, which Beijing officials have often branded as subversive because its adherents backed the 1989 student-led pro-democracy protests in Beijing's Tiananmen Square.
Hong Kong's future constitution, the Basic Law promulgated by China, requires laws to be passed after the handover to ban anti-constitutional activities, including subversion.
There has been intense speculation in Hong Kong over what actions the law will ban and whether or not it should be legislated by a provisional body that China plans to appoint upon the handover, or a new legislature expected to be elected in 1998.
So will Hong Kong "dissidents" face the same fate as Wang?
Members of the pro-Beijing political camp said no. "I would certainly dispute any suggestion that could be the case," Eric Li, a legislator and a member of the China-picked Preparatory Committee working out transitional arrangements, told reporters.
"We have our own judicial system and courts, and it will be up to the Hong Kong people to decide what that law is going to be like in the future," Li said.
But Martin Lee, head of Hong Kong's Democratic Party, said he believed Hong Kong dissidents would go to jail.
"If we have a similar law in Hong Kong passed under article 23 of the Basic Law, then the Hong Kong people's freedoms will likewise be curtailed," Lee said. "If we then do something which we do today lawfully, then we are liable to be put into prison, no matter how fair the judge is."
The four leading candidates jockeying to run Hong Kong after 1997 have all refrained from commenting on Wang's sentence.
But one, former chief judge Ti Liang Yang, said he hoped it would be the post-1997 elected legislature which tackles the subversion law and not the provisional body that China plans to install after scrapping the current elected legislature.
"When the time comes for the legislature to legislate under article 23 of the Basic Law they will take into consideration the conditions of Hong Kong, the laws of Hong Kong," Yang said.
After a week of nervousness over its future freedoms, Hong Kong watched on Friday for the outcome of a Beijing gathering that will set the tone for the post-colonial government that takes over in 1997.
The Preparatory Committee of pro-China figures from Hong Kong and mainland Chinese officials was meeting in Beijing for two days to elect a 400-member caucus that will pick Hong Kong's first post-colonial leader and parliament.
The exercise will quicken the pace of the British colony's transition to Chinese rule in 242 days' time.
In the latest step in Britain's pull-out, Gurkha soldiers who were the backbone of the colonial garrison were set to bid a ceremonial farewell to one of their Hong Kong bases on Friday night.
Hong Kong was jarred this week by fears of a crackdown by China after the handover in view of the jailing in Beijing of prominent dissident Wang Dan.
The colony was also unnerved by remarks this month by Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, chairman of the Beijing meeting, that freedom of expression in Hong Kong would be limited after the sovereignty transfer at midnight next June 30.
On Thursday, a further jolt came when China barred entry to two Hong Kong politicians who wanted to petition the Beijing meeting against some of China's Hong Kong policies.
On Friday two more Hong Kong activists were expelled from Beijing.
On the eve of the Beijing meeting, a pro-China lobby group published a survey showing that most Hong Kong businessmen expected press freedom, the political system and human rights to deteriorate after the handover.
Some 72 percent expected less press freedom, 64 percent expected the political system to suffer, and 63 percent saw a deterioration in human rights, the survey by the Better Hong Kong Foundation showed.
A leading candidate to become the future leader of Hong Kong, former Chief Justice Ti Liang Yang, sought to allay fears this week that the territory would be forced to accept tough, Chinese-style laws on sedition after 1997.
"If you simply chant a few lines which do not incite any illegal acts, or which you don't expect to cause others to act radically, it should not be a problem," Yang said on Thursday.
But Yang and three other leading contenders for the top job were attacked by Hong Kong's leading democracy group for failing to condemn Wang Dan's 11-year jail sentence, saying they were ignoring local people's anger.
"They are not just angry about the fate of Wang Dan, what they are most worried about is whether Article 23 of the Basic Law will become a tool to curb their freedom of speech after the handover," said Szeto Wah, deputy head of the Democratic Party.
The Selection Committee make-up is expected to be announced on Saturday. The body will meet in Hong Kong next month to select the Chief Executive who will succeed colonial Governor Chris Patten next July.
Hong Kong legislators plan court action and a lobbying mission to Britain in a "last-ditch battle" to save the territory's elected legislature from China's axe, pro-democracy leader Martin Lee said on Tuesday.
Britain hands the century-and-a-half-old colony back to China in 238 days, and Beijing is moving full steam ahead with a plan to appoint a new provisional legislature to replace the Legislative Council (Legco) that was fully elected in 1995.
A Chinese-controlled Selection Committee is to name the 60 members of the body at a meeting in Hong Kong next month.
The committee, formed in Beijing last weekend, is opposite to last year's election results in Hong Kong. It gives all the clout to pro-China factions and sidelines democracy groups who won a landslide 70 percent of last year's poll.
Lee, a lawyer and leader of the colony's largest political party, the Democratic Party, told Reuters the government had a duty to stop Beijing's provisional legislature from happening.
"Primarily it should be the responsibility of our attorney general to take them to the courts. But if the government will not act, then I'll certainly take them to the courts," he said.
"It's the last-ditch battle for Hong Kong," Lee said. "We should not look at it as a fait accompli. We should fight against it with all our might."
Britain has condemned China's plan and challenged Beijing to prove its legality under the Joint Declaration and Basic Law -- the documents which cover Hong Kong's sovereignty transfer.
Lee is flying to London on Friday to lobby Prime Minister John Major, opposition Labour Party leader Tony Blair and other British officials and members of parliament ahead of a November 14 House of Commons debate on Hong Kong's future.
"I want them to say the setting up of this legislature will amount to a most blatant breach of the Joint Declaration. So far the British government has refused to say that," Lee said.
He plans a similar mission to Australia and New Zealand later this month.
Another group of Hong Kong legislators led by independent Emily Lau is also flying to London to lobby. Colonial Governor Chris Patten, the ruling Conservatives' ex-chairman, also plans to be in London to press Hong Kong's case before the debate.
Reliable sources said Lee has already drawn up a raft of lawsuits to sue members of the provisional body and institutions if the new assembly is set up in breach of laws and treaties.
But Lee declined to reveal details. "I don't think I should reveal my hand. A lot will depend on what they do," he said.
Opponents of the Chinese plan point to findings by Legco's legal adviser, Jonathan Daw, who counselled in July that the provisional body would be illegal on several counts. Hong Kong's Bar Association has also highlighted illegalities.
Only one legislature is allowed to operate in Hong Kong, and no other body is allowed to pass bills under Hong Kong's constitutional set-up, Daw noted in written counsel. Any enactment of laws by a parallel body before the handover would amount to "usurpation" and would be unlawful, he said.
Lee said China's crackdown on dissidents, including the recent 11-year jailing of student leader Wang Dan for subversion, was another reason for Hong Kong's 6.3 million people to worry.
"It augurs very badly because what has happened to Wang Dan today can well happen to us tomorrow," Lee said.
"Unfortunately, Hong Kong will also have laws against subversion after 1997, because the Basic Law says so," he said.
"The provisional legislature, which is going to be a rubber stamp for Beijing appointed by Beijing, will certainly pass a law something like the law under which Wang Dan was convicted."
The leader of Hong Kong's biggest pro-Beijing party said on Thursday the China-appointed interim legislature Beijing plans to set up next month would not clash with existing institutions before the handover.
Tsang Yok-sing, leader of the Democratic Alliance for the Betterment of Hong Kong (DAB), said the possibility that the provisional legislature would meet on the communist-ruled mainland rather than in Hong Kong has not been ruled out.
Britain is handing Hong Kong, its last major colony, back to China as an autonomous Special Administrative Region in 236 days' time, ending a century and a half of colonial rule.
Hong Kong's political establishment, and the governments of Britain and China, are polarised over China's plan to dissolve the elected Legislative Council (Legco) on July 1 and replace it with a provisional body until elections in 1998.
The plan is China's response to an enlargement of the democratic franchise by Governor Chris Patten, which Beijing has said violated the handover agreements.
In an interview with Reuters, Tsang said Hong Kong's constitutional arrangements did not prevent the provisional legislature from becoming Hong Kong's legislative body on July 1, after the sovereignty transfer.
"That is the date from which onwards, the provisional body is supposed to be involved in legislative work," Tsang said.
"Before that date, although the body is there, the Preparatory Committee and also some Chinese officials in charge of Hong Kong affairs have made it very clear that this provisional body will not be a legislature of Hong Kong."
The China-controlled Preparatory Committee has elected a 400-member body that will select both the territory's first post-colonial leader, the chief executive, and the provisional legislature. Both selections will be announced next month.
Critics portray the provisional legislature as a rubber-stamp body appointed by China that will enact repressive laws and eliminate many basic freedoms.
But Tsang told Reuters the committee process to establish the provisional body was just as much an election as the electoral arrangements for Legco, some of whose members are only indirectly elected.
Tsang, whose DAB fared badly against the popular Democratic Party in the September 1995 Legco elections, insisted that China had not breached the 1984 Sino-British treaty on the handover.
"China is abiding by the Joint Declaration. China is not going to set up a parallel legislature in Hong Kong before the actual handover," Tsang said.
"The place where the provisional body will work before July 1 next year has not been thoroughly discussed," he said.
"If people believe it would be inappropriate for the provisional body to meet in Hong Kong before July 1, 1997, then it can meet somewhere outside the territory," he said.
The leader of the Democratic Party, Martin Lee, said the provisional body would be illegal and that if the government did not take it to court, then he would do it himself.
"It's the last ditch battle for Hong Kong," Lee said. "We should fight against it with all our might."
Lee, who plans to lobby Britain next week to take firmer action, said the provisional legislature would roll back civil liberties and have dissidents jailed as they are in China.
China's crackdown, highlighted by the 11-year jail sentence handed to student leader Wang Dan last week, was a sign of what Hong Kong would be like after 1997, Lee said.
"Today Wang Dan, tomorrow you and me," he said.
Shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa saw his fortunes almost dashed on the rocks in the 1980s when the family company met ill winds, but his luck rebounded and now he could be Hong Kong's next leader.
Next month China's carefully screened Selection Committee will choose a chief executive to run Hong Kong after Britain hands the colony back in mid-1997.
Tung topped a recent popularity poll with 30.2 percent. His nearest rivals were former Chief Justice Ti Liang Yang with 27.5 percent, businessman Peter Woo with 8.7 percent and former High Court judge Simon Li with 3.3 percent.
Tung has been a senior member of a preparatory committee of pro-Beijing Hong Kong notables and mainland China officials crafting the power structures to replace British colonial rule.
He was lauded as an impartial and honest counsellor by Governor Chris Patten when Tung stepped down in June this year from Patten's advisory cabinet, the Executive Council.
He resigned in October as head of his family firm, Orient Overseas (International) Ltd, to make his leadership bid.
Tung's early campaigning consisted of clearing the decks of speculation that might lead to challenges on his integrity, such as how China had once saved his family from bankruptcy.
Tung took the helm of the business after his father died in 1979. He recently revealed China had helped bail out the firm 11 years ago by backing a US$120 million fund led by tycoon Henry Fok, a kingmaker in today's leadership contest. The family later bought back most of the shares and restored their majority.
"In 1985 and '86 we went through a very difficult time when the shipping business was in serious recession. Henry Fok led a syndicate of investment in our company," Tung said.
"I know there were mainland funds in it. I'm sure. To Mr Fok and those who have helped me...I am very grateful."
Tung was spotted as a possible favourite of China when President Jiang Zemin singled him out for a personal handshake at a meeting in Beijing this year.
Tung is believed to be acceptable also to Britain and to expatriate business leaders who hope he will form a "dream team" with incumbent Chief Secretary Anson Chan -- Hong Kong's top civil servant -- if China allows her to stay on after the flag change on July 1 next year.
Tung has links with the powerful in key capitals -- Beijing, Taipei, London and Washington -- whose influence will be important for Hong Kong's evolution after 1997.
Born in Shanghai in 1937, Tung was educated at Liverpool University in Britain.
The 59-year-old magnate has a patriarchal look, with grey bristly hair, bright eyes and hand-on-heart gestures.
The tycoon, who previously dodged the limelight, is said to lead a disciplined life, arriving at his office at dawn to perform t'ai chi exercises on the roof before starting work.
Despite a reputation for modesty, wisdom and caution, and his strong ties to China, Tung's local power base may ultimately stir some unease in Beijing.
"It is hard to see Beijing favouring someone with a local power base, who really means to run the show," said legislator and lawyer Margaret Ng.
Tung has made a point of tapping various views, including those of pro-democracy parties and trade unions.
"I have met with people of different social classes, organisations and political views. I have gained a deeper understanding of Hong Kong's future challenges," Tung said.
But he has also made increasingly strident pro-China policy utterances. He accused Patten of splitting Hong Kong's 6.3 million people through a speech that assailed China's plan to replace the elected legislature with an appointed assembly.
He has urged people to forget China's bloody army crackdown on the 1989 democracy movement in Beijing and to leave it to historians to judge the event.
In an exercise dubbed by China as a "democratic election with Hong Kong characteristics", this bustling territory goes to the polls on Friday. But only 400 citizens out of 6.3 million people in the colony will be voting.
A 400-member Selection Committee formed under Beijing's tight rein will be inaugurated in Hong Kong with a month-long mission to elect the first post-colonial leader and the 60 members of a replacement legislature.
The committee, to be anointed by Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen on his first official trip to the colony, will set the tone of the government to rule Hong Kong after Britain hands its Asian pearl back to China at midnight next June 30.
Hong Kong, one of Asia's economic wonders, is to become a Special Administrative Region of communist-ruled China. Beijing has pledged to maintain the territory's thriving capitalist system intact for 50 more years under the terms of China's "one country two systems" reunification policy.
Pro-democracy legislators attacked the leadership candidates in a debate on Wednesday for failing to address issues of human rights and democracy and called for a real general election.
Trade unionist Lee Cheuk-yan told Hong Kong's existing legislature that a leading contender, shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa, was dangerous.
"Mr Tung is the most conservative among them, and he is the most dangerous as he calls on Hong Kong people to be willing to be obedient citizens," Lee said.
But a motion critical of the leadership selection was defeated by the pro-Beijing camp. Several democrats were absent on a lobbying mission to London.
"Democratisation is not like instant noodles... It took hundreds of years for Western countries to develop their present democratic systems," pro-Beijing legislator Ip Kwok-him said.
The sovereignty transition has been frought with disputes between China and Britain, between colonial governor Chris Patten and Chinese envoys, and between Hong Kong's burgeoning democracy movement and a pro-Beijing political camp.
They have sparred over the future of Hong Kong's human rights, democracy and basic freedoms, over whether or not the commercial "level playing field" will continue, and over the survival of Hong Kong's autonomy and the rule of law.
But now, 229 days before the sun finally sets on Britain's empire in Asia, attention is shifting to who will be running the show for China after Patten sails away.
In the first round of the process on Friday, the Selection Committee members will propose candidates for the chief executive who will step into Patten's shoes next year.
To enter the final run-off for the job, a candidate must be nominated by at least 50 members of the committee on Friday. The committee meets again on December 11 to pick the winner.
The leading candidates are all acceptable to China, sources close to the committee say.
In the forefront of the leadership battle are Tung and former chief judge Ti Liang Yang. An opinion poll gave Yang a 10 percentage point lead over Tung in public popularity this week.
Businessman Peter Woo and former appeals judge Simon Li came a remote third and fourth, and four other little known candidates scored less than one percent in the public's ratings.
However, it is not the public who vote, but the committee, and inside that body the real lobbying campaign is unfolding.
"We have a process which is laid down and I think it's clear the polls don't determine the winner," said Woo.
The committee was formed in Beijing two weeks ago and is dominated by pro-Beijing political and business groups.
China launched the contest to pick Hong Kong's future leader on Friday, hailing the event as the birth of "real democracy" in the British-ruled territory which is set to revert to Beijing's control next year.
But pro-democracy protesters disagreed -- they stormed into the building where Hong Kong's rich and mighty had gathered to vote, and, waving imitation black coffins, they denounced the exercise as the death of freedom.
Only 400 of Hong Kong's 6.3 million people are participating in the voting, having joined a special Selection Committee set up under China's close supervision.
Shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa and his principal rival, former Chief Justice Ti Liang Yang both scored more than the minimum of 50 votes required to reach the next leg of the contest to select the first post-colonial Chief Executive.
Tung took a commanding lead with 206 votes. Also through to round two is businessman Peter Woo, but five contenders including former appeals court judge Simon Li fell out of the race.
The run-off will be on December 11.
The gathering of the Selection Committee, inaugurated by China's Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, who was visiting the territory for the first time, was marred by scuffles when pro-democracy activists clashed with police.
A dozen demonstrators scrambled into the plush Hong Kong Convention Centre in an unsuccessful bid to disrupt the historic meeting. Police chased protesters up six floors of escalators before they were rounded up and detained.
Outside, a police officer received a bloody nose and three more demonstrators were carted away in scuffles between about 40 activists and 100 police.
In his inauguration speech Qian declared the selection process as the dawn of genuine democracy in Hong Kong.
"For Hong Kong's people to elect their own chief executive, that is something unprecedented in Hong Kong's history," he said.
"For some 150 years Britain has appointed 20 or so Hong Kong governors, and when were the views of Hong Kong people ever consulted?" Qian asked the assembled caucus.
"The establishment of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR) is the start of real democracy in Hong Kong, and not the end of democracy in Hong Kong," he said.
Hong Kong reverts to China at midnight next June 30.
Tung, 59, Yang, 67, and Woo, 50, are now the only hopefuls left in the race, and Qian was at pains to stress that despite claims by critics that the winner had been chosen in advance by China's communist rulers, the result was not preordained.
The democracy activists brandished posters of jailed Chinese dissidents Wang Dan and Wei Jingsheng and banners condemning China's plan to replace Hong Kong's elected legislature.
"Free Wang Dan, release Wei Jingsheng, oppose the provisional legislature", they shouted through loudhailers.
The democracy lobby brands the leadership race undemocratic and has campaigned against the provisional legislature.
"The provisional legislature is a great step backwards for democracy," one protest banner said on Friday.
British Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind warned China on Thursday its plans for a provisional legislature risked creating "confusion and uncertainty" in Hong Kong.
"China would have to explain to Hong Kong and the world why they had chosen to replace a body for which more than a million Hong Kong people voted by one chosen by a handpicked electorate of only 400," he told a parliamentary debate in London.
A shipping tycoon whose company was bailed out by Beijing when it was sinking years ago is poised to govern Hong Kong when China takes over next year, after a thumping victory in the first round of the ballot.
Tung Chee-hwa swept up 206 of the votes cast on Friday by an exclusive club of 400 Hong Kong's rich and influential, who were selected for the purpose under Beijing's close supervision.
The runner-up, former chief judge Ti Liang Yang scored 82. A third candidate, businessman Peter Woo, came in with 54. The trio were the only candidates to get the minimum 50 votes required to go through to the deciding round on December 11.
If an election were held by universal suffrage, however, Yang would get 35.7 percent and Tung 33.5 percent, an opinion poll by a local university showed after the vote.
Tung, 59, recently revealed for the first time that China had helped salvage his family shipping empire 11 years ago by backing a US$120 million syndicated fund led by pro-Beijing tycoon Henry Fok, a kingmaker in today's leadership contest.
"I know there were mainland funds in it. I'm sure. To Mr Fok and those who have helped me...I am very grateful," Tung said.
Fok went to pains after Friday's vote to assure reporters for half an hour that the rescue package was above board and had not entailed any political deal on the future of Hong Kong.
"I don't think he is returning favours to China by running for the Chief Executive," Fok said.
"Commercial relations are strictly what we have with those what you call Chinese-funded banks. We deposit our money there or we borrow money from them -- it is strictly normal commercial relations," Fok said.
Tung has long been viewed as Beijing's favoured candidate to become Hong Kong's Chief Executive when Britain hands its last Asian colony back to China at midnight next June 30.
Foreign Minister Qian Qichen gave fresh assurances on Friday that the winner had not been preordained by Chinese leaders.
Many in Hong Kong are convinced that a demonstrative personal handshake that Tung received from President Jiang Zemin in January was a deliberate cue.
Tung has tried to shake off the impression that despite the existence of other candidates it is really a one-horse race.
"I dont think it is a foregone conclusion. It's three weeks away to December 11...and I will have to be working very hard to make sure that I win on that day," he told Reuters Television after the first round vote.
"The process of nomination today was done in a very transparent manner," he said.
Some analysts, noting that Tung had scored more than 50 percent, wondered if a second round was worth the bother and suggested that Yang and Woo might as well bow out.
"For, if the ultimate purpose of running is to win, then there is little point in them carrying on," said political commentator C.K. Lau.
Tung, a striking figure with spiky grey hair and a boxer's stance, is noted for his cautious style and modesty.
He and his rivals will be interviewed by the committee members at the end of the month on their policies and attitudes.
So far he has emphasised the importance of the economy and business, and has taken a conservative view on ticklish issues such as human rights and democracy, advocating "consensus rather than confrontation" in dealings with China's communist rulers.
Speculation has abounded in Hong Kong that some of its business titans may have been secret card carrying members of the Chinese Communist Party for years. But Tung's name has until now not figured among these rumours.
Shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa saw his fortunes almost dashed on the rocks in the 1980s when the family company met ill winds, but Beijing bailed him out and now he is poised to become Hong Kong's next leader.
Next month, China's carefully screened Selection Committee will choose a Chief Executive to run Hong Kong after Britain hands its last important colony back to Beijing in mid-1997.
Tung appears streets ahead of his rivals, having run away with 206 of the 400 votes in the first round of balloting on Friday.
Behind him were retired Chief Justice Yang Ti Liang, who scored 82 votes, and businessman Peter Woo, who clocked up 54.
In the public's eyes, Yang is slightly more popular than Tung, according to recent opinion polls.
Tung has been a senior member of a Preparatory Committee of pro-Beijing Hong Kong notables and mainland China officials, charged with crafting the power structures which will replace British colonial rule.
Tung was lauded as an impartial and honest counsellor by Governor Chris Patten when he stepped down in June this year from Patten's advisory cabinet, the Executive Council.
The shipping tycoon resigned in October as head of his family firm, Orient Overseas (International) Ltd, to make his leadership bid.
Tung's early campaigning consisted of clearing the decks of speculation that might lead to challenges on his integrity, such as how China had once saved his family from bankruptcy.
Tung took the helm of the business after his father died in 1979. He has publicly acknowledged that China had helped bail out the firm 11 years ago by backing a US$120 million investment fund for the firm, led by tycoon Henry Fok, a kingmaker in today's leadership contest. The family later bought back most of the company's shares and restored its control of the firm.
"In 1985 and '86 we went through a very difficult time when the shipping business was in serious recession. Henry Fok led a syndicate of investment in our company," Tung said.
"I know there were mainland funds in it. I'm sure. To Mr Fok and those who have helped me...I am very grateful."
Tung was spotted as a possible favourite of China when President Jiang Zemin singled him out for a personal handshake at a meeting in Beijing this year.
But Tung is believed to be acceptable also to Britain and to expatriate business leaders who hope he will form a "dream team" with incumbent Chief Secretary Anson Chan -- Hong Kong's top civil servant -- if China allows her to stay on after the flag change at midnight next June 30.
Tung has links with the powerful in key capitals -- Beijing, Taipei, London and Washington -- whose influence will be important for Hong Kong's evolution after 1997.
Born in Shanghai in 1937, Tung was educated at Liverpool University in Britain.
The 59-year-old tycoon who has previously dodged the limelight, is said to lead a disciplined life. He was known for arriving at his office at dawn to perform tai chi exercises on the roof before starting work.
Despite a reputation for modesty, wisdom and caution, and strong ties to China, Tung's local power base may ultimately stir some unease in Beijing. "It is hard to see Beijing favouring someone with a local power base, who really means to run the show," said legislator and lawyer Margaret Ng.
Tung has made a point of tapping various views, including those of pro-democracy parties and trade unions.
But he has also made increasingly strident pro-China policy utterances. He accused Patten of splitting Hong Kong's 6.3 million people through a speech that assailed China's plan to replace the elected legislature with an appointed assembly.
He has urged people to forget China's bloody army crackdown on the 1989 democracy movement in Beijing and to leave it to historians to judge the event.
As U.S. President Bill Clinton jumped into Asian foreign policy issues with a new enthusiasm on Wednesday, security experts meeting in Hong Kong called on all countries involved to ensure no conflict flared up over Taiwan.
Experts said U.S. policy on China and Asia was maturing, and they called for the status quo in Taiwan to continue in the interests of wider Asia-Pacific security and prosperity.
"Next to Korea, the Taiwan Strait is the second major potential security flashpoint in the region," David Shambaugh of the George Washington University in the United States said.
"This is not a back-burner issue. It can quickly ignite and get on to the front burner... It is an issue we have to keep our eye on," he said, adding that any flareup over Taiwan would severely damage the region's bustling commerce.
Shambaugh was talking at a discussion panel of security experts at the World Economic Forum's Europe/East Asia meeting.
He said Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui and other Taiwan leaders should restrain themselves and that the time would be riper for dialogue with Beijing after China holds a watershed Communist Party congress next year.
At the same time, China should renounce the use of force and coercive diplomacy towards Taiwan and respect Taiwan's autonomy within a "one-China" formula. China should not expect Taipei "to negotiate with a gun to its head", Shambaugh said.
China-Taiwan relations have been tense over the past two years as pro-independence sentiment grew in Taiwan and Beijing launched a drive for the reintegration of its lost territories.
Taiwan, historically part of China, has been separated from the mainland for most of the past century, first by 50 years of Japanese occupation, then when China's nationalist government lost a civil war to the communists in 1949 and fled to Taipei.
China regards Taiwan as a rebel province and has threatened to use force if the island seeks formal independence.
In March this year, as Taiwan went to the polls, a major crisis blew up when China launched missile tests and briefly blockaded Taiwan to deter Taipei from declaring independence.
"We should maintain the status quo," Yuan Ming, a strategic studies expert from Beijing University, said on Wednesday.
The view was echoed by Masashi Nishihara from Japan's National Defence Academy, who said Taiwan should not provoke China by seeking a United Nations seat.
Another expert, Gerald Segal of the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London, said the United States successfully defended the strategic balance and at the same time managed to stop short of a conflict when it sent two aircraft carriers into seas near Taiwan as a warning to China during the March crisis.
But he warned that the arms race in the region, where many governments were newly democratic but politically very fragile, threatened stability.
Visiting Australia on Wednesday, Clinton said the United States was more determined than ever to be involved in Asia, to help provide stability, that China should not be isolated and that engaging Beijing was a "big priority".
At the same time Secretary of State Warren Christopher was in Beijing shoring up relations. Clinton is to meet Chinese President Jiang Zemin at next week's summit of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum in the Philippines.
Shambaugh said the flurry of high-level contacts now and in the near future between Beijing and Washington was important for building the Sino-U.S. relationship.
But he said Chinese officials would remain suspicious that the United States had a "subversion agenda" for China and that the policy of engagement was actually an attempt at containment.
Signals from Hong Kong's likely future leader that the Chinese Communist Party might become legal in the territory in 1997 raised concerns in the pro-democracy camp on Wednesday about the party's future power.
Concern was stirred up after the man tipped as the favourite to become Hong Kong's chief executive, shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa, said on Tuesday he would accept the Communist Party's legalisation after the British colony reverts to China.
London is handing Hong Kong back at midnight next June 30, and Tung is the frontrunner to lead it after he received 51 percent of the votes in the first round of a ballot last week by the 400-member selection committee organised by China.
Although China is ruled by the Communist Party, Beijing has promised Hong Kong wide-ranging autonomy, leaving its capitalist system intact for 50 years under a policy of "Hong Kong people running Hong Kong" and "one country, two systems".
"The most important thing is, what will be the role of the Communist Party in Hong Kong after the handover, because whether it's legal or not it is here," legislator Emily Lau told Reuters.
Many people in Hong Kong have speculated that the future Chief Executive will be stage-managed by a Communist overlord from Beijing. China has publicly denied this is the plan.
Tung said on Tuesday in response to a reporter's question that he would accept the party's legalisation if asked to do so.
"That's totally unnecessary. It's already there," said Martin Lee, leader of the Democratic Party, Hong Kong's largest.
The democracy camp is worried about what power, if any, the Communist Party might wield over Hong Kong, which is supposed to be administratively separate from the rest of China.
"Let's be realistic. China is dominated by the Communist Party and the Communist party already has an office here in the form of the Xinhua News Agency headed by Zhou Nan," independent lawmaker Christine Loh told Reuters.
"In the future after 1997 there is no reason to continue to pretend the Communist Party is not here," Loh said.
"But the problem is the Communist party isn't just an ordinary political party. In China it dominates the political and governmental institutions. So what we want to know is that its presence here would not represent interference," she said.
A Hong Kong security authority spokesman said the Communist Party is not legally registered in Hong Kong and, therefore, does not exist in the eyes of the law.
Hong Kong's colonial authorities outlawed all political parties. Since 1990, however, they have been allowed to register under the societies ordinance. As a result, parties such as Lee's Democrats are registered as societies.
But, "The Communist Party is not registered under the societies ordinance and we've received no application from them for registration," chief government spokesman Kerry McGlynn told Reuters. He declined to comment further.
A government source said the government never talks about the issue in detail. "When a politician raised the issue last year, the government's spokespersons just looked down and mumbled into their beards."
"In terms of legalising it, I'm not aware that the Communist Party is actually illegal, but we know it's not legally constituted by being registered," Loh said.
In the past, the party was involved in violent conflicts with the colonial government, especially the Hong Kong riots of 1967 inspired by China's radical-left Cultural Revolution.
A Chinese plan for 6,000 People's Liberation Army (PLA) troops to march into Hong Kong the very minute Britain hands the colony back to China in 1997 would send the world a bad signal, diplomats said on Thursday.
The Financial Times of London reported that China had told Britain it intends to march 6,000 troops across the border into Hong Kong when Beijing takes over at midnight next June 30.
Bill Dickson, a spokesman for the Foreign Office mission in Hong Kong, told Reuters that China had announced no such plan to the British side in ongoing handover negotiations.
"Although we've been discussing the transfer of defence responsibilities with the Chinese and are of course discussing arrangements for the handover ceremony itself, the Chinese have not told us of their plans for moving defence forces into Hong Kong after midnight on the first of July," Dickson said.
"This is a matter which is entirely for them, but if reports such as that in the Financial Times are true, then the question arises whether this sort of display of military force conveys the right message to the rest of the world," he said.
In Beijing, China said it would station troops in Hong Kong after it regained sovereignty next year, but the number would depend on defence requirements.
"The central government will send an appropriate number of troops into Hong Kong" after the transfer of power next year, Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai said.
"The actual number will be based on the defence needs of Hong Kong," Cui told reporters, without saying when the troops would be moved into the territory.
Diplomats in Hong Kong, who asked not to be identified, said the plan outlined in the newspaper report seemed very credible given China's hardline stance on many handover-related issues.
"We have made it absolutely clear to the Chinese that it would be far better, if they want to send the right signal, if they would build up their armed forces in Hong Kong in a gradual way, over a period of time," one British source said.
"Of course we got no response," the source said.
"This would be exactly the kind of thing to send a shiver down Hong Kong's spine, and would raise questions about China's commitment to a smooth transition," a Western diplomat said.
Hong Kong is switching back to the Chinese flag after a century and a half as a colony on China's southern doorstep.
The approaching handover has been frought with jitters. Many of the territory's 6.3 million people fear a crackdown against human rights, democracy and press freedom, as well as possible trouble with the PLA soldiers, after the transfer.
For most people in Hong Kong, the PLA conjures up images of the bloody military crackdown that was unleashed, with heavy loss of life, against the student-led pro-democracy movement in Beijing's Tiananmen Square in June 1989.
Britain and China have been sparring lately in handover negotiations over whether or not a PLA advance party in Hong Kong can carry weapons before the handover.
Also disputed is whether PLA garrison soldiers should be put on trial in Hong Kong courts if they commit crimes in the territory.
Under a proposed law drawn up unilaterally by China, the PLA troops would be tried in military courts on the mainland, not civilian courts in Hong Kong.
A former top judge who is vying to lead Hong Kong after China takes over next year has said the territory needs a neutral and impartial leader rather than a well-connected tycoon, and one who is tolerant towards dissent.
"I'm for tolerance," Yang Ti Liang, one of three candidates trying to become Hong Kong's first chief executive after Britain hands the colony back to China at midnight next June 30, told Reuters in an interview.
The 67-year-old Shanghai-born former chief justice, who shed his British knighthood a month ago, came through this month's first round of voting by a 400-strong China-backed Selection Committee with 82 of the votes.
He was well behind frontrunner Tung Chee-hwa, a shipping tycoon with strong China links who scored 206 votes, but ahead of another entrepreneur, Peter Woo, who scraped through with 54.
Tung has often been depicted as Beijing's favourite in the race. But Yang, who has emerged as the people's favourite in some recent opinion polls, and once with a lead of as many as 10 percentage points, is battling on, even though there will be no public vote for the top post.
"Of course the votes indicated that certainly the Selection Committee favours Tung much more than they favour me. It's an uphill battle. It's not easy. But I think there's still hope," Yang said.
Over the coming week candidates will be quizzed by committee members on their policies ahead of their final vote on December 11.
Asked if the committee was likely to heed his popularity with the public, Yang said: "I think to a certain extent it will. I don't think they will follow the poll to the letter. If there's a vast difference shown between candidates in the polls, the committee will have to take note."
Yang's campaign headquarters is a modest, cramped office rented in a hotel, in marked contrast the plush executive suites occupied by Tung. The "campaign" is a crusade to lobby business and interest groups, not the general public.
Yang described his greatest strength in comparison with Tung as his long experience as a fair, unbiased arbiter.
"I have no business connections or political connections ... having been a judge for the past 30 years. I am somebody above politics, above connections, neutral, impartial, as opposed to somebody who is very much in business and whose contact with the Chinese government is very good," he said.
"I think anybody who has a huge network with other people does give rise to the problem as to whether, if eventually selected, he might not be perceived to be influenced by these connections when making a decision."
Yang said Hong Kong's future leader would not face a test of courage in standing up to Beijing's communist rulers to resist pressure for a crackdown on anti-communist dissenters and pro-democracy activists.
"It's not a question of being brave or not brave. It's a question of looking at the letter of the law and seeing what it allows," he said. "I want to be on the side of tolerance."
He said he hoped a law on sedition, treason and subversion required by Beijing would not be enacted by the controversial interim legislature that China plans to install at the handover, but by a new long-term legislature to be elected in 1998.
Yang also said he believed the Chinese Communist Party, which has long operated underground and behind the scenes in Hong Kong, should register as a party under local law if it planned to be active in the territory after 1997.
Britain risked China's wrath on Tuesday by proposing new laws on subversion in Hong Kong, laying down legal markers intended to head off Chinese-style jailings of dissidents after Beijing takes over the colony in 1997.
The colonial government unveiled draft amendments to Hong Kong's criminal law, ordered by Governor Chris Patten's cabinet, to cover crimes of subversion and secession. The bill will go to the Legislative Council next Wednesday.
Britain's move, after months of fruitless exchanges with China on the issue, was an effort to set down legal standards for China to follow after Beijing takes control of the territory at midnight next June 30, British officials said.
But the move was promptly attacked by Chinese officials. A spokesman for China's de facto embassy, the Xinhua News Agency office, was quoted by a local Beijing-controlled news agency as saying Britain had "violated promises on the transition" and London "must bear all the consequences of its actions".
Under a post-1997 Hong Kong constitution promulgated by China, the Basic Law, the territory must add laws against secession and subversion to the statute book after the handover.
Until now China has indicated it will have the law enacted by a new legislature it planned to install after the sovereignty transfer, sparking fears in Hong Kong that it will bring in draconian communist-style laws clamping down on dissent.
Mainland China has always eyed Hong Kong as a potential base of subversion, ever since revolutionaries used it as one of their bases against the imperial Manchu dynasty in the last century.
A Legislative Council motion in January urged the Hong Kong government to introduce pre-emptive laws on the issue to protect the civil rights of Hong Kong's 6.3 million people.
Fears were aggravated by remarks made by senior Chinese officials this year including Foreign Minister Qian Qichen and Beijing's Hong Kong policy chief Lu Ping, who set clear limits on post-1997 freedom of expression in the territory.
Britain's draft bill proposes adding the crimes of secession and subversion to the existing criminal law and clarifies the definition of seditious activity. It removes references to the present sovereign Queen Elizabeth, and refers only to Britain.
"It would not be desirable to leave a legislative gap in this important and sensitive area," an official said.
"It is quite clear that it is the view of the community that we should seek to have legislation on these concepts in place before July 1, 1997," said Secretary for Security Peter Lai.
The changes take a form that makes them easily adaptable by the future government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR) that China will install, an official said, adding that all that would have to be changed in the law after 1997 would be the name of the sovereign state from Britain to China.
Under the amended law, sedition would carry a maximum jail term of two years, subversion and secession 10 years, and treason life imprisonment. In China these crimes can earn a death sentence. In Hong Kong the death penalty is non-existent.
The draft law makes clear the offences are related to the use of force to attempt to overthrow the government, and not to non-violent criticism of the regime or of the political system as in China, officials said.
"What the British seem to be doing is to set down legal standards that would give space to non-violent critics and dissenters -- a law that wouldn't put people like Wei Jingsheng or Wang Dan in jail," a source close to the government said.
Wei, the father of the Chinese democracy movement, and former student leader Wang Dan, were both given lengthy jail terms in China this year for subversion.
Both dissidents had criticised the government orally and in their writings and had called for democratic change in China, but neither man had resorted to violence.
Britain and China clashed over the future of Hong Kong on Wednesday as the colonial power took steps to bring in a pre-emptive new law on subversion ahead of the capitalist territory's 1997 return to communist-ruled China.
The quarrel was ignited when the government on Tuesday laid down legal markers defining the concepts of treason, sedition, subversion and secession in a bid to head off Chinese-style jailings of dissidents after Beijing takes over the colony.
The draft bill would jail only people who plot the violent overthrow of government, not non-violent critics and dissidents.
Chinese officials in Hong Kong immediately attacked the move and pro-China politicians said the law would probably be erased and replaced after China resumes sovereignty at midnight next June 30, when a century and a half of colonial rule expires.
A senior negotiator on the Hong Kong handover, Chen Zuo'er, told reporters Britain should not have acted unilaterally, but declined to say if China would repeal the bill if it became law.
A spokesman for China's de facto embassy in the territory attacked the move more sharply. "Britain violated its promise that all major issues must be decided through negotiations with China in the latter stage of transition," the spokesman said.
"Britain will have to take responsibility for all the consequences of amending this law," the spokesman said.
British officials said they were confident the bill could get through the Legislative Council (Legco) next Wednesday. But some pro-China politicians and analysts were sceptical.
"The move itself is bound to be futile. Even if the bill is passed by the present Legco, I don't think there is any chance that it can survive the handover," said Tsang Yok-sing, leader of the biggest pro-Beijing political party in the territory.
"This decision will not be useful because the Chinese side will eventually roll back all the reforms undertaken by the Hong Kong government before July 1997," said analyst Sunny Lo at the Chinese University of Hong Kong.
"The Hong Kong government is trying to commit suicide by putting this legislation through Legco," Lo said.
He said China would want a broader definition of subversion that would include subversion in non-violent forms.
Beijing had previously said it opposed any major changes to Hong Kong's criminal law before the change of flag.
Governor Chris Patten, often vilified by Chinese officials, said the government had taken the step only after 17 months of efforts to clinch agreement with China had failed.
He challenged China to say exactly what it objected to in the proposed new bill.
"We've tried to establish in a very reasonable way what these crimes should actually mean," Patten told Hong Kong radio during a visit to Japan. "On this particular issue we really have been negotiating...with a brick wall," he said.
"There's been no response, no give at all," he said, adding that the only alternative to the bill would have been to break the government's word to Legco and the community that it would take action on the issue and ensure Hong Kong's "decent way of life" would not be "swept away" next July.
Independent pro-democracy legislator Emily Lau said she hoped China would not repeal the law, adding that if it did, "that will definitely cause instability in Hong Kong, and it will be a very high price for both China and Hong Kong to pay."
Treason and sedition are already on Hong Kong's law books.
The last time somebody was prosecuted for sedition was in 1953, and for treason in 1946. But These offences have since largely fallen.
Subversion and secession however are new concepts in the law required by China in Hong Kong's post-1997 constitution, known as the Basic Law.
Chief Executive candidate Tung Chee-hwa, rated by a poll as the best man to deal with China after Britain leaves Hong Kong next year, said a proposed subversion law faces review by the post-colonial government.
"The Basic Law (Hong Kong's post-handover constitution) clearly states that it is up to the future government to draw up its own law on these matters," Tung told about 100 members of the 400-strong Selection Committee that will choose Hong Kong's future leader.
"The Special Administrative Region government will have to review these issues after the handover."
Britain hands its colony back to Beijing at midnight next June 30. The China-controlled Selection Committee is in the midst of a three-day vetting of Tung and two rivals who are bidding to succeed colonial Governor Chris Patten.
The winner will be announced on December 11.
On Tuesday, Britain began the process of bringing in a law on subversion, laying down legal markers defining the concepts of treason, sedition, subversion and secession in a bid to head off Chinese-style jailings of dissidents after the handover.
China has condemned the move but stopped short of saying whether the law would be scrapped when it takes over the territory.
Tung, a billionaire shipping tycoon, also told the committee that Hong Kong should stand by China if Beijing is under sanction by foreign powers.
"If sanction is for political reasons then we have to consider Hong Kong's position. Maybe Hong Kong has to make some sacrifices," he said.
An opinion poll released on Thursday showed Tung to be the favourite among the 967 respondents and indicated 73 percent of them also believed Tung was the candidate best able to communicate with the Chinese government.
The poll, conducted by the Chinese University of Hong Kong, showed that only 7.2 percent thought former chief justice Ti Liang Yang could commmunicate well with Beijing while businessman Peter Woo scored only two percent.
But Yang was seen as being the most impartial of the three and the one most ready to voice his opinion to China.
Asked who was most likely to speak out against Beijing, 31 percent said Yang, 20 percent Tung and 4.8 percent Woo.
After the first day of questioning by the committee on Wednesday, Tung emerged as a better communicator than he had during previous occasions, analysts said.
They said he produced a clearly focused vision for Hong Kong, with the main thrust on putting business and economic interests first.
During the quizzing by committee members representing Hong Kong's business community, Tung blasted the Democratic Party, Hong Kong's largest, urging it to drop its anti-China stance and to play a positive role in the transition for the sake of Hong Kong's 6.3 million people.
"At present they are objecting to anything Chinese," Tung said. "This is not good in the long term or for the interests of Hong Kong."
The Democrats are boycotting the Selection Committee, condemning its mission to pick the post-colonial leader as undemocratic and its task of assembling a new provisional body to supplant the elected legislature as a violation of handover pledges made by China.
Hong Kong shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa was rated by a poll on Thursday as the best man to deal with China as a Beijing-controlled committee grilled candidates vying to run the territory when Britain pulls out in 215 days.
Britain hands its colony back to Chinese sovereignty at the stroke of midnight next June 30, and the 400-strong Selection Committee is in the midst of a three-day vetting of Tung and two rivals bidding to succeed colonial Governor Chris Patten.
The winner will be announced on December 11.
The opinion poll, conducted among 967 people by the Chinese University of Hong Kong on Monday and Tuesday, showed Tung to be the favourite and indicated 73 percent of the respondents also believe Tung is the candidate who can communicate best with the Chinese government in Beijing.
Only 7.2 percent thought his rival, former chief judge Ti Liang Yang could commmunicate well with Beijing, while another candidate, businessman Peter Woo, scored only two percent.
Yang, however, was seen as being more impartial and as the man most ready to voice his opinion to China, the poll showed.
Asked who was most likely to speak out against Beijing, 31 percent said Yang, 20 percent Tung and 4.8 percent Woo.
After the first day's questioning of the candidates by the committee on Wednesday, Tung emerged as a better communicator than he has appeared on previous occasions, analysts said.
He produced a clearly focused vision for Hong Kong with the main thrust on putting business and economic interests first.
During the quizzing by committee members representing Hong Kong's business community, Tung blasted the Democratic Party, Hong Kong's largest, urging it to drop its anti-China stance and to play a positive role in the transition for the sake of Hong Kong's 6.3 million people.
"At present they are objecting to anything Chinese," Tung said. "This is not good in the long term or for the interests of Hong Kong," he said. "They should not think in this way."
The Democrats are boycotting the Selection Committee, condemning its mission to pick Hong Kong's post-colonial leader as undemocratic and its activity to assemble a new provisional body to supplant the present elected legislature as a violation of handover pledges made by China.
Tung, delivering his policy platform in a speech to the body, outlined a new era in which he would pack his advisory cabinet with specialists and include legislators -- now excluded from the equivalent colonial body.
He also said he would like to retain all the senior local officials of the civil service in sign that he might keep on the present and highly regarded Chief Secretary Anson Chan.
Among his policy initiatives, Tung listed the revival of manufacturing industries, especially with a high-tech focus.
In recent years manufacturing has shifted out of Hong Kong to cheaper locations in mainland China, and Hong Kong has become a service-based economy.
Tung also said he wanted to boost the role of provident funds and social security. He said he would press for faster approval of construction plans, the sale of public housing to tenants at affordable prices, the release of more government land for housing, and a reduction of red tape.
He said he had a sense of mission to work for Hong Kong's good. "My father C.Y. Tung had always taught me to do meaningful things and to be proud of being a Chinese," he said. "It is this sense of mission that drives me."
Shipping boss Tung Chee-hwa emerged as the most vocally pro-China contender for Hong Kong's leadership on Friday as a Beijing-controlled body wrapped up a three-day quiz of three men vying to rule Hong Kong after 1997.
The Selection Committee of 400 rich or influential Hong Kong people, who were picked under China's close supervision, will now ponder. But many believe Tung is the preordained winner.
The committee meets again on December 11 to make its choice.
Tung shot off a volley of comments and answers to committee members underlining his loyalty to China, attacked the politics of British Governor Chris Patten, and even threw in a snub about the inauspicious qualities of Patten's official residence.
Hong Kong reverts to Chinese rule at the stroke of midnight next June 30 after more than 150 years as a British colony.
Beijing is turning the territory of 6.3 million people into a Special Administrative Region of communist China, pledging no change to its thriving capitalist system for 50 years.
The committee's choice of a chief executive to succeed Patten was obvious, the pro-business Economic Journal said on Friday. "We get the feeling that winner and loser in the chief executive contest is already decided," it said.
Tung Chee-hwa's answers were all "politically correct", showing a "cautious nature" that suited the taste of Beijing and many Hong Kong people, the journal said.
In his remarks, Tung jumped to China's defence and attacked an attempt by Britain this week to introduce a pre-emptive soft subversion law before the 1997 handover aimed at ensuring no China-style jailings of dissidents take place after 1997.
"It is up to the future government to draw up its own law on these matters," Tung said. "The Special Administrative Region government will have to review these issues after the handover."
Tung, 59, who quit as head of the Orient Overseas shipping empire to bid for Hong Kong's leadership, has been tipped as China's favoured son since Chinese President Jiang Zemin singled him out for a handshake in Beijing in January.
In the three days of committee interrogation, much of which was broadcast live, Tung's rivals -- former chief judge Ti Liang Yang and entrepreneur Peter Woo -- also gave voice to patriotism but were glaringly less pro-China in their utterances.
Yang made clear he would not always bend with Beijing's wind or whim, but would follow the letter of Hong Kong law.
"I'm for Yang because he's for justice," said a Hong Kong Chinese resident listening to the sessions on the radio.
"He's a fair man. He's not a merchant," he said, summing up a widely held view of the contest.
Tung said Hong Kong might have to make sacrifices if China fell victim to political or diplomatic sanctions.
He stressed Chinese cultural values and patriotic education and the need for less red tape, speedier land development approvals, a sell-off of low-price public housing to tenants, and setting an example of Chinese reunification for Taiwan to follow later.
"I found it abominable...I found him more colonial than the colonial government," said legislator Tsang Kin-shing.
Tsang, whose Democratic Party is boycotting the leadership contest, said Tung's rivals were no better. "They are all foul grass growing from a foul jar," he said, using a colloquial Chinese insult.
Tung also said he would not like to move into the governor's traditional residence next year. "I have heard the Government House is crowded and the fung shui is not good."
Many Hong Kong Chinese cling to fung shui, "wind and water", a mixture of science and superstition that people use to chart their lives, birthdays, weddings, business and burials.
With China's takeover of Hong Kong rapidly looming, the British colony faces a swirl of politics and diplomatic jousting in the week ahead, the last before China names the territory's first post-colonial governor.
British and Chinese negotiators, often sparring over the details of the sovereignty transfer, will meet on Wednesday for three days in their latest bargaining round.
Chinese sources said China is likely to lash out during the Joint Liaison Group session at a British attempt to foist a soft subversion law on the territory before the mid-1997 handover.
Last Tuesday Britain announced a draft bill that would make crimes such as subversion and sedition a crime only if they entailed violence, making clear mere dissident-style criticism of the authorities was not a crime.
China has denounced the move. "This will only cause disruption and instability in Hong Kong," China's spokesman in Hong Kong Zhang Junsheng said on Friday. Some members of the pro-China lobby predicted the law would be replaced by a more Chinese-style legislation after the handover on July 1.
The territory is also preparing for a visit by U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Winston Lord on Wednesday.
Lord, who is also heading for China amid signs of a thaw in Sino-U.S. ties, plans to meet Governor Chris Patten and his deputy Anson Chan, as well as China's hardline envoy in the territory, Zhou Nan, and shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa, the favourite in the contest to be the first post-colonial leader.
Critics said Lord's meeting with Tung would be an undiplomatic signal from the United States tantamount to Washington picking the winner in the contest.
Fresh attacks on China are also expected on Wednesday from democrats in Hong Kong's elected legislature, which is set to be dissolved upon the handover and replaced with a new provisional body assembled under China's supervision.
Last week a Selection Committee of 400 rich or influential Hong Kong people, formed under China's careful control, quizzed Tung and two rivals over their policies and attitude to China.
Tung, 59, emerged as the most vocally pro-China contender, loosing off a volley of remarks that stressed loyalty and patriotism to China, attacked Patten's politics and threw in a snub on the inauspicious quality of the governor's residence.
The tycoon also suggested the Democratic Party, the territory's largest, should stop confronting China if it wanted to participate in post-handover political establishment, which drew an attack from Patten.
"You can't, nobody can, freeze out of the political debate in Hong Kong, out of the dialogue about Hong Kong's future, those who represent majority opinion in Hong Kong," Patten told Hong Kong's government-funded radio on Saturday during his visit to Japan.
The 400-member Committee will meet again on December 11 to vote for the new chief executive. Most people now consider Tung's rivals Ti Liang Yang, a former chief judge, and businessman Peter Woo, rank outsiders.
Many Hong Kong people were unimpressed by last week's performances, not least the territory's pro-democracy camp.
"Only empty promises and brief outlines were provided in their platforms," said legislator Fred Li of the Democratic Party.
He decried the fact Hong Kong's voters were not involved in choosing among the three contenders. "All they need is the blessing of these 400 people," Li said.
Canadian envoys on Tuesday dismissed reports that thousands of Hong Kong people in Canada may be forced to flock home en masse ahead of Hong Kong's 1997 handover to China in order to protect their residence rights.
Canada's commissioner in Hong Kong, Garrett Lambert, and the country's ambasador to China, Howard Balloch, said they believed China would soon decide on the issue, which has been a stumbling block in Sino-British talks on the territory.
But Lambert said Hong Kong people who had emigrated from the British colony might have to live in Hong Kong as Canadians in future and lose their local voting rights after it becomes a Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China on July 1, 1997.
Lambert told reporters he had been informed by China's envoy in Hong Kong, Zhou Nan, that progress was being made by Chinese and British negotiators on the problem of right of abode.
The question is one of the major unresolved issues facing the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group (JLG), which meets this Wednesday.
"This is a good file. It's one on which progress is being made. Mr Zhou said he expected that we would have a decision announced in the JLG soon -- my guess is probably in early January," Lambert said.
"It now seems fairly obvious that you do not have to be physically present in Hong Kong to protect your interests if you are already a permanent resident of Hong Kong before the transition," he said.
However, Lambert said questions remained about political and working rights of Hong Kong emigrants who return to live in the territory after 1997.
Of all Western nations, Canada has one of the largest immigration relationships with Hong Kong.
Apart from some 500,000 Hong Kong people who have emigrated to Canada in recent years, some 30,000 Canadian citizens live in Hong Kong, many of them originally Hong Kong citizens.
Press reports in Hong Kong have quoted British officials warning of a chaotic mass return of Hong Kong emigrants if China insists on them being in Hong Kong in person on the July 1 handover day in order to keep their residence rights.
Chinese officials have said in the past that this would be their bottom line, but the JLG has reached no agreement on it.
Canada has delayed a decision on granting visa-free entry to holders of a new Hong Kong passport to be issued after the handover, pending guarantees from China on the repatriation of Chinese who enter Canada illegally.
Replying to a reporter on Tuesday, Lambert denied Canada had any grounds to believe the SAR passport had been compromised from a security viewpoint.
Balloch declined to confirm or deny that significant numbers of Chinese illegal immigrants had entered Canada using Hong Kong documents that were illegally issued or obtained.
The envoys also denied local press reports that Canada had received a comprehensive list of Chinese dissidents living in exile in Hong Kong, and that it planned to grant them refuge after 1997. They said some individual dissidents had come forward but declined to comment further.
Britain and China are deadlocked on core issues central to a smooth handover of Hong Kong to Beijing in 1997, ranging from citizenship rights to subversion and troop deployments, officials said on Tuesday.
"With only 210 days to go under the British flag, time is running out fast to sort out these problems," a British official said on the eve of Sino-British talks starting on Wednesday.
"China has to decide whether it wants things to go smoothly next year or not."
British and Chinese chief negotiators meet on Wednesday for three days of talks under the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group (JLG) forum, haggling over handover details.
There have already been signs over the past week that handover talks have soured, blocking progress on major details of the flag change, set for midnight June 30 next year.
Chinese and British experts who met on Monday failed to agree on a formula for China to send an advance party of troops into Hong Kong before the handover, and last week a big quarrel flared over a liberal anti-subversion law proposed by Britain.
"We haven't made as much progress as I would have liked to have seen but we have agreed that this is an important subject," British representative Alan Paul said after the talks on troops.
"We must continue our efforts and we must meet more often on this subject," Paul said. A source close to the talks said China had yielded ground by abandoning a demand that the advance party bear arms, which Britain has publicly opposed, and that the argument was now over troop numbers.
JLG working-level negotiators were due to meet again on Tuesday to discuss citizenship and right of abode issues.
A British official said Britain was especially worried by the fact that China had come to no agreement on the terms whereby Hong Kong citizens with a domicile abroad can qualify for permanent residence in the territory after 1997.
Chinese officials have previously proposed that citizens must be back in Hong Kong on the day of the handover or lose their right of abode in the territory, which is to become an autonomous Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China.
British officials have warned that unless this problem is solved, there could be a chaotic mad rush by overseas Hong Kong people to the territory on the eve of the handover.
The main negotiations on Wednesday open against a backdrop of tension heightened by a liberal anti-subversion law that the colonial government will put to the legislature on Wednesday.
The legislation aims to set legal standards that would exclude China-style jailings of dissidents.
Britain has said China has blocked efforts to discuss the bill although handover documents require a law to be legislated on the offences of subversion, secession, sedition and treason.
Chinese officials said enactment of the law was not for the colonial government to carry out now, but for the SAR, after 1997, and they accused Governor Chris Patten of lying when he said China had blocked discussions on it.
The Legislative Council plans to launch a new motion of censure on Wednesday opposing its own abolition and China's appointment of a provisional legislature next July 1.
On Thursday, more political drama related to the handover is likely when a legislative inquiry panel summons senior officials to testify under oath about the sudden retirement of Hong Kong's immigration chief Laurence Leung last July.
Finance Secretary Donald Tsang and Leung's successor Regina Yip are both to testify. Leung's early retirement has fuelled a welter of questions among politicians about why he was permitted to depart so abruptly.
The United States' top diplomat on Asia drew flak from leaders of Hong Kong's pro-democracy camp on Wednesday as he met key officials and politicians on the colony's 1997 return to China.
The U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Winston Lord had separate meetings with local political parties and with China's top official in the British colony, Zhou Nan.
Lord was also set to meet colonial Governor Chris Patten and his deputy, Anson Chan, as well as the man tipped as Hong Kong's first post-colonial leader, shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa.
Pro-democracy parties criticised Lord for planning to see only one of the three candidates in the China-controlled contest to select a post-colonial successor to Patten -- tycoon Tung.
"He has adopted the conventional wisdom that Tung will be chief executive and that the other two have no chance," said legislator Emily Lau of the pro-democracy group, Frontier.
Lau said she was not invited to meet Lord. The democracy camp has accused China of preordaining Tung as winner of the contest, which will culminate on December 11, and some critics say Lord's meeting with him is helping to pick the victor.
"What's the point in seeing the others when there's only one who will become the chief executive-designate of Hong Kong," one U.S. diplomat admitted to a reporter on Wednesday.
Lau said U.S. politicians no longer followed up remarks supporting human rights and democracy with action, and that they were now interested only in making money out of China.
"If they cared about human rights and democracy they should have cancelled Secretary of State Warren Christopher's recent visit to China, to send Beijing a strong signal," Lau said.
But Christopher went there -- just one week after China had jailed leading dissident Wang Dan, she said. The U.S. has said it hopes to see Hong Kong keep its freedoms after 1997, but has stopped short of condemning Chinese plans to crimp democracy.
Legislator Yeung Sum, vice-chairman of the Democratic Party, Hong Kong's largest, said his party had told Lord of its worries about the future of press freedom, the elected legislature and the undemocratic nature of the post-1997 leadership contest.
His party had told Lord that a Chinese plan to dissolve the elected Legislative Council next July 1 and install a new provisional legislature was illegal, Yeung told reporters.
"It's a step back as far as democracy is concerned," Yeung said, branding the provisional legislature move a breach of the Sino-British treaty covering the sovereignty transfer.
Lord said Washington would continue to take a keen interest in Hong Kong after the change of flag at midnight next June 30.
"I'm here essentially for two reasons. One, to underline the United States' strong interest in a smooth reversion of Hong Kong to Chinese rule, and secondly I'm here to listen, and I'm listening to a wide spectrum of views," Lord told reporters.
Lord was to hold a news conference on Thursday.
On Wednesday, he heard not only the views of the democrats but also politicians who oppose some of Britain's latest moves.
Before meeting Lord, the chairman of the Liberal Party, Allen Lee, said he would stress his opposition to the colonial government's decision last week to put forward a liberal new anti-subversion law without China's agreement.
"Mr Patten, knowing that the chief executive will be selected next week, gazetted last Friday a bill, without the agreement not only from the chief executive-designate, but also from the Chinese government," Lee said.
"I think this is totally irresponsible. He is playing politics, and he doesn't deserve to be the governor of Hong Kong," he said.
Britain entered new talks with China on Hong Kong's future on Wednesday, admitting it could give no consular protection to Hong Kong people holding special British passports after the Chinese flag is hoisted in 1997.
Senior diplomats met to argue over handover details against a backdrop of disputes over a subversion law drafted by Britain and Chinese troop deployments in the British colony.
The agenda for the three-day meeting of the Joint Liaison Group (JLG) was confidential and it was not clear what, if any, agreements would be produced from the latest bargaining round.
But British chief negotiator Hugh Davies said a great effort was needed to surmount a raft of problems before the capitalist territory of 6.3 million people is handed over in 209 days.
"The subjects that we all know about...are questions such as continuity of law in Hong Kong, questions to do with right of abode, questions to to do with the international network of agreements that Hong Kong already has and which will be agreed to continue beyond 1997," Davies said.
His Chinese counterpart Zhao Jihua served notice that China, infuriated by the colonial government's liberal anti-subversion law last week, would not brook any more major unilateral changes in Hong Kong's legal set-up by Britain before 1997.
"During the period of the final days, we do not wish to see new troubles or new obstacles, because the remaining issues are more than enough to deal with," Zhao said.
"But we are still very confident, so long as the two sides sincerely cooperate with each other...we will solve all issues which are related to the transfer of Hong Kong in a timely and successful manner," Zhao said.
Hong Kong is to become an autonomous region of China at midnight next June 30, ending over 150 years of British colonial rule, under a treaty in which Beijing has vowed to let it keep its freewheeling capitalist system for 50 years.
In the latest of many twists in the transition, Britain's Senior Trade Commissioner, Francis Cornish, said on Tuesday London could not give consular protection to the more than 135,000 Hong Kong people holding special British passports.
Britain in 1990 granted 50,000 heads of households in Hong Kong the right to a full British passport in a concession to widespread demands for passports for all residents following Beijing's 1989 crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators.
Cornish said China regarded these people as holders of dual citizenship and would not recognise British consular protection for them on Chinese soil.
"The Chinese have made it very clear that they regard holders of British Nationality Selection Scheme passports, when in Hong Kong and when in China, as Chinese citizens," he said.
British officials have also warned there could be a stampede home in June by Hong Kong people with domiciles abroad if China insists on them being present in person on handover day in order to keep their Hong Kong right of abode.
Britain's liberal bill on subversion, designed to exclude China-style jailings of dissidents, goes to the Hong Kong legislature later on Wednesday, and its fate is unpredictable.
China condemned the move last week and said such a law was the sole prerogative of the post-handover government to enact.
Earlier this week, British experts said they had failed to reach agreement with China in the JLG on Beijing's demand to send an advance party of People's Liberation Army (PLA) troops to Hong Kong before the handover.
The quarrel appears to be over the size of the unit, diplomats say.
Hong Kong people have bitter memories of the PLA's bloody crackdown on pro-democracy students in Beijing in 1989.
The Hong Kong government was in a flap on Thursday after a bombshell admission that Britain could not protect Hong Kong holders of British passports after China takes over the colony next July.
Governor Chris Patten called an urgent meeting of the Legislative Council for later on Thursday to make a statement on the controversy, which arose after a British envoy said London could provide no consular protection for the passport holders.
Patten's spokesman said the issue had sparked "considerable public interest and a good deal of misunderstanding" as well as demands by legislators to meet him.
Patten would answer their questions at the extraordinary sitting of Legco on Thursday evening.
The uproar is the latest jolt in Hong Kong's often bumpy transition back to Chinese rule 208 days from now, when 150 years of colonial rule will end and the territory will become an autonomous region of China.
Britain's Senior Trade Commissioner, Francis Cornish, said on Tuesday that London could not protect the more than 135,000 Hong Kong people granted full British passports with right of abode in Britain under a special selection scheme in 1990.
In a concession to widespread demands for full British citizenship after Beijing's 1989 Tiananmen Square crackdown, London offered passports to 50,000 Hong Kong households, a privileged fraction of Hong Kong's 6.3 million people.
Cornish said China regarded these people as holders of dual citizenship and would not recognise British consular protection for them on Chinese soil, on the mainland or in Hong Kong.
Cornish's remarks were denounced by local politicians as a sell-out. In the corridors of the Hong Kong government even the most senior officials were privately criticising Britain for what they saw as a concession to China, one source said.
On Wednesday, London and the Hong Kong government rushed to assure affected passport holders that anyone claiming sole British nationality would receive consular protection until it was proven they held dual citizenship.
But a British statement made clear Britain could not give full consular protection for people holding dual Chinese nationality once Hong Kong becomes part of China again.
British officials said the passports issued to these people were indistinguishable from any other full British passport, but many in Hong Kong are concerned that Britain may have learned that China had obtained the names of the passport hodlers.
"The only way to know for sure if one of these passports was issued under the special scheme would be if you had the names," a senior government source said.
The transition to Chinese rule has been dogged by disputes since the 1989 Beijing crackdown. China reacted furiously to the special passport scheme, and again when Patten introduced reforms expanding democracy in 1992.
China was infuriated last week when Britain unveiled a liberal anti-subversion bill that would set legal markers against China-style jailings of dissidents in Hong Kong.
British and Chinese senior negotiators are in the midst of a three-day bargaining session on handover details and have signalled they expect to announce accords on several issues on Friday, although the agenda has so far remained confidential.
Hong Kong is supposed to be autonomous and keep its capitalist system intact for another 50 years, but a human rights group said on Wednesday China's crackdown on dissent bode badly for the territory and its autonomy prospects were slim.
"The rule of law and human rights picture is bleak," said Human Rights Monitor director Law Yuk-kai on the launch of an annual human rights report.
Just months ago, shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa was a retiring man who avoided the limelight, kept his political views secret, and seemed to steer an even keel between his loyalties to China and Britain.
But in a short time, he has emerged as the hot favourite to become Hong Kong's first post-colonial leader and evolved into a tough-talking conservative, loudly singing China's tune on key political issues, under the bright spotlight of the media.
The 59-year-old tycoon with hallmark spiky grey hair has been swapping his pinstripe suits for jeans and sportswear to traipse around local communities to show he not only walks among kings but also has the common touch.
Tung, 59, saw his fortunes almost dashed in the 1980s when the family company met ill winds, but Beijing helped bail him out with a syndicated loan, and now he is poised to be their man in Hong Kong.
On Wednesday, China's carefully screened Selection Committee will choose the chief executive to run Hong Kong after Britain hands its last important colony back to Beijing in mid-1997.
Tung is streets ahead of his rivals, having run away with 206 of the 400 votes in the first round of balloting.
Behind him are retired chief judge Yang Ti Liang, who scored 82, and businessman Peter Woo, who clocked up 54.
A poll last week for the first time made Tung the public's favourite -- 47 percent support versus Yang's 29 -- although the masses are excluded from voting for their future leader.
There is hardly a voice that does not pronounce Tung the predetermined winner. A pointed handshake from President Jiang Zemin in Beijing last January anointed Tung, most people think.
Since he declared his candidacy two months ago Tung has said he would legalise the Communist party, condemned the Democratic Party -- Hong Kong's largest -- for being anti-China, and warned foreign countries not to use Hong Kong to subvert China.
He also said anybody advocating independence for Taiwan or Tibet could not stay.
He has accused colonial Governor Chris Patten of trying to split Hong Kong, called for pro-China patriotism in the schools, and unveiled administrative polices stressing executive-led rule and a slower route to democracy.
Last week Tung rounded on those who use the term "pro-China" as a dirty word. "We have to turn pro-China into a very positive definition. It is a good thing to love our country," he said.
"I find him more colonial than the colonial government," complained Democratic Party legislator Tsang Kin-shing.
Tung has vowed to give free rein to Hong Kong's capitalist economy and business development. But he has also promised to boost the role of provident funds, guarantee welfare for the poor, and make cheap housing available.
While some fret over his conservatism, most who know him both at home and abroad hail Tung's good character. He has a reputation for modesty, wisdom and caution.
"He is a man, in my view, of great integrity, a strong individual, independent-minded, surely and sincerely promoting the welfare of the people of Hong Kong," said U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Winston Lord, a friend of Tung's.
But Lord noted he had failed to sway Tung to reject China's plan to scrap Hong Kong's elected Legislative Council with a provisional legislature next July 1. Britain has condemned the plan as a "black day for democracy" in the territory.
Tung has been a senior member of a Preparatory Committee of pro-Beijing Hong Kong notables and mainland China officials crafting the power structures to replace British colonial rule.
He was lauded as an impartial and honest counsellor by Patten when Tung left Patten's advisory cabinet in June.
He resigned in October as head of his firm, Orient Overseas (International) Ltd, to make his leadership bid.
Tung took the helm of Orient after his father died in 1979. He has publicly acknowledged China had helped bail out the firm 11 years ago by backing a US$120 million fund led by tycoon Henry Fok, a kingmaker in today's leadership contest.
Tung is believed to be liked in Britain and by many business leaders who hope he will form a "dream team" with incumbent Chief Secretary Anson Chan -- Hong Kong's top civil servant.
Born in Shanghai in 1937, Tung was educated at Liverpool University in Britain.
Hong Kong democracy activists staged a noisy protest on Monday after 134 politicians applied to join a Beijing-controlled assembly to replace the colony's elected legislature in mid-1997.
The rush to join the provisional legislature may cripple the colonial legislature in the twilight of British rule, political analysts said.
As a registration deadline expired on Monday, organisers said 134 people had applied, among them at least 33 members of the present elected Legislative Council (Legco).
Hong Kong reverts to China at midnight next June 30, and Beijing is steaming ahead -- in the face of British objections -- with a plan to replace the elected Legco on handover day with a provisional assembly, to be selected on December 21.
The territory of 6.3 million people now face the prospect of two legislatures during the final six months of British rule -- one elected, legal and active, and one a "selected", shadow chamber preparing post-1997 laws.
The number of seats on Legco and the new body is the same -- 60. Among 33 incumbent lawmakers who have applied are Legco speaker Andrew Wong, whose bid startled the political community last weekend and sparked fears that Legco could disintegrate.
Banner-waving pro-democracy activists on Monday caused chaos in the lobby of the building where registration took place, burning documents and scuffling with security men. "Phoney election", "dictatorship in disguise", protesters shouted.
"Cracks which have already emerged within the Legislative Council over the bid by some members for a seat on the provisional legislature will widen in the next six months," said political commentator Chris Yeung.
"When you have two bodies from which laws emanate at the same time, there's going to be some confusion and dispute," said analyst Michael DeGolyer of Hong Kong's Baptist University.
Seat seekers for the new chamber include at least 11 former lawmakers and 22 former election contestants defeated in 1995 elections won by pro-democracy groups.
Those who lost 1995 elections include prominent pro-Beijing politicians such as Tsang Yok-sing, Peggy Lam and Elsie Tu.
Applicants include at least 47 newcomers to legislative contests, many of whom are members of the hand-picked 150-member Preparatory Committee crafting the post-1997 Hong Kong power structures on behalf of China's communist rulers.
Other newcomers are members of the 400-strong Selection Committee. This is the China-backed panel that will chose the first post-colonial leader on Wednesday, with the winner forecast to be conservative-minded shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa. The committee will also be responsible for selecting the provisional legislative body on December 21.
Poll results issued on Monday by the independent daily Ming Pao showed Hong Kong people split over the body's legitimacy.
The poll showed 32 percent supporting it, 30 percent against, and 38 percent voicing no opinion.
Britain has condemned China's plan as reprehensible and unnecessary and has ruled out all cooperation with the body.
The Democratic Party, the largest in the Legco with 19 seats, is absent from all China-controlled transition bodies.
It has boycotted the selection process, branding the provisional legislature as undemocratic and illegal, and has vowed to challenge its legitimacy in court.
The threat has forced Beijing to consider locating the new legislature in mainland China until the handover.
More than 100 politicians, including half of today's lawmakers, have sought seats on a controversial Beijing-controlled legislature in a move that may cripple Hong Kong's parliament in the twilight of British rule.
Before a registration deadline on Monday, 112 people had applied to join the "provisional legislature", among them 33 members of the present elected Legislative Council (Legco).
Hong Kong reverts to China at midnight next June 30, and Beijing is pressing ahead -- despite British objections -- on setting up a provisional interim legislature to replace the elected Legco at the handover.
The provisional legislature will be selected on December 21.
The territory of 6.3 million people now faces a bizarre prospect of having two legislatures for the final six months of British rule -- one elected, legal and active, and a shadow "selected" chamber vulnerable to courtroom battles.
The number of seats on Legco and the new body is the same -- 60. An official of the China-controlled committee supervising the three-week registration process said 217 people had requested application forms, so there could be more contenders at the last minute.
Among 33 incumbent lawmakers who have applied are Legco speaker Andrew Wong, whose bid startled the political community last weekend and sparked fears that Legco could disintegrate.
"Cracks which have already emerged within the Legislative Council over the bid by some members for a seat on the provisional legislature will widen in the next six months," said political commentator Chris Yeung.
"When you have two bodies from which laws emanate at the same time, there's going to be some confusion and dispute," said analyst Michael DeGolyer of Hong Kong's Baptist University.
Those wanting a seat in the new chamber also include 11 ex-lawmakers and 22 former election contestants defeated in 1995 elections in which pro-democracy groups led by the Democratic Party fared strongly.
The 1995 losers applying for a seat include prominent pro-Beijing politicians such as Tsang Yok-sing, Peggy Lam and Elsie Tu.
Applicants also include 47 newcomers to legislative contests, many of whom are members of the hand-picked 150-member Preparatory Committee crafting the post-1997 Hong Kong power structures on behalf of China's communist rulers.
Other newcomers are members of the 400-strong Selection Committee. This is the China-backed panel that will chose the first post-colonial leader on Wednesday, with the winner forecast to be conservative-minded shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa. The committee will also be responsible for selecting the provisional legislative body on December 21.
An opinion poll published on Monday by the independent daily Ming Pao showed Hong Kong people split over the legitimacy of the provisional legislature.
The poll showed 32 percent supporting the body, 30 percent against, and 38 percent voicing no opinion. A sample of 983 respondents were surveyed by telephone for the poll.
The Democratic Party, the largest in the Legco with 19 seats, are absent from all China-controlled transition bodies.
They have boycotted the selection process, branding the provisional legislature as undemocratic and illegal, and have vowed to challenge its legitimacy in the courts.
The threat has forced Beijing's representatives in Hong Kong to consider locating the interim legislature in mainland China in the transitional period.
Britain has condemned China's plan as reprehensible and unnecessary and has ruled out all cooperation with the body.
Hong Kong has arrived at the brink of history, set to name its first Chinese leader after a century and a half of British colonial rule.
At a gathering to be held under the red flag of communist-ruled China, Hong Kong's rich and mighty will meet on Wednesday to pick the first post-colonial leader -- and the smart money is on shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa.
The vote by a 400-member Chinese-controlled Selection Committee, slammed by critics as a travesty of democracy, was viewed by most in Hong Kong as a foregone conclusion.
A survey by Hong Kong University showed 82.2 percent expected Tung to win, while 43.4 percent of respondents would back him if they had the chance to vote. His nearest rival, Ti Liang Yang, would get 27.9 percent of popular support.
Sovereignty over the territory of 6.3 million people, one of Asia's economic wonders and Britain's last major colony, reverts to China at midnight next June 30 -- 203 days from now.
The winner of Wednesday's vote by the committee will become the chief executive-designate of the Special Administrative Region of China, as Hong Kong will be called from next July 1.
On the eve of the vote a small band of pro-democracy protesters camped overnight outside the conference centre.
Some politicians and diplomats fretted about China-style repression. "The people of Hong Kong cannot trust him (Tung) to protect our rights...I cannot see how he is in a position to say no to Beijing on any important issue," said legislator Martin Lee.
"Unless there is a complete change in the attitude of these candidates the outlook for human rights in Hong Kong is very bad," said Paul Harris, head of Hong Kong Human Rights Monitor.
But the markets, a barometer of Hong Kong's fortunes, trumpeted bullish optimism. Hong Kong stocks rebounded from recent losses to end 198 points up, the index of China-linked H-shares soared to nine-month highs in the largest one-day gain in history, and forecasters predicted a 1997 property boom.
Publicly espousing "consensus" rather than confrontation with China, and collective duties over individual rights, and blessed by a public handshake from President Jiang Zemin in January, 59-year-old Shanghai-born Tung grabbed 206 votes in the first round of voting last month by the committee.
He only needs 201 to win the clincher on Wednesday. Some Hong Kong newspapers were already putting the finishing touches on Tuesday to a slew of Tung-the-victor profiles for Wednesday.
If he wins, he will be greeted by a no-confidence debate presented by lawmaker Emily Lau, one of China's loudest critics, in Hong Kong's Legislative Council (Legco).
Governor Chris Patten has vowed support for the future leader, whoever he is, in the twilight of British rule.
But Tung has not responded to the plege. He has said he will consult Hong Kong's respected civil service on how best to run the territory and ensure a smooth transition.
"Nobody wants the present administration to be turned into a lame duck," Tung said on Monday.
If he wins, Tung will spend the next six months assembling a cabinet of advisers to guide policy. His team is expected to be highly pro-business.
He will also lay the groundwork for a provisional legislature, soon to be picked by the same Selection Committee, to take over from the present elected Legco next July 1.
The head of Hong Kong's main pro-democracy group said on Tuesday that the man likely to be the first post-colonial leader after British rule is a pro-China yes-man, and described preparations for the sovereignty change as a disaster.
Martin Lee, head of the Democratic Party, the largest in Hong Kong's legislature, told Reuters in an interview that shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa was indebted to Beijing for a company bail-out years ago and was unlikely to defend democracy.
"The Hong Kong people want and need a defender of the Hong Kong system. What we are getting, it seems, is somebody who is going to be a spokesman of China. That is very unfortunate.
"The people of Hong Kong cannot trust him to protect our rights, not because he is a bad man, he is a nice guy, but I cannot see how he is in a position to say no to Beijing on any important issue," he said.
Tung, 59, is the favourite to win when a 400-member selection committee meets on Wednesday to pick the chief executive of the special administrative region (SAR), as Hong Kong will be called after China takes over next July 1.
Britain is handing the colony back to Beijing under a treaty called the Joint Declaration, which promises to keep Hong Kong's freewheeling capitalist system intact for a further 50 years.
Lee said there was never any doubt Tung would win, echoing a widely held view that the future leader was picked in Beijing.
The lawyer and legislator said Tung owed China a big debt for a Chinese-sponsored financial bailout of his family firm, the Oriental Overseas group, in the 1980s.
"How can he say no to Beijing? Beijing will say 'wait a minute, who bailed you out in the early 1980s and who put you in this position?" Lee said.
But his party would try to work with Tung if he won. "We are quite prepared to cooperate with the chief executive irrespective of the personality involved...we cannot carry on as a political party without dialogue with the chief executive."
Lee denied accusations by Tung that the Democratic Party was anti-China. "That's clearly wrong. We have always supported the return of sovereignty over Hong Kong by the British to the Chinese government on July 1.
"We only criticise China whenever we believe the Joint Declaration has been broken by China...in these circumstances we have a duty to object and to oppose.
"It is far too simplistic and wrong for Mr Tung to say we are anti-China. We are not. China is our country. I have yet to see him side with Hong Kong on any key issue, like the provisional legislature," Lee said.
Britain and the Hong Kong democrats have criticised China's plan to scrap the elected Legislative Council and install a provisional legislature next July as an attempt to kill off democracy.
"It's going to be the most disastrous thing. Once you allow China to set up an effectively appointed legislature when under the Joint Declaration we were promised an elected legislature, you are actually accepting that China can break the Joint Declaration at will. So what other provision is safe?" Lee said.
He said Beijing had made clear the new legislature would pass repressive laws to control the freedom of the press and the freedom of assembly. "There can be little doubt that the rule of law as we know it will not be there any more. Freedoms can no longer be protected."
Lee said 134 candidates nominated for the provisional legislature this week would all take orders from Beijing.
"You would not find even five of them who could be called democrats, by any stretch of the imagination."
On the eve of an historic gathering of the elite assembled by China to pick Hong Kong's future leader, the smart money was on Tung Chee-hwa.
Most observers viewed it as a foregone conclusion that the shipping tycoon would emerge the winner after the 400-strong Selection Committee of Hong Kong business titans and pro-China politicians meets on Wednesday to choose the territory's post-colonial chief executive.
Blessed by a personal public handshake from Chinese President Jiang Zemin last January, Tung ran off with 206 votes in the first round of voting last month by the committee, which was chosen under Beijing's close supervision.
Sovereignty over the territory of 6.3 million people, one of Asia's economic wonders and Britain's last major colony, reverts to China at midnight next June 30 -- 203 days from now.
A poll by Hong Kong's Lingnan College showed on Tuesday that 56 percent believed the winner has probably been picked in advance. Only 18 percent believe there will be a real contest.
"I don't think there was ever any doubt that it would be Mr Tung. I've been calling this selection committee the Tung Chee-hwa selection committee," said Martin Lee, head of the Democratic Party, the largest in Hong Kong's legislature.
Lee, whose party is boycotting the selection process, said Tung could not be counted on to preserve Hong Kong's freedoms, human rights and its current moves towards greater democracy.
"The people of Hong Kong cannot trust him to protect our rights, not because he is a bad man, he is a nice guy, but I cannot see how he is in a position to say no to Beijing on any important issue," Lee said.
Some Hong Kong newspapers were already putting the finishing touches on Tuesday to a slew of Tung-the-victor profiles for publication on Wednesday, an industry source said.
If he wins on Wednesday, Tung will be greeted soon by a no-confidence debate presented by lawmaker Emily Lau, one of China's loudest critics.
Colonial Governor Chris Patten has promised his support for the chief executive-designate, whoever it turns out to be, in the twilight months of British rule.
Tung has not responded to the pledge but has said he will engage Hong Kong's respected civil service in dialogue on how best to run the territory and ensure a smooth transition.
"Nobody wants the present administration to be turned into a lame duck," Tung said on Monday.
Two rival candidates -- former Chief Justice Ti Liang Yang and entrepreneur Peter Woo -- are both ranked as outsiders.
An opinion poll by Hong Kong University last week gave Tung 46.7 percent, Yang 28.8 percent and Woo 5.2 percent public backing.
But Tung only began to gain public support in the past month, after Patten's chief civil servant Anson Chan declared she would not run for the job. Tung has never matched the 60 percent-plus popularity ratings which Chan enjoyed.
Assuming he wins, the 59-year-old tycoon will spend the next six months assembling a cabinet of advisers to guide policy after Hong Kong becomes an autonomous Special Administrative Region of China. His team is expected to be highly pro-business, but he has also promised a role for grassoots bodies.
He will also lay the groundwork for a provisional legislature, soon to be picked by the same Selection Committee, to take over from the present elected Legco next July 1.
The leader-in-waiting will face many challenges before and after the handover, with Britain and China locked in disputes on issues ranging from passports, nationality and troop deployments to an anti-subversion law and the disbanding of Legco.
Just months ago, shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa was a retiring man who avoided the limelight, kept his political views secret, and seemed to strike a balance between his loyalties to China and Britain.
But he has emerged as Hong Kong's first post-colonial leader and evolved into a conservative, Chinese patriot, loudly singing China's tune on key political issues under the bright spotlight of the media.
A 400-member Selection Committee controlled by China on Wednesday picked Tung as chief executive to govern Hong Kong when it becomes an autonomous region of China in mid-1997.
On the campaign trail, the 59-year-old tycoon with hallmark spiky grey hair had been swapping his pinstripe suits for jeans and sportswear to traipse around local communities to show he not only walks among kings but also has the common touch.
Tung saw his fortunes almost dashed in the 1980s when the family firm met ill winds, but Beijing helped bail him out with a syndicated loan. Now he is their man in Hong Kong.
Tung grabbed a resounding 320 of the committee's 400 votes.
Eve-of-vote polls also showed Tung to be the public's favourite -- 47 percent support versus his nearest rival Yang Ti Liang's 29 percent. The masses, however, had no vote.
Many saw Tung's victory as preordained. A pointed handshake from President Jiang Zemin in Beijing last January anointed him, most people think.
During his campaign, Tung said he would legalise the Communist Party. He condemned the Democratic Party -- Hong Kong's largest -- for being anti-China, and warned foreign countries not to use Hong Kong to subvert China.
He also said anybody advocating independence for Taiwan or Tibet could not stay in Hong Kong.
He has accused colonial Governor Chris Patten of trying to split Hong Kong, called for pro-China patriotism in schools, and unveiled administrative policies stressing executive-led rule and a slower route to democracy.
Tung rounded on those who use the term "pro-China" as a dirty word.
"We have to turn pro-China into a very positive definition. It is a good thing to love our country," he said.
Complained Democratic Party legislator Tsang Kin-shing: "I find him more colonial than the colonial government."
Tung has vowed to give free rein to Hong Kong's capitalist economy and business development. But he has also promised not to ignore the need for social welfare.
While some fret over his conservatism, most who know him both at home and abroad hail Tung's good character. He has a reputation for modesty, wisdom and caution.
"He is a man, in my view, of great integrity, a strong individual, independent-minded, surely and sincerely promoting the welfare of the people of Hong Kong," said U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Winston Lord, a friend of Tung's.
But Lord noted he had failed to sway Tung to reject China's plan to scrap Hong Kong's elected Legislative Council with a provisional legislature next July 1. Britain has condemned the plan as a "black day for democracy" in the territory.
Tung has been a senior member of the Preparatory Committee of pro-Beijing, Hong Kong notables and mainland China officials crafting the power structures to replace British colonial rule.
He was lauded as an impartial and honest counsellor by Patten when he left the governor's advisory cabinet in June.
He resigned in October as head of his company, Orient Overseas (International) Ltd, to make his leadership bid.
Tung took the helm of Orient after his father died in 1979. He has publicly acknowledged that China helped bail out the company 11 years ago by backing a US$120 million fund led by tycoon Henry Fok, a kingmaker in the leadership contest.
Born in Shanghai in 1937, Tung was educated at Liverpool University in Britain.
He once sailed his shipping empire through rough waters, steered an even course between China and Britain for years, but navigating Hong Kong into Chinese rule in 1997 will be the challenge of his lifetime.
Shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa, chosen as Hong Kong's first Chinese leader on Wednesday after more than 150 years of British colonial rule, will take the helm on July 1.
"He will be charting the course for Hong Kong as it enters a new era. And he will be at the helm of what is at once an economic powerhouse and a dynamic, sophisticated metropolis," Governor Chris Patten, Britain's last colonial chief, said in a statement congratulating Tung on his victory.
It is a mission that has no precedent.
The territory that Tung governs will be the first British colony to have matured into a world trading economy and then handed back to a communist-ruled motherland.
China has promised the territory of 6.3 million people a great degree of autonomy and at least 50 more years of untrammeled capitalism but vowed to curb the pace of democratic reform.
The 59-year-old tycoon saw his fortunes almost dashed in the 1980s when the family firm met ill winds, but Beijing helped bail him out with a syndicated loan, and his firm regained its strength.
In his new role, Tung will have to tack between pro-democracy politicians who branded his triumph the death of democracy, the departing colonial British with their sense of lost empire, and a proud Beijing Communist leadership keen to set the stamp "This is China" on the map of Hong Kong forever.
The vocal pro-democracy lobby plans to challenge his authority with a no-confidence vote in the current legislature.
"What Hong Kong needs most is a champion for Hong Kong people as we face the unprecedented challenges of the handover -- not a spokesman for China," said Democratic Party leader Martin Lee.
Some analysts predicted Hong Kong's own version of China's "red princelings" -- sons and daughters of senior Communist Party officials -- would move to centre stage from now.
Members of families closely tied to the Beijing government since the 1950s are favourites for the 60 seats in the new legislature or roles in Tung's inner advisory cabinet.
The new elite will look to people such as legislator Leung Chun-ying, a policeman's son who has emerged as Beijing's trusted lieutenant in the transition process.
The princelings also include figures such as Timothy Fok, eldest son of Beijing's most trusted man in Hong Kong, tycoon Henry Fok, a kingmaker in the contest that Tung won.
Tung must now swiftly lay down a gameplan for the next six months with Beijing, political analysts said.
He must also work closely with the politicians and business titans likely to be brought into the post-1997 provisional legislature and advisory cabinet known as the Executive Council.
"He will start out with a unity of support behind him at least from the more moderate and pro-China in Hong Kong," said political analyst Michael DeGolyer of the Baptist University.
"I think he's going to have to move rather rapidly to talk to the people in Beijing. He is going to have to move rather rapidly to meet with Provisional Legco (Legislative Council) members," DeGolyer said.
Tung's first bite at his realm will come on Thursday when the China-controlled Hong Kong Preparatory Committee crafting 1997 power structures meets over the border in Shenzhen city.
Very soon, Tung will also have to talk to Hong Kong's popular top civil servant, Chief Secretary Anson Chan.
Tung has said he would like to keep Chan as chief secretary but her past defence of Patten's democratic reforms may have dented her credibility and spoiled her chances of staying on.
Tung is keen not to rock the boat and has said he aims to keep as much of the civil service intact as possible. "Nobody wants the present administration to be turned into a lame duck," Tung said before the vote.
Hong Kong's chief executive designate Tung Chee-hwa, fresh from an overwhelming leadership victory, launched a charm offensive on Thursday aimed at winning public confidence in a smooth transition to China.
At a meeting in this Chinese frontier city, the 59-year-old Shanghai-born former shipping magnate was also endorsed as Hong Kong's future leader by the 150-member China-controlled Preparatory Committee, which is crafting the territory's future political institutions.
A beaming, animated Tung appeared at a Shenzhen news conference, vowing to make himself regularly available to the press, and promising to aim for friendly cooperative relations with Hong Kong's Democratic Party and the outgoing colonial administration.
"Have you eaten?" was his first remark as he entered a gathering of 100 Hong Kong journalists. He fielded his questions skillfully, shifting effortlessly between three languages -- Mandarin, Cantonese and English.
Tung quipped and charmed with great self-confidence and a charismatic style that would be the envy of many Chinese leaders in Beijing, not known for their skillful handling of the media.
He declared he would go on the offensive to persuade Hong Kong's 6.3 million people to trust a controversial 60-member provisional legislature which China plans to install in place of the present elected Legislative Council (Legco) when Britain hands back the colony to Beijing next July 1.
"I think you'll find the provisional legislature will have good credibility," the businessman turned politician said.
"The acceptability of the provisional legislature is gaining ground every day. I'm confident we'll find 60 people with credibility among the people of Hong Kong."
Thursday's Preparatory Committee meeting in the boomtown of Shenzhen was working on a package of procedures for selecting the legislature on December 21, the next milestone in Hong Kong's march to Chinese rule.
Hong Kong's Democratic Party has condemned the move as an attempt to snuff out the territory's embryonic democracy and vowed to challenge the legislature's legality in the courts, forcing China to consider locating the body on the mainland rather than in Hong Kong.
But Tung said he would also like to charm the Democrats by sitting down with them and "peacefully" discussing the transition problems.
Tung said he hoped to cooperate with departing governor Chris Patten and the British colonial administration. He recognised there were many difficulties but said: "Let's do what is best for Hong Kong."
He also said that Hong Kong would continue its gradual shift towards greater democracy but only at the slower pace laid down in the territory's post-1997 constitution, the Basic Law.
"We will of course move forward on the course of democracy in accordance with the Basic Law," he said. "The process has already begun. It's quite clearly defined in the Basic Law."
Tung said he had no news yet on who he planned to bring into his kitchen cabinet, the Executive Council, or whether Hong Kong's current chief civil servant Anson Chan would stay on.
"I hope she will stay, I hope she will be my deputy," he said, repeating his desire for a through-train civil service and smooth transition.
Tung also said he would go to Beijing for investiture as the Chief Executive-designate of Hong Kong but no date had been set.
China and Britain moved closer on Friday to removing some obstacles to Hong Kong's smooth transfer to Chinese sovereignty next year, but fresh controversies raised new potential hurdles.
Agreements took shape on issues of handover ceremonies and budgets but quarrels brewed over China's moves to appoint new political leaders for Hong Kong.
Hong Kong government radio quoted diplomats saying London and Beijing were closing in on an agreement on a ceremony to mark Hong Kong's handover to China next June 30/July 1 and that the deal might be announced next month.
The sources signalled progress in informal talks and that a basic accord could be forged before foreign ministers of the two nations meet at the United Nations General Assembly in New York next month, the government-run radio said.
Differences over handover ceremonies have posed a stumbling block in negotiations on the sovereignty transfer, especially the question of what role Governor Chris Patten will play.
At the same time concrete progress was announced in talks on Hong Kong's next budget, which will straddle the handover date.
British and Chinese negotiators agreed on ways to allocate resources for the 1997/98 budget, Chinese senior official Chen Zuo'er told reporters after the latest talks.
Chen announced agreement on spending guidelines, maximum spending limits and procedures for dealing with new requests for money from the budget. Hong Kong Treasury Secretary K.C. Kwong was upbeat about the breakthrough.
"We have in the past few days had very positive pragmatic discussions on the preparation of the 1997-98 Budget," he said.
"We have for all practical purposes completed the preparatory stage of the resource allocation exercise," he said.
"Our next step will be to consider the bids for new resources from branches and departments."
But prospects of a smooth handover on the political front appear less bright. A Beijing official was quoted as saying a list of names of people being nominated by the public to sit on a caucus that will pick the first post-colonial legislature and governor, the chief executive, would not be made public.
The official was quoted by the South China Morning Post as saying some nominees might not want their names to be publicised and that only the nominees would have the right to see the list.
"This whole fiasco is too much. The whole thing is such a sham," pro-democracy legislator Emily Lau told Reuters.
"Perhaps they feel some important people will be embarrassed if they are not picked. The whole process lacks transparency and accountability and credibility."
The Wen Wei Po newspaper, flagship of Beijing's propaganda machine in Hong Kong, attacked Britain on Friday for trying to amend Hong Kong's laws in order to preserve London's influence after 1997.
The salvo came just a day after the paper criticised Britain's chief handover negotiator, Hugh Davies, accusing him of touting Britain's own favourite for post-1997 leader.
Davies' office dismissed the claim as ludicrous but Chinese spokesman Zhang Junsheng told reporters: "The British side should not meddle, and has no right to poke its nose in. This is entirely a matter for China."
Two hundred days before its historic handover to China, Hong Kong has adopted a charismatic shipping tycoon as helmsman to lead it into the 21st century.
But the British colony of 6.3 million people is waiting to see if chief executive-designate Tung Chee-hwa can form a "dream team" with the territory's most popular public figure, "iron lady" Anson Chan, head of the present colonial Civil Service.
The former tycoon, who resigned from his shipping empire to become Hong Kong's first post-colonial leader, takes over from British Governor Chris Patten at midnight next June 30, when a century and a half of colonial rule comes to an end.
"If Tung can keep Anson in her job, we will have a dream team leadership that both Britain and the Hong Kong community will be happy with," a senior official said.
Tung, 59, selected by a Beijing-vetted electoral college to run the future Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China, named Chan on Thursday as favourite to be his deputy, saying he wanted her to stay on as head of the 180,000-member civil service.
"I have said I hope she can remain at her post. She, too, has indicated she is willing to do so. I hope she can be my chief secretary," Tung said in the Chinese city of Shenzhen.
"I would like to see a smooth transition. I hope most of the senior officials can remain in office," he said.
Chan, 56, has signalled her interest in working for Tung but restated her fervent belief in libertarian values.
She praised Tung for urging Hong Kong to forget political squabbles and "find common ground to build Hong Kong together".
But she cautioned that the freedoms and plurality of views that made Hong Kong one of the world's economic marvels must be preserved, and said pragmatism and flexibility were vital to it.
"Its very success has been founded on tolerance of different viewpoints," she told the college gathering. "I believe that the law was made for man, not man for the law, that government is the servant of the people, not their master."
Of a similar age, Tung and Chan have much in common and have always described their relationship as friendly.
Both their families moved from Shanghai to Hong Kong as the Communists overran China, defeating the Nationalists in a long civil war that ended in 1949.
The contest for Hong Kong's handover leadership has been dominated by the Shanghai connection. The two candidates who lost to Tung -- former Chief Justice Yang Ti Liang and entrepreneur Peter Woo -- were also Shanghai-born.
Chan herself had earlier been touted as a leadership candidate, having emerged in the polls this year as Hong Kong's most popular political personality with more than 60 percent of public support. But she decided not to run against Tung.
The Shanghainese form one the greatest networks within Hong Kong. Tens of thousands of Shanghai people fled the Communist regime and relocated their businesses in Hong Kong after 1949.
The current leadership in China is also heavily dominated by the so-called "Shanghai faction" led by President Jiang Zemin, who has been actively promoting officials from his home area.
Tung, a conservative who was once bailed out by Chinese funds and who opposes conflict with Beijing, has evolved from a publicity-shy figure into a charismatic leader-in-waiting who can charm and quip his way through news conferences.
He shifts comfortably from one language to another -- English, Cantonese and Mandarin.
Chan is profoundly respected by civil servants for her no-nonsense, efficient administrative style, which has earned her a reputation for toughness -- tempered by a huge smile, kind heart and balanced political outlook.
"The question is whether it is too balanced. Beijing may reject her for defending democracy too much," the official said.
Britain's Prince Andrew has arrived in Hong Kong to inspect his troops in one of the last royal visits to the territory before its return to Chinese rule in the middle of next year.
During the three-day visit the Duke of York will watch jungle training and border patrols by soldiers of the 1st battalion of the Staffordshire regiment, of which he is Colonel-In-Chief.
Prince Andrew made a low-key entry to Hong Kong on Monday night and was entertained at Government House by Governor Chris Patten and his wife Lavender, officials said.
"It was a quiet supper," said one official. "This is a low-key visit. He will spend most of his time with the One Staffords," an official said. "It's quite likely his last visit here before China takes over."
The prince, who fought in the 1982 Falklands War, will visit Hong Kong battle positions from World War Two, when the colony was occupied for four years by Japanese troops.
He will visit Hong Kong's military base on Stonecutters Island, the scene this year of many a tearful military farewell as the British steadily withdraw their armed forces ahead of 1997.
The garrison will be scaled down from almost 3,000 now to about 1,500 six weeks before the handover. All remaining troops are then to be pulled out by the time Britain hands over to China at midnight on June 30.
Andrew was to attend a cermony at which the colours of the Dragon Company of the Hong Kong Military Service Corps will be handed over to the Staffordshires, who will adopt the dragons as their nickname, a military officer said.
The dragons corps of Chinese servicemen, Britain's only Hong Kong Chinese army unit, lowered its ensign for the last time at a disbandment ceremony last Saturday.
The Staffordshires are one of two battalions that will be stationed in Hong Kong in the final months of British rule.
From July 1, China's People's Liberation Army will take over the garrison with a force of up to 10,000 troops, matching the British at their former peak of troop strength.
Andrew is expected on Wednesday to visit construction sites related to the territory's mammoth new airport now being built at Chek Lap Kok on the outlying Lantau Island, officials said.
He will see the huge Tsing Ma suspension bridge linking Lantau and the mainland part of Hong Kong with an expressway and railway corridor to the airport, they said.
Hong Kong is the last outpost in Asia of the formerly globe-girdling British Empire. The handover next year weighs heavily on the hearts of British patriots, colonials and fans of the royals who sadly regard the event as the sunset of British power and prestige.
Andrew's visit is likely to be one of the last by a member of the royal family before Queen Elizabeth's realm loses the bustling capitalist enclave of 6.3 million people to China.
Princess Anne is expected to visit for a ceremonial opening next month of Britain's Consulate-General building, which will be London's official mission in Hong Kong after the handover.
Although not official yet, it is an open secret that Britain wants heir-to-the-throne Prince Charles to preside over the last farewell on handover night and to sail away with Patten on the royal yacht Brittania after the furling of the Union Jack.
Shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa was to fly to Beijing on Tuesday to be anointed by China's communist leadership as Hong Kong's first Chinese leader when Britain pulls out in mid-1997.
Tung was to head for the Chinese capital in the afternoon after addressing Hong Kong's business community in his first major speech since he was selected as the territory's future chief executive last Wednesday.
In Beijing, he will have his first face-to-face meeting with China's President Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng since formally launching his bid for Hong Kong's leadership mantle two months ago.
It was Jiang who signalled in January this year that Tung was Beijing's favourite for the job when he singled out the tycoon for a warm, personal handshake at a reception in Beijing.
Britain is returning its last major colony to its former and future masters in Beijing at midnight next June 30, after a century and a half of colonial rule that turned it into one of Asia's economic marvels with a population of 6.3 million people.
One of Tung's first tasks in the twilight of British rule will be to cobble together an advisory cabinet called the Executive Council and to decide which senior mandarins to keep.
He has said he will start this task after his China visit, reinforcing speculation in Hong Kong that China will call the shots from behind the scenes on the make-up of the future government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.
"If he waits before deciding on his team, there will be lingering doubts as to whether he was acting on instructions received from Beijing," the South China Morning Post said in its main editorial on Tuesday.
On Monday, the colonial government said it would set limits on how much it would help Tung to form a government-in-waiting before the transfer of sovereignty.
Constitutional Affairs Secretary Nicholas Ng told the Legislative Council that the government ruled out a mass exodus of senior officials to the government-in-waiting because it would undermine the stability and efficiency of the present administration.
The colonial administration is supposed to cooperate with the incoming government under the handover agreement.
But the transition has been fraught with disputes over issues ranging from human rights and democracy to infrastructure projects, darkening prospects for serious cooperation.
Many senior civil servants, including Chief Secretary Anson Chan, who is Governor Chris Patten's deputy, and Financial Secretary Donald Tsang, stayed away from a business dinner party attended by Tung on Monday night, though they had been invited.
Officials said Chan and Tsang had scheduling conflicts but political analysts said it might have been a sign that the administration's top two civil servants would not keep their jobs.
The 400-member, Beijing-controlled Selection Committee that selected Tung last week is now preparing for the next milestone in the march to Chinese rule -- the selection on Saturday of a 60-member, pro-China "provisional legislature" with which China plans to replace the existing, elected legislature on July 1.
Patten again condemned the new legislature in an interview with the French newspaper Liberation on Monday, saying he would never cooperate with it.
"This echo chamber has no place in the political or administrative life of Hong Kong," he said.
The contest for power in Hong Kong heated up at the weekend as the pro-China lobby cast a top judge into the race as the candidate to lead the territory after sovereignty reverts from Britain to China in 1997.
Controversial Chief Justice Sir Ti Liang Yang re-emerged as a rival to existing favourites after influential pro-Beijing publisher Xu Shimin said he would nominate him and that the judge was keen to take up the challenge.
Hong Kong, the last significant outpost of the British empire, reverts to China on July 1, ending a century and a half of colonial rule.
China is setting up a 400-member panel called the Selection Committee, which will nominate the first post-colonial governor, to be known as the Chief Executive, and appoint a provisional legislature to replace the present elected Legislative Council.
Nominations in the month-long process to create the committee close in two weeks' time, and almost 20,000 nomination forms have been requested and issued.
China has ruled out a universal democratic vote by Hong Kong's people to pick their post-handover political leaders.
The committee is expected to pick the chief executive around November.
Yang's return to the contest comes as a surprise after he faded from the picture last year in a row about his remarks on human rights.
Lawyers and pro-democracy politicians attacked him last November after he said the Bill of Rights, which was introduced in Hong Kong by the colonial administration and which China plans to dilute next year, had sown chaos in the judiciary.
The 67-year-old China-born lawyer left his home to study law in London after the Communists took power. He later settled in Hong Kong, where he has worked for 30 years in the judiciary.
A poll last week showed the public's hot favourite for post-colonial leader is Anson Chan, the colony's Chief Secretary and deputy to British-appointed Governor Chris Patten. She scored a stunning 60.1 percent of respondents' support.
Runner-up in the poll was shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa with 10.4 percent, and the leader of the biggest political party, the Democratic Party's Martin Lee, came third with 10 percent.
But China has kept Lee and his Democrats out of the handover stakes and he has scant chance of being nominated.
Chan is also unlikely to be accepted by the committee because she is closely identified with Britain. Last week a top Chinese official attacked Britain's chief diplomat in Hong Kong for touting London's favoured candidate -- presumed to be Chan.
The poll showed Yang would come into the picture if neither Chan nor Lee were candidates. In that case Yang would get 9.8 percent, but Tung would rise to 21.6 percent.
However, the Selection Commitee is what will count, not public opinion, and China has insisted the nomination list remain secret, arousing suspicions of foul play.
Xu said Yang was happy to be proposed by him and that the judge's independence was a strong factor.
"A judge has no business connections, and there are many against Mr Tung because of his business background," Xu said.
Tsang Yok-sing, a senior member of the panel overseeing the entire handover process for China, said Yang was "unbiased and neutral".
Political analyst Chris Yeung said the latest move showed Beijing seemed undecided who it wanted in charge in Hong Kong.
"Sir Ti Liang, a judge not known for his business links, might not be the perfect choice, but he might yet win out as a compromise figure," Yeung wrote in the South China Morning Post.
The chief justice was out of town on Sunday and unavailable to comment.
Britain has suggested going to the World Court over China's plan to disband Hong Kong's elected legislature when Beijing takes back the territory next July.
The spectre of the two countries slugging it out in the International Court of Justice in the Hague raised the drama of Hong Kong's transition to Chinese rule to a new level after many months of bitter wrangling on handover arrangements.
British Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind and Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten denounced China's plans on Friday and proposed letting the World Court rule on the dispute.
After more than 150 years of British rule, the capitalist territory of 6.3 million people falls back under the Chinese flag at midnight next June 30, with promises from Beijing's communist leadership that almost nothing will change.
At that moment, a Beijing-appointed legislature will take over from the elected Legislative Council (Legco), reversing democratic reforms introduced by Patten over the past four years.
"There is no justification for China to replace a legislature elected openly and fairly by more than one million Hong Kong people," Rifkind said in London.
"China should be prepared to trust Hong Kong people with the measure of democracy we have introduced."
He summoned Chinese ambassador Jiang Enzhu, the man tipped to be China's envoy in Hong Kong next July, to underline Britain's concern.
Separately, Patten said in a statement and in an interview with Reuters that the body planned by China would be a "rubber stamp" chamber that would simply echo Beijing.
The threat of World Court action came on the eve of a vote by 400 wealthy and influential Hong Kong people picked under China's supervision to elect the provisional legislature.
Pro-democracy groups staged scattered protests in Hong Kong and jeered committee members as they left for the Chinese frontier city of Shenzhen where Saturday's meeting takes place.
"The International Court of Justice will, I'm sure, be able to sort things out, and we'd be very happy to put our arguments to them," Patten told Reuters.
"Clearly this weekend is going to be a very disagreeable one," Patten said, adding that China might "trash an institution" but it could not "stamp out the spirit of democracy" in Hong Kong.
Protesters mounted small-scale demonstrations outside China's diplomatic mission in the colony and at the Hung Hom railway station where members of the Selection Committee were boarding trains for Shenzhen.
"It is totally unacceptable," said lawmaker Emily Lau, who joined in the protests. "There is no legal and constitutional basis for that body, and also the Chinese government is using that body to kick out people who they do not like."
Patten said that despite Britain's views on the legislature, he would meet Hong Kong's post-colonial leader-designate, 59-year-old shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa, to explore ways to cooperate on building the post-handover administration.
The quarrel over the legislature set Tung and Patten on a collision course this week. Tung lashed back in a speech to the business community, saying Britain must "face the reality" and warned that if the legislature were challenged he would get China's parliament to pass a resolution making it legal.
Hong Kong's biggest pro-democracy group, the Democratic Party, is boycotting Saturday's selection process, which it brands as a plot to snuff out democracy and enact repressive laws.
"You won't find five of them who can be called democrats by any stretch of the imagination," Democratic Party leader Martin Lee told Reuters, commenting on the candidates.
Hong Kong's Governor Chris Patten on Friday denounced a legislature that Beijing plans to impose on the territory as a "rubber stamp" and said Britain and China should fight it out in the World Court.
"The International Court of Justice will, I'm sure, be able to sort things out, and we'd be very happy to put our arguments to them," Patten told Reuters in an interview.
His remarks, on the eve of a gathering in China to create the legislature, coincided with a toughly worded statement in London by Foreign Minister Malcolm Rifkind, who urged China to reconsider its plan or face international pressure.
"Clearly this weekend is going to be a very disagreeable one," Patten said of Saturday's gathering of 400 of Hong Kong's elite who will meet over the border in the Chinese city of Shenzhen.
They will elect 60 new legislators to take over lawmaking next July 1.
On that day, Hong Kong reverts to Chinese sovereignty, after a century and a half under the British flag, with a treaty pledge from Beijing that it can stay a distinct entity with its laissez faire capitalist system intact for a further 50 years.
The transition has been bumpy since China decided to disband the elected Legislative Council and appoint a new interim body without a mass vote, rolling back the expansion of democracy ushered in by Patten over the past four years.
Democrats in Hong Kong have said they will mount legal challenges if the interim body meets in the territory before July 1.
Calling China's plan a "sad and bad decision to go ahead with the establishment of a rubber stamp legislative body", Patten said it was designed to reduce democrats involved in lawmaking and would have serious legal repercussions.
He said that if China insisted the body was in line with Sino-British handover accords, "let them join Britain in making a joint submission to the World Court, the International Court of Justice, so that we can actually get a ruling from the ICJ."
But Patten also said he would go ahead with efforts to help Hong Kong's future leader, shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa, to prepare his administration. Tung was picked this month by the same 400-strong Selection Committee choosing the legislature.
Patten said he would meet his successor on Monday to explore a framework for pre-handover cooperation.
"We will cooperate in helping him establish an office, in helping him prepare for July 1, 1997. We will do everything to cooperate within the Joint Declaration and the Basic Law. But there is absolutely no requirement whatsoever for a provisional legislature before July 1," he said.
He said China might be able to "trash an institution" but it could not "stamp out the spirit of democracy" in Hong Kong.
China is poised to take a major step in reversing democratic reform in Hong Kong by creating a new legislature to replace the territory's elected body when Beijing resumes control of the British colony next year.
The die will be cast on Saturday when 400 Hong Kong people, carefully screened by China, meet over the border in the city of Shenzhen to appoint 60 legislators who will make Hong Kong's laws from July 1.
The "provisional legislature" will be installed after China disbands the elected Legislative Council (Legco) in a move to roll back political reforms introduced by Beijing's nemesis, departing colonial governor Chris Patten, since 1992.
The body that will choose the new parliamentarians is the Selection Committee, which also elected Tung Chee-hwa, a 59-year-old shipping tycoon with strong pro-Beijing loyalties, to succeed Patten as chief executive of the territory of 6.3 million people.
China resumes control of Hong Kong at midnight on June 30 next year, ending more than 150 years of British rule.
The Hong Kong public, who voted resoundingly for pro-democracy groups in Legco elections last year, have had no vote in the two selection processes organised by China and no say in the decision to remove the elected legislature.
The Sino-British quarrel over the provisional legislature set Tung and Patten on a collision course this week.
"A quarter of those who are lining up for jobs in this institution were beaten in regular elections ... It will be a blot on the first months of Chinese rule," Patten told a newspaper. "This echo chamber has no place in the political or administrative life of Hong Kong ... We will have nothing to do with it any form."
Tung responded in a speech to the business community by saying Britain must "face the reality" of the new legislature. He warned that if its legitimacy was challenged further he would get China's parliament to legislate on its legality.
Hong Kong's biggest pro-democracy group, the Democratic Party, is boycotting the selection process, which it brands as a plot to snuff out democracy and enact repressive laws.
"You won't find five of them who can be called democrats by any stretch of the imagination," Democratic Party leader Martin Lee told Reuters, commenting on the candidates.
The Democratic Party has expelled a rebel member, Dominic Chan, because he broke ranks to run for the new assembly.
The party is organising two days of protests against the provisional legislature, and China has beefed up security on the border in case demonstrators try to cross into Shenzhen, local media quoted Chinese sources as saying.
The Selection Committee will choose the 60 members of the provisional legislature from a list of 130 candidates.
Pro-Beijing parties fielding candidates denied critics' allegations this week that they had negotiated the result of the voting in advance in under-the-table horse-trading.
"There is definitely no carve-up of seats," said Liberal Party leader Allen Lee.
Each Selection Commitee member will vote by endorsing up to 60 names from among the candidates. The top 60 candidates -- those listed the most times -- will be appointed to the provisional legislature.
Among the candidates are 34 incumbent legislators, raising the prospect that Legco could be crippled well before Chinese rule, because the two legislatures' schedules could clash.
A poll by Hong Kong University indicated on Thursday that one-third of the public support the concept of the new legislature and one-quarter trust the Chinese government.
Thumbing its nose at Britain, China brought Hong Kong's elected legislature a step closer to oblivion on Saturday when it founded a new lawmaking body to take over next July when it takes back the colony.
The birth of the Provisional Legislative Council in the frontier city of Shenzhen brought Hong Kong to a crucial turning point in its journey towards Chinese rule at midnight next June 30 and opened the way for a possible clash in the world court.
The body, stuffed with pro-China politicians and tycoons, was attacked by Britain, Washington and local protesters. London challenged China to let the International Court of Justice in The Hague rule on its legality.
The legislative body is a big crease in Sino-British relations that could cause instability in the territory in the run-up to the handover, now less than 200 days away.
The speaker of Hong Kong's Legislative Council and 32 other incumbent lawmakers were among the 60 members chosen by a 400-member China-controlled Selection Committee.
Congratulating the 60, Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen declared the contest had been "just, fair, open and based on democratic principles" and had the approval of a wide spectrum of Hong Kong society.
Dominic Chan, recently expelled from the Democratic Party, Hong Kong's largest, also grabbed a seat. The Democratic Party has boycotted the selection as anti-democratic.
The winners included pro-China politicians such as Tsang Yok-sing, Elsie Tu and Peggy Lam, who were routed in 1995 Legco elections when more than a million people went to the polls and voted resoundingly for pro-democracy forces.
Pro-democracy groups staged noisy protests in Hong Kong declaring the Shenzhen meeting a "fake election" and a "black day for democracy". They launched 50 helium-filled balloons into China with a protest banner attached.
"Today we will have two legislatures...This is a constitutional crisis," said the Democratic Party's Andrew Cheng, a current legislator.
Beijing's communist rulers are bent on imposing themselves firmly on Hong Kong and on ending 150 years of national shame over the forced cession of the territory to Britain in 19th century wars over the opium trade.
Governor Chris Patten, who has introduced elements of democracy in this territory of 6.3 million people over the past four years, denounced the Shenzhen vote as a "bizarre farce".
"The reality is that over a million people in Hong Kong voted for the present Legislative Council. And up over the border now, 400 people -- 400 -- are voting for a so-called provisional legislature," Patten said on Saturday.
Dorothy Liu Yiu-chu, a Hong Kong member of China's parliament -- the National People's Congress -- and the Selection Committee, dissented and stayed away from the vote.
"I am sick. This is the official reason from the point of view of the Selection Committee. But I know, and I don't mind letting the world know, the real reason is that I don't agree to the establishment of the provisional legislature," she said.
Earlier this month she took part in the committee's first task, selecting shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa as Patten's successor.
Tung dismissed Britain's suggestion of world court arbitration on Saturday, saying: "We cannot have a legal vacuum in 1997. This is a great day for Hong Kong."
China's official spokesman in Hong Kong, Zhang Junsheng, said Britain's challenge would not undermine the provisional legislature's authority.
"Establishing the provisional legislature is an internal affair of China. If Britain demands international arbitration it is absurd and ignorant," Zhang told the Mad Dog Daily.
The U.S. Consul-General in Hong Kong, Richard Boucher, called the legislature vote "a backward step".
"We think it's a bad idea and a mistake," Boucher said. "I don't think we would describe it as an open and fair election which is an essential part of Hong Kong's future stability and future business environment."
Democratic Party leader Martin Lee has vowed to seek a court injunction against the provisional body if it meets in Hong Kong before July 1.
"If this sham legislature is lawful, why not appoint it and have it meet in Hong Kong, where the Supreme Court can decide on its legality," Lee said on Friday.
The skyscrapers are decked with fairy lights. Red-cloaked Santas pat children on the head. Christmas carols ring out. It is Christmas in Britain's last major colony, but will it ever be like this again?
The most spectacular Christmas light displays in the world are strung from Hong Kong's skyscrapers, featuring giant illuminated Santas and reindeer covering entire facades, beaming a rainbow of colours along the famed Hong Kong harbour skyline.
Hong Kong -- shopping paradise of the world -- is awash with Christmas. Its glass and marble malls brim with exorbitant festive displays, its shops push the fanciest, most expensive brand names in the world, specially repackaged for the season.
But after Britain pulls out and Communist-ruled china takes over next July, what then?
Will Christmas turkey, Christmas pudding and Christmas cake be allowed to grace the yuletide dinner table? Even if it does, will it taste the same?
Will revellers pull Christmas crackers and drink themselves silly in merriment as many do today?
Will China allow bourgeois extravagance and Western customs? Will charities run their "Operation Santa Claus" fundraising drive for the disadvantaged and underprivileged? Will Christians be free to worship at Midnight Mass?
If China lives up to its promises, the answer to all these questions is a resounding "yes".
China has promised to allow Hong Kong to retain its freewheeling capitalist system for a further 50 years, as a quasi-autonomous part of the motherland under a "one country two systems" policy. This means freedom of religion will stay. And the hybrid cocktail of customs and traditions, too.
However, many of Hong Kong 6.3 million people worried that pro-democracy protests such as a Christmas Eve vigil and the mass dispatch of Christmas cards to mainland dissidents by human rights groups on Tuesday might not be allowed again.
It is also doubtful if Queen Elizabeth's Christmas broadcast will ever again be on Hong Kong public radio and television."
Christmas is still going to be a holiday next year in Hong Kong, as is the other main Christian festival, Easter.
Only the Queen's official birthday and World War Two victory holidays are to be removed after China takes over.
And, in this overwhelmingly ethnic Chinese territory, there are more non-Chinese than ever, despite the gradual departure of expatriate colonial civil servants and company executives.
There are 37,000 Americans, 33,000 British and 30,000 Canadians, enough to keep a few Christmas parties going. The largest foreign group, 140,000 Filipinos, mostly brought in as servants, are also a strong Christian community.
Nevertheless, there are misgivings how much will remain the same in Hong Kong. And there's a whiff of melancholy and pre-nostalgia among expatriates this festive season.
It's almost like a "last supper", their minds tilted towards midnight next June 30, 1997, the moment when the British flag will be furled away here forever.
Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten's annual "Christmas Song Choice", which will be aired on local radio, reflects the mood.
His selection starts with Louis Armstrong singing "Basin Street Blues", followed by "As Time Goes By" by Jimmy Durante.
Patten gathered his family and friends on Wednesday night, Christmas night, for a traditional dinner of roast turkey.
All assembled were aware it could be the last Christmas dinner in the regal Government House overlooking the harbour.
Patten's successor Tung Chee-hwa, who will be Hong Kong's first Chinese leader, has indicated he doesn't want to live in the mansion that symbolises Hong Kong's one and a half centuries of British colonial rule and 150-plus years of China's national shame. He says the residence is cramped and inauspicious.
So no more Christmas there, at least.
Hong Kong's final year as a British colony has seen the balance of power tilt into China's orbit, even before the change of flag arrives. Chinese influence waxed and Britain's waned.
However, just as Christmas has become a commercial success in Japan, the festival will inevitably live on -- Chinese-style.
Hong Kong Chinese vie with each other to lavish expensive presents on their children.
Even over the border in mainland China, Christmas shopping sprees are catching on. There, Santa Claus has taken to riding a rickshaw, instead of a sleigh.
Hong Kong's leader-in-waiting Tung Chee-hwa on Friday invited the territory's top official, Anson Chan, to meet him amid intense speculation over whether she might stay in her post after China takes over next year.
The two would meet over breakfast at Tung's villa on Hong Kong Island on Saturday morning, a government spokesman said. He did not say what they planned to discuss.
Chan, 56, is chief secretary and second-in-command to Governor Chris Patten, whom the 59-year-old Tung will succeed after the change of flag at midnight next June 30, bringing down the curtain on over 150 years of British colonial rule.
An opinion poll this month ranked Chan as the most popular political figure in Hong Kong with 73 percent of people saying they support her, well ahead of Tung himself, who scored a 65 percent approval rating.
Tung was selected by a China-controlled committee on December 11 to be Hong Kong's post colonial chief executive, the first Chinese leader in the territory's history.
With only 186 days left until the handover, Tung is moving quickly to assemble a cabinet and to hammer out his relationship with a provisional legislature that China created last week.
He has called an informal lunch meeting of the 60 legislature members next Monday, likely to discuss the scope of the body's lawmaking activities and possible candidates for speaker of the assembly, although no agenda has yet been set.
Chan was once touted as a possible candidate for the job that has fallen to Tung, but she bowed out from the race and declined to become an official candidate despite her popularity.
Many officials -- in Hong Kong, in Britain and in China -- respect Chan's administrative talent and consider the Tung-Chan ticket as a "dream team" scenario likely to promote Hong Kong's smooth transition to Chinese rule.
She has said she would like to see as many as possible of her policy secretaries -- equivalent to government ministers -- stay on, for the sake of stability in the civil service.
However, in the first sign of cracks in the upper echelon of the administration, one top official, Michael Leung, head of the Independent Commission Against Corruption, announced this week he would quit before the mid-1997 handover.
Local media speculated on Friday that Leung's move could be the first in an exodus of top officials unwilling to serve an administration under Beijing's thumb after Britain pulls out.
China has promised that Hong Kong can be a quasi-autonomous territory and keep its capitalist system for another 50 years, but many in the territory fear repressive communist-style rule.
On Friday, Hong Kong's Bar Association, which groups the territory's lawayers, said it had sent a 38-page report to China urging Beijing's communist rulers not to scrap Hong Kong's Bill of Rights.
China has signalled it will roll back the human rights law and a string of other laws and trappings of democracy after it resumes sovereignty.
Hong Kong's top policeman said on Monday he was confident the territory's police could handle any disturbances after the July 1 handover to China without the help of China's People's Liberation Army.
Police Commissioner Eddie Hui, unveiling crime figures for 1996, told reporters that offences had fallen by 14 percent in the year, reaching a 15-year low and making Hong Kong one of the world's safest cities.
Hui was confident of tackling any crime problem, including mass disturbances, despite an exodus of senior officers, mainly expatriates, from the Royal Hong Kong Police Force.
China resumes sovereignty over Hong Kong on July 1 this year after a century and a half of British colonial rule. Many in Hong Kong have raised fears of a breakdown in law and order, including when the handover takes place at midnight on June 30.
Officers taking early retirement packages privately voice anxiety that Hong Kong's police will become tarnished by China-style corruption after the handover.
Pro-democracy politicians have warned that China could impose repressive laws and use its PLA garrison troops, whose colleagues crushed pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square in 1989, to keep order and put down protests.
Asked by Reuters if the police might call in the PLA to help deal with disturbances after the handover, Hui said: "I hope not. I can't foresee any situation which I cannot handle, which would require the assistance of the People's Liberation Army."
He said the exodus of officers from the service had not dented the force's ability to deal with mass disturbances in this freewheeling city of 6.3 million people.
"The senior officers who are leaving have little to do with crowd control," he said, adding that the force had sent many officers abroad for training in recent years and was prepared to deal with any outbreak of unrest.
"The overall manpower situation is very sound," he said.
Police Deputy Commissioner for Operations, Peter Wong, dismissed suggestions that the police were being pushed by China to get tough with political demonstrators, after a year of confrontations involving pro-democracy groups hostile to China.
"We're under no pressure from anybody in dealing with demonstrations," Wong said, adding that the Hong Kong police respected the population's right to demonstrate peacefully.
The enforcement of Hong Kong laws would remain solely the prerogative of the Hong Kong Police, he said.
Hui said 155 expatriates had asked to retire in the run-up to the handover, representing just five percent of the total of 3,000 senior officers on the force.
Asked to give reasons for the police's success in whittling down crime, Hui said he had sent more police out on the beat.
"We have moved a lot of our officers to the front line, to the streets, to make our presence more visible," he said.
He said Beijing's crackdown on crime last year had contributed to a more peaceful Hong Kong, where crime often has mainland links.
He said cooperation with Chinese police would be stepped up after the handover when Hong Kong's Interpol office, now a sub-group of Britain, would become a sub-group of China.
The force is to drop the word "royal" from its name and abandon the British insignia on July 1.
But it will continue to work in both English and Chinese and will retain exclusive responsibility to maintain law and order and police the Hong Kong side of the border with China, he said.
