A restructuring agreed between Channel Tunnel operator Eurotunnel SA /Plc and bank negotiators on its 69.6 billion francs of debt was a "robust" deal, French co-chairman Patrick Ponsolle said on Monday.
He told a news conference the restructuring was robust as it would eliminate a total 16 billion francs of debt by swapping eight billion of loans into equity and a further eight billion for equity notes.
The plan secured the company's future until 2003, when the London-Folkestone high-speed rail link would be built, he said.
"After 2003 we will see an explosion of revenues from the railways," Ponsolle said.
The restructuring meant the interest bill would be fixed at 5.2 percent or 3.21 billion francs for the seven-year period. That rate was much lower than market rates, the company said.
If there is a cashflow shortage to repay interest, it will be able to draw down on stabilisation notes, which are effectively a credit line, free of interest until January 2006.
The plan also pushed back the debt repayment periods by a significant period, Ponsolle said. The resettable bonds mature in 2050, the participating loan notes in 2040, the remaining junior debt in 2025 and stabilisation notes in 2026.
Eurotunnel has also negotiated the right to refinance all its debt after 2004, free of penalties, to benefit from any improvement in market conditions. Previously, that refinancing incurred heavy financial penalties.
The deal had been worked out using a wide range of scenarios and sought to preserve the company's future and independence, Ponsolle said. "It is the best compromise under the circumstances. The sacrifices for shareholders and banks are equal and equitable."
The two chief aims of the deal were "to preserve a clear majority for the shareholders and to ensure long-term financial stability," he said.
Although the company planned to pay a first dividend in around 10 years, if it performed very well it could make a payment at the date envisaged in the 1994 rights issue -- 2004.
Asked what would happen if shareholders rejected the deal, Ponsolle said, "I think we would go back to the choices at the starting point. The starting point was either we come to a friendly agreement or insolvency."
"I think, contrary to some, an insolvency could only be a catastrophe for the small shareholders."
Prices should rise "to a reasonable level" following the merger announcement last week of P&amp;O and Stena of their cross-Channel operations, Ponsolle said.
The merger news had come as a surprise to Eurotunnel, which had not expected such a move until later, perhaps in 1997, he said.
The earliest Eurotunnel could hold a shareholders' meeting to vote on the deal would be late March or early April, he said.
-- Paris newsroom +33 1 4221 5452 pnt
Shares in debt-mired Channel Tunnel operator Eurotunnel SA fell on Tuesday after they were requoted following a week's suspension amid disappointment over terms of its restructuring with creditor banks.
The troubled Anglo-French company unveiled on Monday details of the refinancing its 69.6 billion francs ($13.50 billion) of junior-ranked bank debt after a year of complex negotiations with bank lenders.
The shares closed down 8.74 percent at 8.35 francs on heavy volume of 20 million shares. They were at 9.15 francs when they were suspended on September 30 in the runup to the debt deal.
Analyst Jean Borgeix at broker Pinatton said the stock market was disappointed with the 10.40 franc price that banks will be getting new Eurotunnel shares at as part of an eight billion franc equity-for-debt deal.
The market had been looking for a conversion price of between 12-15 francs per share, he said.
Current shareholders also stand to effectively "lose" 30 percent of Eurotunnel's future cashflow, as this is the percentage earmarked for paying the "stabilisation notes" it would issue to banks in return for an interest-free credit line.
The company negotiated the right to issue the stabilisation notes in case it fell short of cash to meet interest payments. It can issue up to 14.8 billion francs of the notes.
Factoring in that loss of future cashflow gave the shares a present value of around 8.5 francs a share.
Another French analyst said: "The restructuring assures the industrial viability of the project, even though the shares remain a risky investment."
The debt deal looked good on paper and the zero-interest stabilisation notes provided Eurotunnel with a last line of defence if its cash failed to meet interest payments, he said.
A trader at a major U.S. brokerage in Paris said the share price suffered from the dilution of equity due to the debt pact.
The restructuring will dilute the holdings of current shareholders to 54.5 percent of the capital after the debt swap.
The complex agreement also includes issuing eight billion francs of bonds redeemable in shares, which could further dilute the equity holders to 39.4 percent if the banks exercised their conversion rights at 12.40 francs per share.
But shareholders will also get share warrants at the same price to bring them back to owning 51.3 percent of the capital. ($1=5.156 French Franc)
Shares in debt-mired Channel Tunnel operator Eurotunnel SA fell on Tuesday after they were requoted following a week's suspension, amid disappointment over terms of its restructuring with creditor banks.
The troubled Anglo-French company unveiled on Monday details of the refinancing its 69.6 billion francs ($13.50 billion) of junior-ranked bank debt after a year of complex negotiations with bank lenders.
The shares were trading at 8.50 francs at 1052 GMT, on heavy volume of 16 million. They were 9.15 francs when they were suspended on September 30.
Analyst Jean Borgeix at broker Pinatton said the stock market was disappointed with the 10.40 francs for which the banks will getting new Eurotunnel shares in an eight billion franc equity for debt deal.
The market had been looking for a conversion price of between 12-15 francs per share, he said.
The current shareholders also stand to effectively "lose" 30 percent of Eurotunnel's future cashflow, as this is the percentage earmarked for paying the "stabilisation notes" it would issue to banks in return for an interest-free credit line.
The company negotiated the right to issue the stabilisation notes in case it fell short of cash to meet interest payments. It can issue up to 14.8 billion francs of the notes.
Factoring in that loss of future cashflow gave the shares a present value of around 8.5 francs per share.
Another French analyst said, "The restructuring assures the industrial viability of the project, even though the shares remain a risky investment."
The debt deal looked good on paper and the zero-interest stabilisation notes provided Eurotunnel with a last line of defence if its cash failed to meet interest payments, he said.
A trader at a major U.S. brokerage in Paris said the share price suffered from the dilution of equity due to the debt pact.
The restructuring will dilute the holdings of current shareholders to 54.5 percent of the capital after the debt swap.
The complex agreement also includes issuing eight billion francs of bonds redeemable in shares, which could further dilute the equity holders to 39.4 percent if the banks exercised their conversion rights at 12.40 francs per share.
But shareholders will also get share warrants at the same price to bring them back to owning 51.3 percent of the capital.
($1=5.156 French Franc)
Construction group Bouygues has emerged as the latest contender in the French telecommunications arena with its joint bid with Italy's STET to run the telephone network of rail operator SNCF
Bouygues follows the larger Cie Generale des Eaux, which last month announced blue chip partners for its Cegetel telecoms unit, and the state-owned RATP Paris Metro operator which set up a unit to exploit its 300 kilometres of track.
The stock market cheered Bouygues' alliance with STET and marked its shares up 4.62 percent to 510 francs on Friday.
The new entrants are seizing on the opportunity presented by the breakup of France Telecom's domestic monopoly from the start of 1998, under European Union competition rules.
Although both Bouygues and Generale des Eaux currently run mobile telephone businesses, their ambitions run higher. They want a major slice of the profitable long-distance call market and the high-value business networks.
Generale des Eaux chairman Jean-Marie Messier wooed analysts recently with bullish growth forecasts for the telecoms sector and said he expected Cegetel to contribute 15 percent of group sales and 25 percent of cashflow by 2003.
Which leaves Lyonnaise des Eaux of the three French major utilities and services company firmly wedded to pursuing communications rather than telecommunications.
"Our strategy is communications, not telecommunications," said a Lyonnaise executive.
Analyst Annick Santer at broker Ferri said, "Communications is not at all in the same league as telecommunications. It does not have the same scope but it can be profitable."
Communications, if it offers less spectacular potential, also holds less scope for risk, she added.
The group's communications interests, grouped around its Lyonnaise Communications unit and M6 television stake, had 1995 sales of 1.4 billion francs and contributed 69 million in net profit.
The profit came from its 34 percent stake in the Metropole Television M6 unit, which reported a first half net profit of 215 million francs, up 2.3 percent from a year ago.
But Lyonnaise Communications, which runs its cable television operations, made a 1995 loss of 45 million francs.
The cable business, with 400,000 subscribers, is close to breaking even this year and depends on getting a few thousand more customers, a source close to the company said.
Lyonnaise owns 70 percent of Lyonnaise Communications, with France Telecom holding 17 and US West with six percent.
Lyonnaise executives declined to give sales or cashflow forecasts for its communications business but said most of the investment had already been made and it was adding services to the existing infrastructure.
-- Paris newsroom +33 1 4221 5452 pnt/cct
French utilities giant Compagnie Generale des Eaux posted on Monday higher first half profits and unveiled plans to reorganise its loss-making construction business, hammered by a depressed French market.
Chairman Jean-Marie Messier told a news conference the company made first half net profit of 808 million francs, after payment to minorities, up from 224 million a year ago.
He also forecast net profit for the full year 1996 would be about 1.8 billion francs, compared with a net loss of 3.69 billion francs a year ago. The results would be "strongly marked by exceptional items, notably capital gains from asset sales," he added.
For 1997, Messier expected profits to be "much higher" than those of 1996 and should be "without doubt higher than the best profits the company has had in its history." The company made 3.4 billion francs net profit in 1994.
Messier also announced Generale des Eaux had made a formal bid on Monday with its German partner Mannesmann AG to run the telecommunications operations of French state railways SNCF. The two companies want to bring British Telecom to join the bid.
Messier, who came from an investment bank, was brought in last year to clear out the group's balance sheet which had put on more than 50 billion francs of debt and been savaged by a crisis in the property market and construction business.
His first step last year was to reorganise the property arm, which he said on Monday had cost the group a total 15 billion francs since 1994.
The group expects to lose 4.6 billion francs this year due to poor property assets but that includes three billion francs of exceptional charges which should wipe out any uncertainty for the next three years, he said.
"At the end of 1996, Generale des Eaux will not face any questions, even in pessimistic scenarios for the next three years, on any exceptional charges which may arise from its property activities," he said.
The group's George V property development arm aims to be profitable from 1997, he said.
The group's average level of property provisioning was around 55-56 percent, of which assets in the south of France were provisioned at 65-70 percent and 85 percent at Cannes.
This time round, Messier attacked the group's building and public works businesses which have suffered from the downturn in France and Germany. He has made its SGE subsidiary the centre of its construction activity.
The GTIE and Santerne electrical installations units and roadbuilders Cochery, Viafrance and SGE-VBU will be brought into SGE. And there will be a consolidation of building activity with SGE buying 40 percent of Compagnie Generale de Batiment et de Construction (CBC), currently wholly owned by CGE.
The new SGE, which will be "radically different and attractive," will have annual sales of 52 billion francs and will return to a "significant level" of profit in 1997, Messier said.
Generale des Eaux also expects to cut its debt by about 10 to 15 billion francs in 1997. It said it expected its net financial debt to stand at 53 billion francs at the end of 1996, down from 54 billion in 1995.
Messier said the company's operating profit would be close to the 3.7 billion franc profit recorded in 1994.
Turnover in 1996 should be up three percent to 164 billion francs, he added.
France is deregulating the telecommunications regime in 1998, breaking the domestic monopoly of state-owned France Telecom to comply with European Union rules.
French utilities giant Compagnie Generale des Eaux on Monday posted higher first half profits and unveiled plans to reorganise its loss-making construction business, hammered by a depressed French market.
Chairman Jean-Marie Messier told a news conference the company made a first half net profit of 808 million French francs ($155.9 million), after payment to minorities, up from 224 million a year ago.
He also forecast net profit for the full year 1996 would be about 1.8 billion francs after a net loss the year before of 3.69 billion francs. The results would be "strongly marked by exceptional items, notably capital gains from asset sales."
For 1997, Messier expected profits to be "much higher" than those of 1996 and should be "without doubt higher than the best profits the company has had in its history." The company made 3.4 billion francs net profit in 1994.
Messier also announced Generale des Eaux said it had made a formal bid on Monday with its German partner Mannesmann to run the telecommunications operations of French state railways SNCF. The two companies want to bring British Telecom to join the bid.
Messier, who came from an investment bank, was brought in last year to clear out the group's balance sheet which had put on more than 50 billion francs of debt and been savaged by a crisis in the property market and construction business.
His first step last year was to reorganise the property arm, which he said on Monday had cost the group a total 15 billion francs since 1994.
The group expects to lose 4.6 billion francs this year due to poor property assets but that includes three billion francs of exceptional charges which should wipe out any uncertainty for the next three years, he said.
"At the end of 1996, Generale des Eaux will not face any questions, even in pessimistic scenarios for the next three years, on any exceptional charges which may arise from its property activities," he said.
The group's George V property development arm aims to be profitable from 1997, he said.
The group's average level of property provisioning was around 55-56 percent, of which assets in the South of France were provisioned at 65-70 percent and 85 percent at Cannes.
This time round, Messier attacked the group's building and public works businesses which have suffered from the downturn in France and Germany. He has made its SGE subsidiary the centre of its construction activity.
Into SGE will go the GTIE and Santerne electrical installations units and roadbuilders Cochery, Viafrance and SGE-VBU. And there will be a consolidation of building activity with SGE buying 40 percent of Compagnie Generale de Batiment et de Construction (CBC), currently wholly owned by CGE.
The new SGE, which will be "radically different and attractive," have annual sales of 52 billion francs and will return to a significant level of profit in 1997, Messier said.
Generale des Eaux also expects to cut its debt by about 10 to 15 billion francs in 1997. It said it expected its net financial debt to stand at 53 billion francs at the end of 1996, down from 54 billion in 1995.
He said the company's operating profit would be close to the 3.7 billion franc profit recorded in 1994.
Turnover in 1996 should be up three percent to 164 billion francs, he added.
France is deregulating its telecommunications in 1998, breaking the domestic monopoly of state-owned France Telecom to comply with European Union rules. ($1=5.182 French Franc)
French aviation executives said on Tuesday they feared renewed turbulence with the United States over airline market access in France, with flagcarrier Air France caught up in a looming "air war".
The U.S. government wants France to sign a bilateral treaty which would grant more landing rights to American airlines, while Paris seeks a gradual market liberalisation.
A spokeswoman for the U.S. embassy in Paris told Reuters the U.S. authorities had not rejected the new winter schedule for state-owned Air France.
"However, Air France has requested increased services over last winter," she said.
"The Department of Transportation has extended the deadline to rule on Air France's request until October 27, thereby giving our government time to discuss the schedule with the French authorities."
That delay on approving Air France's schedule was seen as a strongarm measure to force Paris into agreeing a new aviation treaty.
"It's like placing a dagger at our throat," an aviation executive said. Air France's winter schedule was due to enter service on October 27.
Air France has requested an extra flight to San Francisco, two to Los Angeles and one to Chicago this winter, compared to the 1995 winter schedule. It wants to add extra cargo capacity from March to Miami and Chicago.
A second French executive said if the United States took unilateral measures, Paris would not hesitate to retaliate against U.S. airlines, as it did in March when U.S. Transportation Secretary Federico Pena rejected Air France's summer schedule.
Paris cut landing rights of six U.S. airlines before the junior transport ministers of both countries, meeting in Paris, agreed to open talks aimed at reaching a treaty to replace one which expired in 1992.
Without such a treaty, each route and landing rights have to be negotiated on a case-by-case basis, whereas Washington would like a global, market-driven solution.
Separately, Washington is withholding approval of a planned alliance between American Airlines and British Airways Plc until Britain agrees an "open skies" treaty with the United States.
French President Jacques Chirac looked set on Wednesday to achieve his ambition of creating a national defence giant to rival huge U.S. conglomerates through the planned merger of Lagardere's Matra with Thomson- CSF.
The government announced on Wednesday it preferred a bid by missile-maker Lagardere Groupe for electronics firm Thomson SA over a rival one by civilian engineering group Alcatel Alsthom. Both offers have been referred to the independent Privatisation Commission.
The preference for Lagardere seems to vindicates the integration sought by Noel Forgeard, chairman of Lagardere's Matra unit, who has fought a highly-public campaign for Thomson, in order to win its Thomson-CSF defence arm.
The deal will "indisputably strengthen the missiles activity in France and particularly Europe," said Jean-Marc Baron, a partner specialising in defence at consultants KPMG Peat Marwick. "The merger wil create a critical mass," he added.
Matra specialises in air-to-air missiles with the Magic and Mica weapons, while Thomson-CSF has ground-to-air missiles including the Crotale NG (New Generation) and Starstreak very- short-range missile built with Shorts Brothers Plc, a unit of Canada's Bombardier.
The addition of Thomson-CSF reinforces a vital joint venture between Matra and British Aerospace Plc to create Matra BAe Dynamics, which Lagardere wants to be the pole for future European industrial concentration.
Besides the missile synergy, Baron pointed to the benefits of marrying Thomson-CSF's radar and communications expertise with Matra's space satellites, which will give Thomson access to a new market.
Lagardere has major space interests with its Matra Marconi Space (MMS) joint venture with GEC Plc of Britain and also wants to use this a platform for building a single European satellite giant, to make the most of scarce funds.
This vertical integration of detection, communications and weapons makes the future Thomson Matra a powerful "systems" player rather than a seller of separate products. Each of these segments has annual turnover of about $1-$2 billion, Baron said.
In the United States, the defence industry has quickly consolidated through $40 billion of mergers and acquisitions to create giants such as Lockheed Martin. Integration is seen as key, with firms such as Hughes, a unit of General Motors, not only building missiles and satellites but also operating the satellites.
European and U.S. defence firms have had to adapt to shrinking military spending since the end of the Cold War and soaring research and development costs. But Europe has lagged in that restructuring due to differing national interests.
With the aid of Matra's links with BAe and GEC and through overtures to Daimler-Benz Aerospace (Dasa), Forgeard wants to forge a European grouping which would have world class status in terms of turnover and product range.
Chirac launched the privatisation of Thomson SA in February as part of a restructuring of France's fragmented defence industry, widely seen by analysts as a vital step toward a badly needed consolidation of European capacity.
Air France is linking up with two major U.S. carriers, Delta Air Lines and Continental, in a transatlantic alliance crucial to its ability to keep up with its major European rivals.
The French state airline said on Wednesday it had signed separate letters of intent for cooperation with Delta and Continental after a lengthy search for a U.S. partner.
The long-awaited agreements mark a strategic step in Air France's development and tap the huge U.S. travel market to feed its global network while the U.S. companies will carry the French airline's passengers on their domestic routes.
"These agreements crystallise the company's wish to forge a network of global alliances," Air France said in a statement.
The alliances allow so-called code-sharing arrangements between Air France and the U.S. companies, which is a low-cost way of gaining more customers without direct investment.
It means passengers can be issued with a through-ticket by one carrier to be used on its partner airline -- making it possible for airlines to feed passengers to each other without setting up their own routes.
The companies will also harmonise their flight schedules, share a common frequent flyer programme, and provide ground facilities.
Delta operates from its hub at Atlanta, Georgia, while Continental works from Houston, Texas and Air France uses Paris Roissy-Charles De Gaulle airport.
Air France gave no financial details of the link-ups but a spokeswoman said they were expected to bring the loss-making airline savings of $100 million a year.
The airline racked up a net loss of more than two billion francs last year after heavy provisions for restructuring, but has said it hopes to be in profit this financial year.
Air France chairman Christian Blanc has for months been looking for a heavyweight partner to give the airline a global reach and counter the spread of alliances between its rivals.
Air France has previously said it was talking to Continental and Delta, as well as American Airlines of AMR Corp, United Airlines of UAL Corp and USAir Group.
German airline Deutsche Lufthansa AG started code-sharing flights with United Airlines in 1994, paving the way for several other high-profile cooperation deals.
American Airlines this year agreed a controversial alliance with British Airways Plc but regulatory approval has been held up by a row between the British and U.S. governments over an "open skies" agreement.
The planned BA-American alliance has been attacked by rivals as anti-competitive.
French newspapers have said Washington is squaring up for another struggle with France over a bilateral "open skies" pact and would use any alliance by Air France as a lever to push the French to further open up the domestic market.
Air France cautioned the through-ticketing accords with Continental and Delta were subject to government approvals.
Washington and Paris clashed earlier this year when the United States wanted to open bilateral talks on market access and held up U.S. approval of Air France's summer schedule until the French agreed to start negotiations.
Air France and Continental signed a commercial accord back in 1993 but it has never been implemented due to changes in top management at both companies. Continental, among the U.S. majors, does not have a European partner.
Air France said Wednesday it was linking up with two major U.S. carriers, Delta Air Lines and Continental Airlines, in a trans-Atlantic alliance crucial to its ability to keep up with its major European rivals.
The French state airline said it signed separate letters of intent to coordinate ticket booking and feed passengers back and forth with Delta and Continental after a lengthy search for an American partner.
The long-awaited agreements mark a strategic step in Air France's development and tap the huge U.S. travel market to feed its global network while the U.S. companies will carry the French airline's passengers on their domestic routes.
Air France and Continental signed a commercial accord back in 1993 but it has never been implemented due to changes in top management at both companies. Continental, among the U.S. majors, does not have a European partner.
"These agreements crystallise the company's wish to forge a network of global alliances," Air France said in a statement.
The alliances allow so-called code-sharing arrangements between Air France and the U.S. companies, which is a low-cost way of gaining more customers without direct investment.
It means passengers can be issued a ticket by one carrier to be used on its partner airline -- making it possible for airlines to feed passengers to each other without setting up their own routes.
The companies will also harmonise flight schedules, share a common frequent flyer scheme, and provide ground facilities.
Delta operates from its hub at Atlanta while Continental works from Houston. Air France uses Paris Roissy-Charles De Gaulle airport.
Air France gave no financial details of the alliances but a spokeswoman said they were expected to bring the loss-making airline an extra $100 million a year in gross revenues.
The French airline racked up a net loss of more than 2 billion francs ($385 million) last year after heavy charges for restructuring, but has said it hopes to earn a profit this fiscal year.
Air France Chairman Christian Blanc said a search for U.S. partners only became possible this year as Air France showed signs of financial recovery and reorganized its global network around a central hub at De Gaulle airport.
German carrier Deutsche Lufthansa AG started code-sharing flights with United Airlines in 1994, paving the way for several other high-profile cooperation deals.
French executives fear Washington could hold up any alliance by Air France as a lever to push Paris into opening up the domestic market as part of a bilateral aviation pact.
American Airlines this year set a controversial alliance with British Airways Plc but regulatory approval has been held up because of a dispute between London and Washington over an "open skies" agreement. The planned alliance has been attacked by rivals as anti-competitive.
Air France noted that the ticketing accords with Continental and Delta were subject to government approvals.
Washington and Paris clashed earlier this year when the United States wanted to open bilateral talks on market access and held up U.S. approval of Air France's summer schedule until the French agreed to start negotiations.
Air France is linking up with two major U.S. carriers, Delta Air Lines and Continental, in a transatlantic alliance crucial to its ability to keep up with its major European rivals.
The French state airline said on Wednesday it had signed separate letters of intent for cooperation with Delta and Continental after a lengthy search for a U.S. partner.
The long-awaited agreements mark a strategic step in Air France's development and tap the huge U.S. travel market to feed its global network while the U.S. companies will carry the French airline's passengers on their domestic routes.
"These agreements crystallise the company's wish to forge a network of global alliances," Air France said in a statement.
The alliances allow so-called code-sharing arrangements between Air France and the U.S. companies, which is a low-cost way of gaining more customers without direct investment.
It means passengers can be issued with a through-ticket by one carrier to be used on its partner airline -- making it possible for airlines to feed passengers to each other without setting up their own routes.
The companies will also harmonise their flight schedules, share a common frequent flyer scheme, and provide ground facilities.
Delta operates from its hub at Atlanta, Georgia, while Continental works from Houston, Texas and Air France uses Paris Roissy-Charles De Gaulle airport.
Air France gave no financial details of the link-ups but a spokeswoman said they were expected to bring the loss-making airline an extra $100 million a year in gross revenues.
The French airline racked up a net loss of more than two billion francs last year after heavy provisions for restructuring, but has said it hopes to be in profit this financial year.
Air France chairman Christian Blanc search for U.S. partners only became possible this year as Air France showed signs of financial recovery and reorganised its global network around a central "hub" operation at Roissy Charles De Gaulle airport, giving it a key asset.
This year marks the end of a three-year productivity drive by Blanc to return Air France to break even by 1997 and match the competiveness of its European rivals.
German airline Deutsche Lufthansa AG started code-sharing flights with United Airlines in 1994, paving the way for several other high-profile cooperation deals.
French executives fear Washington could hold up any alliance by Air France as a lever to push Paris into opening up the domestic market as part of a bilateral aviation pact.
American Airlines this year agreed a controversial alliance with British Airways Plc but regulatory approval has been held up by a row between the British and U.S. governments over an "open skies" agreement.
The planned BA-American alliance has been attacked by rivals as anti-competitive.
Air France cautioned the through-ticketing accords with Continental and Delta were subject to government approvals.
Washington and Paris clashed earlier this year when the United States wanted to open bilateral talks on market access and held up U.S. approval of Air France's summer schedule until the French agreed to start negotiations.
Air France and Continental signed a commercial accord back in 1993 but it has never been implemented due to changes in top management at both companies. Continental, among the U.S. majors, does not have a European partner.
A planned sale of French television maker Thomson Multimedia to South Korea's Daewoo Electronics for a symbolic one franc has sparked a political backlash against the government's privatisation plans.
The government wants to sell electronics group Thomson SA to the Lagardere conglomerate, which would sell the loss-making Thomson Multimedia to Daewoo while keeping Thomson-CSF, the defence electronics subsidiary.
The leader of the French Socialist Party, Lionel Jospin, told France 3 state-owned television on Sunday he was "shocked" by the Thomson privatisation.
"This was a public sector firm and concerned the national interest. It has been privatised for ideological reasons", he said.
"I was shocked by the method, which was despicable and perhaps even illegal as the 1986 (privatisation) law specifically called for the parliamentary privatisation committee to give a supporting opinion," he said.
Jacques Delors, former president of the European Commission, told a conference in Paris on Sunday, "I would have preferred to maintain a European pole in consumer electronics."
On Monday, French business newspaper La Tribune Desfosses added to the controversy by reporting that a French businessman, whom it did not identify, was preparing a bid for Thomson Multimedia to keep the company French.
The report said it was only after the government declared its preference last Wednesday for Lagardere's bid over a rival offer from Alcatel Alsthom that authorities realised "the value of the gift it (the state) was making to Daewoo."
A Thomson-CSF spokesman declined to comment on the report of a "white knight" bidder.
A Lagardere spokesman said bids had closed in September and if investors were interested in Multimedia, they would have to negotiate with Daewoo after it had bought the firm.
Jospin said French President Jacques Chirac and Prime Minister Alain Juppe were allowing the sale of Thomson Multimedia to Daewoo, which would reap the benefits of French state financing for the group's digital technology.
"Thanks to state finances, it will be able to take up a strong position in the digital (television) market and be profitable from 1999," Jospin said.
Thomson Multimedia is set to make big profits in 1999, when revenues from technology licences will contribute at least one billion francs ($192.3 million) a year. The licences were acquired when Thomson bought RCA of the United States from General Electric in 1987 but only revert to Thomson after 1998.
"We are not hostile to a foreign company taking control of Thomson Multimedia as it follows an industrial and economic logic," a spokesman for the Thomson-CSF association of employee shareholders said.
But, he added, it was a pity the state had not played its part as a shareholder to recapitalise the group earlier.
A source close to Thomson said the group's financial situation was untenable as its share capital was insufficient to sustain its debt and that it was in dire need of fresh funds.
But the government is tightening its belt as it cuts public spending to meet tough requirements to join the single European currency by 1999. The Thomson privatisation was also launched as part of the government's consolidation of the defence industry.
The Thomson Multimedia unit, the world's fourth-largest TV maker, reported a loss of three billion francs in the first half of 1996. It has invested heavily in digitial television technology and is a leader in television decoders, as well as a being a member of the Digital Video Disc consortium.
The chairman of the South Korean company, Bae Soon-Hoon, has said he is ready to invest $1.5 billion in France and create 5,000 new jobs if he wins Multimedia.
($1=5.199 French Franc)
Just as the submarine changed the face of naval warfare in World War Two, Europe's shipbuilders are hoping a new breed of "stealth" warships will do the same in the 21st century.
At a trade fair at Le Bourget airport, north of Paris, three shipbuilders presented their own version of combat ships with the ability to hide and deceive the enemy.
Britain's Vosper Thornycroft on Tuesday unveiled its design for the futuristic Sea Wraith corvette.
"We believe it has the potential to make other vessels of its class obsolete," Brian Spilman, Vosper's manager of future projects shipbuilding, told a news conference at the Euronaval exhibition, which gathers the world's navies.
BAeSema, a joint venture between British Aerospace and France's Sema Group, presented its Cougar corvette on Monday.
And French state-owned DCN shipyard presented its La Fayette frigate which it boasted was the first operational warship fully to use stealth features in its design.
Unlike the first two, designed for patrolling regional waters, the French ship is a full-scale deep-water frigate.
Stealth warships use similar principles to the radar-beating technology developed by the U.S. aircraft industry and used in the 1991 Gulf War against Iraq. The diamond-shaped F117 and batwing B2 bombers were designed to absorb or deflect radar.
Built in flat, angular shapes, stealth warships are "platforms" for weapons and detection systems.
The La Fayette uses a slab-sided superstructure and non-metallic materials to confuse radar. The second of eight La Fayette-class ships ordered by Taiwan entered service last week, while Saudi Arabia has also ordered the French ship.
The British are in hot pursuit with their own designs for a new generation of stealth vessels.
"We believe this is the warship of the future and all warships will need to use these techniques," Vosper's Spilman said. "We have made it difficult to detect, classify and engage with a missile," he told the news conference.
The Sea Wraith design puts the distinctive clutter of mast, radar dishes and aerials inside flat-sided towers and has shaped topsides, rather like diamond facets, to make it hard for radar to lock on. It also uses non-reflective composites.
Sea Wraith can alter its "radar signature" by lowering or raising the mast, making it difficult to recognise the craft. Two asymetrically-located masts are meant to confuse radar-guided missiles.
To counter new infra-red, or heat-seeking, missiles, the ship sprays a fine mist of water to conceal itself.
BAeSema is showcasing its low angular Cougar patrol vessel, which uses low-acoustic waterjet propulsion instead of traditional noisy engines which are easily picked up by sonar.
The basic Cougar "hull-in-the-water", excluding weapons and other systems, costs around 30 million sterling ($37.56 million), according to Keith Figg, the craft's designer.
BAe last week announced it was merging its naval systems activities into BAeSema, to boost its prime contractor role.
Prime contractors bid for contracts in which integration of radar, communications and defence provide the added value.
BAeSema would act as prime contractor while the ship would typically be built in the customers' own shipyards.
"We're going for indigenous building and procurement, which would be a more cost-effective solution and involve ownership at an earlier stage" Figg said.
South East Asian delegations have shown interest in both the Cougar and Sea Wraith, company executives said. "We view that part of the world as a very important market," Spilman said.
Strong economic growth and regional rivalries particularly over natural resources and territorial waters have fuelled an arms race in South-East Asia.
French defence electronics group Thomson-CSF is the prime contractor for the La Fayette under Sawari 1 and 2 contracts signed with Saudi Arabia.
($1=.7986 Sterling)
Just as the submarine changed the face of naval warfare in World War Two, Europe's shipbuilders are hoping a new breed of "stealth" warships will do the same in the 21st century.
At a trade fair at Le Bourget airport, north of Paris, three shipbuilders presented their own version of combat ships with the ability to hide and deceive the enemy.
Britain's Vosper Thornycroft on Tuesday unveiled its design for the futuristic Sea Wraith corvette.
"We believe it has the potential to make other vessels of its class obsolete," Brian Spilman, Vosper's manager of future projects shipbuilding, told a news conference at the Euronaval exhibition, which gathers the world's navies.
BAeSema, a joint venture between British Aerospace and France's Sema Group, presented its Cougar corvette on Monday.
And French state-owned DCN shipyard presented its La Fayette frigate which it boasted was the first operational warship fully to use stealth features in its design.
Unlike the first two, designed for patrolling regional waters, the French ship is a full-scale deep-water frigate.
Stealth warships use similar principles to the radar-beating technology developed by the U.S. aircraft industry and used in the 1991 Gulf War against Iraq. The diamond-shaped F117 and batwing B2 bombers were designed to absorb or deflect radar.
Built in flat, angular shapes, stealth warships are "platforms" for weapons and detection systems.
The La Fayette uses a slab-sided superstructure and non-metallic materials to confuse radar. The second of eight La Fayette-class ships ordered by Taiwan entered service last week, while Saudi Arabia has also ordered the French ship.
The British are in hot pursuit with their own designs for a new generation of stealth vessels.
"We believe this is the warship of the future and all warships will need to use these techniques," Vosper's Spilman said. "We have made it difficult to detect, classify and engage with a missile," he told the news conference.
The Sea Wraith design puts the distinctive clutter of mast, radar dishes and aerials inside flat-sided towers and has shaped topsides, rather like diamond facets, to make it hard for radar to lock on. It also uses non-reflective composites.
Sea Wraith can alter its "radar signature" by lowering or raising the mast, making it difficult to recognise the craft. Two asymetrically-located masts are meant to confuse radar-guided missiles.
To counter new infra-red, or heat-seeking, missiles, the ship sprays a fine mist of water to conceal itself.
BAeSema is showcasing its low angular Cougar patrol vessel, which uses low-acoustic waterjet propulsion instead of traditional noisy engines which are easily picked up by sonar.
The basic Cougar "hull-in-the-water", excluding weapons and other systems, costs around 30 million sterling ($37.56 million), according to Keith Figg, the craft's designer.
BAe last week announced it was merging its naval systems activities into BAeSema, to boost its prime contractor role.
Prime contractors bid for contracts in which integration of radar, communications and defence provide the added value.
BAeSema would act as prime contractor while the ship would typically be built in the customers' own shipyards.
"We're going for indigenous building and procurement, which would be a more cost-effective solution and involve ownership at an earlier stage" Figg said.
South East Asian delegations have shown interest in both the Cougar and Sea Wraith, company executives said. "We view that part of the world as a very important market," Spilman said.
Strong economic growth and regional rivalries particularly over natural resources and territorial waters have fuelled an arms race in South-East Asia.
French defence electronics group Thomson-CSF TCFP.PA is the prime contractor for the La Fayette under Sawari 1 and 2 contracts signed with Saudi Arabia.
($1=.7986 Sterling)
Just as the submarine changed the face of naval warfare in World War Two, Europe's shipbuilders are hoping a new breed of "stealth" warships will do the same in the 21st century.
At a trade fair at the business airport of Le Bourget, north of Paris, three shipbuilders were presenting their own version of combat ships with the ability to hide and deceive the enemy.
British shipbuilder Vosper Thornycroft was due on Tuesday to unveil its design for the Sea Wraith corvette at the Euronaval exhibition, which gathers the world's navies.
BAeSema, a joint venture between British Aerospace Plc and France's Sema Group, launched its Cougar coastal corvette project on Monday.
And French state-owned DCN shipyard presented its La Fayette frigate which it boasted was the first operational warship fully to use stealth features in its design.
DCN builds the hulls, while it has linked up with French defence company Thomson CSF to provide the ship's communications, detection and weapons control systems.
Stealth warships use similar principles to the radar-beating technology developed by the U.S. aircraft industry and used in the 1991 Gulf War against Iraq. The diamond-shaped F117 and batwing B2 bombers were designed to absorb or deflect radar.
But traditionalists who admire the sleek greyhound lines of warships would be dismayed to see the flat, angular shapes forced by the stealth technology which makes modern ships mere "platforms" for weapons and detection systems.
The La Fayette uses a slab-sided superstructure and non-metallic composite materials to confuse radar and missiles. The second of eight La Fayette-class ships ordered by Taiwan entered service last week, while Saudi Arabia has also ordered the French ship.
But the British are in hot pursuit with their own designs for a new generation of stealth vessels, which they say they are ready to build now. They have set their sights firmly on export markets for the first customers.
"We believe this is the warship of the future and all warships will need to use these techniques," Brian Spilman, Vosper's manager of future projects shipbuilding, told Reuters.
The Sea Wraith design puts the distinctive clutter of mast, radar dishes and aerials inside flat-sided towers and has shaped topsides, rather like diamond facings, to make it hard for radars to lock on. It also uses non-reflective composites.
Sea Wraith can alter its "radar signature" by lowering or raising the mast, making it difficult to recognise the craft. Two asymetrically-located masts are meant to confuse radar-guided missiles.
To counter new infra-red, or heat-seeking, missiles, the ship sprays a fine mist of water to conceal itself and its "hot spots" such as the exhaust.
BAeSema is showcasing the Cougar patrol vessel, which uses low-acoustic waterjet propulsion instead of traditional noisy engines which are easily picked up by sonar.
Its low, angular lines are typical of stealth designs for throwing off radar beams.
BAe last week announced it was merging its naval systems activities into BAeSema, to boost its prime contractor role.
Prime contractors bid for contracts in which their integration of radar, communications and defence systems provide the added value.
Both BAeSema and Vosper have declined to give prices for their ships, saying these depend on the systems requested.
Thomson-CSF, part of the French state-owned Thomson SA electronics group which is being privatised to the Lagardere conglomerate, is the prime contractor for the La Fayette under Sawari 1 and 2 contracts signed with Saudi Arabia.
The French government, belatedly attempting to consolidate a fragmented aerospace industry, on Wednesday gave the green light for aero-engine maker Snecma to buy up rocket engine manufacturer SEP.
State-owned Snecma already owns 51 percent of Societe Europeene de Propulsion (SEP) and wants to buy out minority shareholders to make it a wholly-owned subsidiary. The enlarged group would have annual sales of around 15 billion francs ($2.9 billion).
"The government has been advised of Snecma's wish to raise its holding in the capital of SEP from 51 percent to 100 percent and has given its approval so Snecma's board can make a public offer for SEP shares, followed by, if the 95 percent threshold is reached, a mandatory buy-in," the Finance Ministry said in a statement.
The deal has a strong industrial logic and would ensure Snecma's future in space programmes and its position as France's centre for engine manufacture, it said.
SEP makes engines and boosters for Ariane rockets, used by the European Arianespace consortium.
Snecma makes civilian and military aero engines including those for passenger jets of the Airbus Industrie consortium and Dassault Aviation combat planes.
The buy-in, for which no financial details were available, reverses a policy drawn up by Snecma's previous chairman, Bernard Dufour, who wanted to dispose of SEP and Messier Bugatti, Snecma's aircraft brakes unit, to raise cash.
"Previously envisaged, the sale of SEP is no longer on the agenda", said a Snecma staff note made available to Reuters.
Although the SEP sale would have brought in fresh cash, it also risked weakening the Snecma group by losing know-how essential for future transports such as a second generation supersonic plane and hypersonic aircraft, the note said.
It would also have meant the loss for SEP of Snecma's technical support, which has helped it in the past.
Snecma's new chairman, Jean Paul Bechat, has said asset sales should not be used to make up operating losses and that the company's deficits would only be tackled by meeting a targeted 1.5 billion francs in cost cuts in a restructuring plan.
In addition, the government has adopted an industrial policy for the defence sector which relies on consolidating each sector on a business basis. Snecma was thus the natural centre for SEP, to build a propulsion group in aeronautics and space, it said.
The move would also consolidate Snecma's brakes activities by bringing together SEP's Carbone-Industrie subsidiary with Snecma's Messier Bugatti to create a bigger entity.
Brakes make up around eight percent of Snecma's sales, with potential to grow into areas such as cars and trains.
The buyout will help SEP through a difficult period in the next few years as its order book falls when the Arianespace space consortium transfers launches to the new Ariane 5 rocket from the existing Ariane 4.
SEP makes the rocket motors for the Ariane 5, which has one huge Vulcain engine instead of the up to 10 Viking and HM 7 motors in Ariane 4. Competition from the United States, Russia, Ukraine, China and Japan is also expected to put severe price pressure on rocket launchers.
SEP also makes ballistic missiles and its proposed M5 replacement for the M45 was only adopted in the six-year defence budget on condition that there would be big cost reductions and reorganisations among the industrial partners.
The takeover will create a group with synergies in aeronautical and space engines, making it virtually unique in Europe, a Snecma spokesman said.
Snecma made a 1995 net loss of 1.24 billion francs and expects to make a loss in 1996 and next year before returning to profit in 1998. Turnover for 1996 is expected to total 9.2 billion francs, up from 8.6 billion in 1995 but still lower than 1994's 10.39 billion.
SEP had 1995 turnover of 5.4 billion francs, up 10 percent from 1994, and made a net attributable profit of 133 million. ($1=5.157 French Franc)
French holding company CGIP said on Tuesday it was buying 20 percent of car parts manufacturer Valeo, solving a problem which has occupied the government, France's car makers and Italian businessman Carlo de Benedetti.
Cerus, a French investment firm controlled by de Benedetti, sold the 20 percent stake to Compagnie Generale d'Industrie et de Participations (CGIP), for a sum which could total 6.7 billion francs, if Valeo hits 1997 profit targets.
The Valeo stake has been on the market for a year, as Cerus sought to raise cash to reduce debts, and sparked U.S. interest which set off alarms among European car makers. French industry minister, Franck Borotra, said he wanted a "French solution" for the Valeo holding.
But the Valeo purchase was made because "it is good for our group, our shareholders and for Valeo," CGIP chairman Ernest-Antoine Seilliere told a news conference, explaining why his company chose to become the lead shareholder in Valeo.
The Valeo purchase was driven by CGIP's desire to rebalance its portfolio away from the packaging business, in which CGIP had 49 percent of assets following the acquisition of U.S. Crown Cork &amp; Seal shares last year in exchange for its interest in CarnaudMetalbox.
CGIP halved its stake in Crown Cork to 9.9 percent last month and with the 3.2 billion franc proceeds, helped pay for the holding in Valeo, which has significant growth potential, Seilliere said. These were "parallel operations" he said.
The question of keeping Valeo in French hands did not figure in its calculations. "It's not our problem," he said.
CGIP wants Valeo to adopt a more generous dividend policy, pursue acquisitions more aggresively and use debt financing to leverage its financial results.
"We will ask for a payout of a third of the net," Seilliere said. Valeo has historically paid out 15 to 18 percent of net profit, while the average on the Paris stock exchange is 35 to 40 percent.
The CGIP move seemed to have borne fruit as Valeo said as part of the acquisition announcement it will make an exceptional 10 franc dividend later this month, for which Cerus would still be the beneficiary.
But Valeo's chairman Noel Goutard emphasised "There is no change in direction," he told a separate news conference. The priority will be a "strong and healthy balance sheet," and the company will pay particular attention to pursuing "controlled and profitable growth," he said.
He added that Valeo had relied on its own resources in the past as Cerus did not want to see its 28 percent stake diluted in any capital raising in the markets.
With the new ownership structure, Valeo would be free to tap the markets for funds when it saw acquisition opportunities.
French car industry analysts said the deal was good news for all involved. Valeo had a solid partner in CGIP to develop on its own, even if this would not rule out a merger with another car parts firm in several years as the industry changed.
In the deal, Valeo, Europe's second largest car parts maker and a leading supplier of French and German carmakers, said it would make a 1996 dividend downpayment of 10 francs. Another payout of 10 francs per share would be made to Cerus if Valeo's 1997 net attributable profit hits 1.45 billion francs.
Shares in CGIP closed 3.93 percent higher at 1,190 francs while Valeo ended 2.64 percent. Cerus was down 7.29 percent at 127.10 francs.
European aircraft maker Airbus looks set to soar higher in 1996 following a bumper order from airline USAir on Wednesday, but tough decisions still need to be made on its products and ownership to secure the long-term future.
Airbus Industrie announced on Wednesday one of the biggest orders in aviation history with the Pittsburgh-based airline's command for 120 planes in the A320 narrow-body family of passenger jets and options for a further 280. List price for the orders was estimated at $5.3 billion.
The USAir victory follows Monday's order by Emirates, a Gulf-based airline, for 16 Airbus A330-200s worth $2 billion, which beat out a rival offer of Boeing Co's 767.
"The order backlog is really healthy," Emmanuel Dubois Pelerin, analyst at ratings agency S&amp;P Adef said. The order book would sustain or even increase production rates for 1997 and 1998, he added.
An Airbus spokesman confidently forecast the consortium would rack up firm orders this year exceeding 300 planes, compared to 106 last year.
While there are no worries on products and profitability for the next two or three years there are uncertainties further ahead stemming from Airbus' change in legal status and implications for projects, particularly the A3XX large plane and stretched A340 long-range jet.
Airbus is a partnership made up of French state-owned Ste Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, British Aerospace Plc, Daimler-Benz Aerospace, a unit of Daimler-Benz AG and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA (CASA) of Spain.
In the interests of increasing market responsiveness and competitiveness, Airbus wants to change into a joint stock company by 1999. Discussions are being held among the partners to decide the shape of the future company.
It also has to find external financing for the 3XX plane.
Airbus has said it wants to find between 30-40 percent of external risk sharing for the 3XX, which it estimates will cost $8 billion to develop.
Dubois Pelerin said he believed Airbus would have to choose to build either the stretched A340-600 or the 3XX, as running both at the same time would overload its finances,
But the Airbus spokesman said the consortium would be able to finance development of both the 340-600 and the 3XX, with the stretched 340 a top priority in the near term.
Airbus is under severe time pressure to come up with a rival to Boeing's monopoly at the large-capacity segment with its 777 and 747 combination which hit Airbus hard in 1995.
Boeing is studying the 747-500X and 747-600X derivatives of its Jumbo jet, which has been a cashcow since it entered service in the 1970s, but which nearly broke the company in development.
The new jumbos are expected to cost around $200 million a piece, which industry sources said prompted Airbus' senior vice-president commercial John Leahy to announce earlier this week that the 3XX would cost $198 million.
The Airbus supervisory board last month asked for the business case for the 340-600 to be presented in mid-December to allow an early decision on whether to launch the product. If it were launched, the 376-seater could be in service in late 2000 and head off competition from the early versions of the 747.
If the 555-seater 3XX goes ahead, it would fly in 2003 and tackle the 747 derivatives.
A signature earlier this week with Rolls-Royce Plc on using its Trent engine for the 3XX will allow Airbus to supply important performance data such as fuel burn, range and take-off and landing weight to the airlines it is talking to for its marketing studies.
The French government sold a nine percent stake in oil major Elf-Aquitaine on Wednesday, raising around 10 billion francs ($2 billion) and allowing the energy group to buy back a big chunk of its own shares.
The disposal follows a sharp rise in the Paris bourse in recent weeks and, specifically of oil stocks which have benefited from high world oil prices.
"Finance minister Jean Arthuis has decided to sell 24.9 million shares in Elf-Aquitaine held by the ERAP company, which will reduce the stake held by this public sector firm in Elf-Aquitaine to 0.75 percent," the ministry said in a statement.
The sale involved the placement of 12.5 million Elf shares, or 4.6 percent of the capital, at 417.50 francs per share to French and international institutions.
Elf said in a separate statement it had bought a 4.5 percent stake through its indirectly-owned financial Fingestval company as a long-term investment, accounting for the remainder of the shares sold by the state.
Elf shares slipped 2.5 francs to 423 by 1300 GMT.
The 10 billion francs will go into a government special account held for share sale proceeds, which is reserved for injecting into other state-owned companies, the ministry said.
Government spokesman Alain Lamassoure said the money would be used to recapitalise state-owned companies which needed it, particularly those being privatised.  It will not be used to help reduce the government's budget deficit.
France plans to recapitalise Thomson SA to the tune of 11 billion francs before selling the state-owned electronics group to Lagardere Groupe and Daewoo Electronics Corp.
The Elf share sale leaves a rump 0.75 percent of Elf stock in government hands, which covers free shares due to Elf employees and non-voting petroleum certificates held by the state.
Elf was among the early privatisations in the previous conservative government of Edouard Balladur in February 1994 (Corrects timing of Elf privatisation), when it was floated at 385 francs per share to private investors.
The group has wide-ranging interests in oil exploration, production and refining, as well as health and beauty products through its Sanofi unit.
It is a major constitutuent in the Paris CAC-40 share index.
The group's stock purchase would boost earnings per share, chairman Philippe Jaffre said: "This removes the uncertainty surrounding the French state's interest in the company which has weighed on the share price."
"The acquisition will automatically improve earnings per share," he said in a company statement.
The sale to institutions was handled by Paribas and SBC Warburg, after a tender with various banks. ABN Amro Rothschild acted as adviser to the government.
Fingestval is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Socap, which itself is wholly-owned by Sofaxbanque. Sofaxbanque is 100-percent owned by Elf. Socap manages assets and financial interests and has substantial cash holdings, Fingestval said. ($1=5.088 French Franc)
State-owned Air France is under pressure from the French government to drop any thought of buying Boeing long-haul jets from the U.S. and stick with the French-based Airbus equivalent, industry sources said on Friday.
They said that Air France chairman Christian Blanc flew into a political storm after saying on Thursday that the French flag carrier might use a mix of Boeing and Airbus planes in its planned new long-haul fleet, expected to cost some $1 billion.
One industry source said the pressure on Blanc had come from Transport Minister Bernard Pons.
"It's clear there is extremely strong political pressure," head of the SNPL pilots union Geoffrey Bouvet said on Friday.
Blanc on Thursday told the business newspaper Les Echos there was no conflict in flying both the Airbus 340 and Boeing 777 aircraft.
"They are complementary...Today like yesterday, we need both Airbus and Boeing." He added that he did not expect government opposition if the company bought from both European Airbus Industrie consortium and arch-rival Boeing.
"The minister, having talked to Airbus, has been told that there will be an equivalent Airbus product. It is perfectly natural that he ask the national company to invest in Airbus," a transport ministry spokeswoman said.
Any decision will go to Prime Minister Alain Juppe for ratification, the transport ministry spokeswoman said.
France's state-owned Aerospatiale is a senior partner in Airbus. The others are British Aerospace Plc, Daimler-Benz Aerospace, a unit of Daimler-Benz AG and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA (CASA) of Spain.
At the heart of the debate, apart from technical merits of the fleet, is Blanc's desire to run the airline as a "normal" company along commercial lines, free of political intervention.
Blanc's mandate is to turn round the airline, prepare it for privatisation and deregulation of European air travel from 1997. He has forecast the group was on track to break even this year.
Because of the political sensitivity, a committee of Air France board members was formed to evaluate the products and will submit its conclusion on December 20.
The union's Bouvet said Air France should be left to choose the right planes for particular routes rather than have a fleet imposed by the government. A mixed fleet could make economic sense, if a world class airline such as Singapore Airlines could fly both Airbus and Boeing, he said.
Air France is expected to order between five and 10 planes.
The official list price for the A340-300 is around $120 million. The plane seats 295 passengers in a typical three-class layout and can fly up to 7,300 nautical miles or 13,500 km.
The Boeing 777 flies in two basic versions. The 777-200 seats between 305 to 328 in three classes and has a catalogue price of $128-146 million, and has a range of 3,780 nautical miles, or 7,000 km.
The 777-300, officially priced at $151 million-170 million, seats between 368 and 394, flies 5,380 miles or 9,970 km.
A Boeing spokesman said the company has made a number of offers to Air France using different product mixes.
Airbus itself declined to comment.
The Air France operating company in June reported a first-half operating profit of 413 million francs compared with a loss of 902 million in the first half of 1995.
The French government has cleared the way for state-owned Air France to buy Boeing long-haul passenger jets from the United states, as well as similar planes from French-based Airbus, an official source said on Tuesday.
The source told Reuters the clearance would come when the airline's board members meet on Wednesday to decide on its fleet acquisition after reports that the government would insist that the French flag carrier should get all its long-haul needs from French-based Airbus.
"We are inclined to a balanced solution between Airbus and Boeing," said the source on Tuesday, speaking on condition of anonymity. "There should an agreement tomorrow."
The business newspaper Les Echos reported earlier on Tuesday that a committee of the Air France board was expected on Wednesday to recommend purchase of 10 Airbus A340-300 and 10 Boeing 777-200 jets for its long-range fleet,
Two other sources close to the talks said the split purchase was expected to be approved.
Transport minister Bernard Pons had so far been pushing airline chairman Christian Blanc into buying exclusively from French-based Airbus Industrie, rather than mixing the purchase with archrival Boeing, industry and union sources have said.
Apart from the symbolic value of the French flag carrier, which has received 20 billion francs ($4 billion) in state funds, buying a French-made product, the Boeing 777 and Airbus 340 are considered by some in the aerospace industry to be competing products.
But a crucial factor in Blanc's decision to press ahead with the Boeing buy was a previous order for seven 767-300 and eight 737-500 aircraft due for delivery between 1999 and 2001. Les Echos said a clause in the sale contract allowed conversion of these planes to other types.
That order was worth around $874 million and Air France would now like to use the option to convert to Boeing 777s. Otherwise it stood to lose its deposit if it reneged on the deal to buy the smaller planes, a second source familiar with the talks said.
A Transport Ministry spokeswoman said Blanc had met Pons on Monday to explain the company's position.
Air France and Airbus declined to comment.
An aerospace executive said the cost of introducing to the fleet a new plane such as the giant 777 twinjet would be an estimated $40 million and mean a broader range of aircraft to maintain, and therefore increasing costs.
The industry will look carefully to see whether Air France will place orders or options on its aircraft, as the airline could use a conversion option for a planned "stretched" version of the Airbus A340, termed the A340-600, and thus become a launch customer for the programme.
Airbus has made studies of the A340-600 a top priority, as it would boost capacity to 375 passengers in three classes from 295 in the current A340-300 version. The new plane would rival the Boeing 777-300, which seats between 368 amd 394, and older models of Boeing's cashcow, the 747 jumbo.
Boeing currently enjoys a monopoly in the large capacity segment, which Airbus is determined to rival with its own products.
Air France already flies the A340, which is a long-range, wide-body aircraft. ($1=5.086 French Franc)
Air France on Wednesday ordered 10 Boeing jetliners and 10 Airbus jets, and the government-owned airline reported dramatically improved profits of 802 million francs ($158 million) in the first half.
The profit estimate for the six months ending Sept. 30, disclosed in an Air France board statement, compared with a loss of 335 million francs ($66 million) a year ago.
The improved results and Air France's aim to break even in 1996/97 was underlined by the orders for 10 Boeing 777 twinjets and options for 10 more. The airline also ordered five Airbus A340s, confirmed five orders made in June and took options for an additional five.
Air France Chairman Christian Blanc won vital support from French Prime Minister Alain Juppe to buy from Seattle-based Boeing instead of ordering solely from its archrival Airbus Industrie, the European consortium based in southwest France.
At list prices, which are rarely paid, the orders and options for the Boeing 777-200 version ordered could be worth around $2.7 billion. Airbus would stand to gain $1.75 billion.
List prices for the B777-200 range between $128 million and $146 million, while the Airbus A340-300 costs $110 million to $120 million.
"In the reorganization of its fleet, Air France is obliged to buy Boeing," Transport Minister Bernard Pons told parliament.
"It is obliged to meet commitments made in 1989 unless it accepts losing deposits and taking legal action, which risks being much more expensive than making this decision."
The French airline had outstanding Boeing orders worth $994 million and $2 billion in options, Pons said, adding that the airline had skilfully negotiated the latest order to respect the initial commitment.
The three government representatives on the Air France board approved the Boeing 777 purchase "not because they are the best or the most profitable but because they best meet the company's needs," Pons said.
Air France had also accepted to be a launch customer for the planned A340-600, a "stretched" version of the A340, he said.
Airbus hopes to build the 375-seater to smash Boeing's monopoly in the large-capacity aircraft segment.
Air France said that, due to financial problems, it froze at the end of 1994 all aircraft orders, including the 1989 Boeing order, and opened talks with the two plane makers.
Air France has since reorganized its fleet, restructured its network around a centralized "hub" at Paris Charles De Gaulle airport and optimised aircraft use. It has over the past two years increased the number of flying hours by 14 percent.
Pons welcomed Air France's financial results, saying: "The results are very encouraging."
State-owned Air France on Wednesday reported dramatically improved earnings of 802 million francs ($158 million) in the first half and placed a bumper order for 20 Boeing and Airbus aircraft, plus options.
The profit estimate for the six months to September 30, which emerged in an Air France board statement, compared with a loss of 335 million francs a year ago.
The improved results and Air France's aim to break even in 1996/97 was underlined with orders for 10 Boeing 777  twinjets, and options for 10 more. The airline also ordered five Airbus A340s, confirmed five orders made in June and options for a further five.
Air France chairman Christian Blanc won vital support from Prime Minister Alain Juppe to buy from Seattle-based Boeing instead of ordering solely from its archrival Airbus Industrie, the European consortium based in southwest France.
At catalogue prices, which are rarely paid, the orders and options for the Boeing 777-200 version ordered could be worth around $2.7 billion. Airbus would stand to gain $1.75 billion.
List prices for the B777-200 range between $128 and $146 million, while the Airbus A340-300 costs $110 to $120 million.
"In the reorganisation of its fleet, Air France is obliged to buy Boeing," Transport Minister Bernard Pons told parliament.
"It is obliged to meet commitments made in 1989, unless it accepts losing deposits and taking legal action which risks being much more expensive than taking this decision."
The French airline had orders outstanding with Boeing worth $994 million and $2 billion of options, Pons said, adding that the airline had skillfully negotiated the latest order to respect the initial undertaking.
The three state representatives on the Air France board approved the Boeing 777 purchase "not because they are the best or the most profitable but because they best meet the company's needs," Pons said.
Air France had also accepted to be a launch customer for the planned A340-600, a "stretched" version of the A340, he said.
Airbus hopes to build the 375-seater to smash Boeing's monopoly at the large capacity aircraft segment.
Air France said that due to financial problems, it froze at the end of 1994 all aircraft orders, including the 1989 Boeing order, and opened talks with the two plane-makers.
Air France has since rationalised its fleet, restructured its network around a centralised "hub" at Paris Charles De Gaulle airport and optimised aircraft use. It has over the past two years increased the number of flying hours by 14 percent.
Pons welcomed Air France's financial results, saying: "The results are very encouraging."
The company said it made its profit despite a rise in spending on fuel of nearly 500 million francs for the period.
Turnover was up nearly five percent to 21.3 billion francs due to a 14.8 percent increase in passenger traffic and a 6.7 percent rise in freight.
Operating profit rose nearly 30 percent to 1.1 billion francs, compared with 849 million in the year-earlier period. The pretax, pre-exceptional result tripled to 660 million francs.
Air France was ahead by "a little more than 250 million francs of its budget" at the six months stage, the company said. The first half is traditionally better for seasonal reasons and should not be used to extrapolate for the full year, it added.
Debt stood at 12.9 billion francs at September 30, versus 19.2 billion at March 31, 1996. The repayment of 6.3 billion francs significantly exceeded the last tranche of its state recapitalisation paid in September.
The Boeing order consists of the heavier "Increased Gross Weight" version of the basic 777-200, equipped with GE90 engines built by General Electric and France's Snecma. The B777-200 will seat 288 passengers in three-classes.
The Airbus order is for the A340-200E version equipped with CFM56-5C4 engines. ($1=5.075 French Franc)
State-owned Air France on Wednesday reported dramatically improved earnings of 802 million francs ($158 million) in the first half and placed a bumper order for 20 Boeing and Airbus aircraft, plus options.
The profit estimate for the six months to September 30, which emerged in an Air France board statement, compared with a loss of 335 million francs a year ago.
The improved results and Air France's aim to break even in 1996/97 was underlined with orders for 10 Boeing 777 twinjets, and options for 10 more. The airline also ordered five Airbus A340s, confirmed five orders made in June and options for a further five.
Air France chairman Christian Blanc won vital support from Prime Minister Alain Juppe to buy from Seattle-based Boeing instead of ordering solely from its archrival Airbus Industrie , the European consortium based in southwest France.
At catalogue prices, which are rarely paid, the orders and options for the Boeing 777-200 version ordered could be worth around $2.7 billion. Airbus would stand to gain $1.75 billion.
List prices for the B777-200 range between $128 and $146 million, while the Airbus A340-300 costs $110 to $120 million.
"In the reorganisation of its fleet, Air France is obliged to buy Boeing," Transport Minister Bernard Pons told parliament.
"It is obliged to meet commitments made in 1989, unless it accepts losing deposits and taking legal action which risks being much more expensive than taking this decision."
The French airline had orders outstanding with Boeing worth $994 million and $2 billion of options, Pons said, adding that the airline had skillfully negotiated the latest order to respect the initial undertaking.
The three state representatives on the Air France board approved the Boeing 777 purchase "not because they are the best or the most profitable but because they best meet the company's needs," Pons said.
Air France had also accepted to be a launch customer for the planned A340-600, a "stretched" version of the A340, he said.
Airbus hopes to build the 375-seater to smash Boeing's monopoly at the large capacity aircraft segment.
Air France said that due to financial problems, it froze at the end of 1994 all aircraft orders, including the 1989 Boeing order, and opened talks with the two plane-makers.
Air France has since rationalised its fleet, restructured its network around a centralised "hub" at Paris Charles De Gaulle airport and optimised aircraft use. It has over the past two years increased the number of flying hours by 14 percent.
Pons welcomed Air France's financial results, saying: "The results are very encouraging."
The company said it made its profit despite a rise in spending on fuel of nearly 500 million francs for the period.
Turnover was up nearly five percent to 21.3 billion francs due to a 14.8 percent increase in passenger traffic and a 6.7 percent rise in freight.
Operating profit rose nearly 30 percent to 1.1 billion francs, compared with 849 million in the year-earlier period. The pretax, pre-exceptional result tripled to 660 million francs.
Air France was ahead by "a little more than 250 million francs of its budget" at the six months stage, the company said. The first half is traditionally better for seasonal reasons and should not be used to extrapolate for the full year, it added.
Debt stood at 12.9 billion francs at September 30, versus 19.2 billion at March 31, 1996. The repayment of 6.3 billion francs significantly exceeded the last tranche of its state recapitalisation paid in September.
The Boeing order consists of the heavier "Increased Gross Weight" version of the basic 777-200, equipped with GE90 engines built by General Electric and France's Snecma. The B777-200 will seat 288 passengers in three-classes.
The Airbus order is for the A340-200E version equipped with CFM56-5C4 engines. ($1=5.075 French Franc)
Channel Tunnel operator Eurotunnel SA/Plc sought to reassure the public Wednesday about the safety of the rail link between France and Britain following last week's fire that halted most services.
But its public relations effort was marred by a minor fire that broke out near the site of last week's blaze.
"There is no doubt the tunnel is at least as safe as other Channel transport systems," French Co-Chairman Patrick Ponsolle of the Anglo-French company told a news conference.
A fire in a truck on a freight train seriously damaged a section of the tunnel on Monday last week, injuring 34 people and raising doubts over the safety of the cross-Channel service.
The Eurostar high-speed passenger train and Le Shuttle car and passenger services have been halted, although a limited freight service has resumed.
Wednesday's fire was apparently sparked by welding work during repairs, but it was quickly extinguished, British police said.
"Safety is our first consideration, ahead of commercial considerations," British Co-Chairman Robert Malpas said. "The emergency evacuation procedure which forms the backbone of the safety system worked after two other measures failed."
The cause of the fire remains a mystery, although sabotage is seen as one possibility by the French magistrate investigating the fire.
"The judge has not ruled out the theory of foul play," said a Eurotunnel spokeswoman.
But legal sources said the idea that the fire was started deliberately was regarded as a remote possibility and not the most likely cause.
Ponsolle said Eurotunnel's maximum potential loss from the fire was five to seven million pounds ($8.40 million to $11.75 million).
"The ultimate maximum loss for the company after receiving insurance indemnities could be of the order of five or six or seven million pounds," he said.
Eurotunnel's monthly revenue before the fire was between 350 million and 400 million francs ($67.75 million and $77.43 million). Loss of revenues would depend on the re-establishment of a partial service, he said.
If passenger and freight services resumed to 50-60 percent of previous capacity, this would mean a maximum monthly loss of 200 million francs ($38.7 million), Ponsolle said.
Eurotunnel's maximum insurance coverage is 1.5 billion francs ($290.4 million) for equipment and 4.5 billion ($871.1 million) for earnings losses, Ponsolle said.
Eurotunnel hopes to resume partial passenger service early next week, if the safety commission that oversees the tunnel approves a new set of temporary evacuation measures, Ponsolle said.
Because a 1.243 mile section of one of the tunnel bores cannot be used for evacuation, the company is laying on special fire-fighting and ambulance crews on 24-hour alert, with two cars for extricating passengers.
The train that was destroyed in the fire was worth nearly 100 million francs ($19.4 million) and repairs to the tunnel and related equipment would cost between 200 million and 500 million ($38.7 million to $96.8 million). But Eurotunnel is awaiting the results of insurance investigations into the costs of the fire.
Ponsolle said the blaze should not affect a complex plan to restructure the company's 70 billion francs ($13.6 billion) of junior bank debt, which took a year to negotiate. "There is no reason for us to put into question the restructuring," he told reporters.
"We do not see at this stage there needs to be any delay in the rescheduling of the debt," Malpas told Reuters Financial Television when asked whether the banks had asked for new clauses to be added to its restructuring because of the fire.
"The creditor banks have been very understanding; they wish us well ... they see it as an incident which we will get over and which will be contained in insurance arrangements and the financial arrangements we have set up," Malpas said.
Ponsolle said the company did not face any problems with cash flow. Eurotunnel had 100 million pounds ($167.7 million) in cash holdings and "it is not under financial pressure to reopen services."
Anglo-French Eurotunnel SA/Plc on Wednesday sought to reassure the public about the safety of the Channel Tunnel following last week's fire which halted most rail services between France and Britain.
"There is no doubt the tunnel is at least as safe as other Channel transport systems," French co-chairman Patrick Ponsolle told a news conference.
A fire in a truck on a freight train seriously damaged a section of the tunnel on Monday last week, injuring 34 people and raising doubts over the safety of the cross-Channel service.
The Eurostar high-speed passenger train and Le Shuttle car and passenger services have been halted ever since, although a limited freight service has resumed.
"Safety is our first consideration, ahead of commercial considerations," British co-chairman Robert Malpas said. "The emergency evacuation procedure which forms the backbone of the safety system worked after two other measures failed."
The cause of the fire remains a mystery, although sabotage is seen as one possibility by the French magistrate investigating the fire.
"The judge has not ruled out the theory of foul play," said a Eurotunnel spokeswoman.
But legal sources said the idea that the fire was started deliberately was regarded as a remote possibility and not the most likely cause.
Ponsolle said Eurotunnel's maximum potential loss from the fire was five to seven million pounds ($8.40 million to $11.75 million).
"The ultimate maximum loss for the company after receiving insurance indemnities could be of the order of five or six or seven million pounds," he said.
Eurotunnel's monthly turnover before the fire was between 350 and 400 million francs ($67.75 million and $77.43 million). Loss of revenues would depend on the re-establishment of a partial service, he said.
If passenger and freight services resumed to 50-60 percent of previous capacity this would mean a maximum monthly loss of 200 million francs, Ponsolle said.
Eurotunnel's maximum insurance coverage is 1.5 billion francs for equipment and 4.5 billion for earnings losses, Ponsolle said.
Eurotunnel hopes to resume partial passenger service early next week, if the safety commission that oversees the tunnel approves a new set of temporary evacuation measures, Ponsolle said.
Because a two km (1.243 mile) section of one of the tunnel bores cannot be used for evacuation, the company is laying on special fire-fighting and ambulance crews on 24 hour alert, with two wagons for extricating passengers.
The train which was destroyed in the fire was worth nearly 100 million francs and repairs to the tunnel and related equipment would cost between 200 million and 500 million. But Eurotunnel is awaiting the results of insurance investigations into the costs of the fire.
Ponsolle said the blaze should not affect a complex plan to restructure the company's 70 billion francs of junior bank debt which took a year to negotiate.
"There is no reason for us to put into question the restructuring," he told reporters.
"We do not see at this stage there needs to be any delay in the rescheduling of the debt," Malpas told Reuters Financial Television when asked whether the banks had asked for new clauses to be added to its restructuring because of the fire.
"The creditor banks have been very understanding; they wish us well...they see it as an incident which we will get over and which will be contained in insurance arrangements and the financial arrangements we have set up," Malpas said.
Ponsolle said the company did not face any problems with cashflow. Eurotunnel had 100 million pounds ($167.7 million) in cash holdings and "it is not under financial pressure to reopen services". ($1=.5956 Pound) ($1=5.166 French Franc)
Some 120 Eurotunnel SA /Plc employees are working round the clock to clear wreckage from the Channel Tunnel, devastated by a fire two weeks ago which has halted passenger services on the undersea link between Britain and France .
Reporters visiting the tunnel on Tuesday viewed a nightmarish scene of flame-scarred concrete where intense heat had blown apart the surface cladding to expose steel reinforcing cables embedded in slabs.
A blaze on a truck-carrying wagon on December 18 forced Eurotunnel to close the tunnel to Eurostar high-speed passenger trains and tourist vehicle Shuttle services just before the Christmas season. Partial freight traffic has been resumed.
Eurotunnel hopes to run two thirds of normal passenger and freight traffic in the estimated three to six months necessary for repairs to be completed, Eurotunnel spokesman Francois Borel said.
"We are going to make a new tunnel," he said.
But before repairs can begin, the wreckage must be cleared.
With scorched rubble underfoot and ghostly streams of melted grey fibre glass filaments overhead, maintenance workers in four shifts of six hours are shovelling out ashes and debris, all that is left of 28 trucks caught in the fire.
The Eurotunnel official coordinating the clearance, Dominique Dorso, said three wagons remained where the fire started, in section five of the tunnel. One was being removed Tuesday evening and the other two should be taken out next week.
The fire was so intense in one 30-metre stretch that no visible traces of the trucks themselves remained in the Shuttle wagons, which were themselves reduced to blackened and twisted steel lattice frames.
Chunks exploded off the first 40-cm thick concrete layer which makes up the the Tunnel wall but the fire did not penetrate to the underlying 20-30 cm of injected concrete which lines the link. Behind that second layer is chalk.
Two weeks on, the smell of burnt plastic and metal still permeates the air and protective masks are obligatory.
Once the debris is cleared , the Anglo-French consortium which built the Tunnel, Transmanche Link (TML), can start repairs to the five or six affected kilometres of the link, putting in new cladding, cabling and conductor rails.
Eurotunnel hopes to use intersections linking the two tunnel bores to bypass the damaged section and allow trains to run between Britain and France during repairs, he said.
Tight security surrounds the entry points to the tunnel bores. There are three separate checkpoints before workers can even enter the narrow central service tunnel, which was used for the evacuation on the night of the fire, and is routinely used by maintenance crews.
Specially-built Mercedes vehicles, high and narrow, are used to transport personnel along the service tunnel. It is not a trip for claustrophobics. Once the overhead lights are out, the grey strip of tunnel extends into the darkness ahead, with only the headlights for illumination. Overhead are tonnes of rock and the Channel waters.
Europe's aircraft industry flew closer to strengthening its industrial base with announcements on Friday that a 100-seater jet to be built with China will form part of the Airbus family and Italy's Alenia will enter new Airbus programmes.
The news follows statements earlier this week from archrival Boeing and the smaller McDonnell Douglas that the two U.S. firms are cooperating on future wide-body jets, particularly two "stretched" versions of the Boeing 747 jumbo.
"A specific agreement has been reached on the new 100 seat jet family in which all the European partners involved have agreed that it will be part of the Airbus product range," a statement from British Aerospace Plc (BAe) said.
BAe is a partner in the European Airbus Industrie consortium, as well as the separate AIA joint venture which is partnering China to build the Asian Express 100 passenger plane.
Airbus, together with Alenia, a unit of the Finmeccanica holding company, will set up a new company to lead the European participation with China and Singapore, the joint statement said.
Singapore's Singapore Technologies Aerospace is also a partner in the project.
"This completes the bottom end of the Airbus range with a brand new offering and consolidates Airbus' position in the growing Asian market," an Airbus spokesman said.
The Airbus partners are also bringing Alenia closer to the consortium by involving it in derivatives of current products, such as the A340-600, a stretched version of the four-engine, long-range A340, as well as a likely role in the A3XX large aircraft under study.
"Alenia will probably be a risk-sharing partner in the A3XX," the spokesman added. "It means a broadening in equity and funds for both programmes."
Airbus has marked out the A340-600 as its top priority as it needs to increase capacity to rival the Boeing 777 twinjet and older 747 models. It also wants to be able to launch the A3XX, expected to cost $8 billion, by 1998 for service in 2003.
But while Alenia is moving in at the programme level, it is not entering the consortium as an equity partner. Alenia is already present in a special Airbus subsidiary, Airbus Military Company, set up to manage the Future Large Aircraft (FLA), a tactical transporter planned for eight European forces.
The other Airbus partners are French state-owned Ste Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, Daimler-Benz Aerospace, a unit of Daimler-Benz AG and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA (CASA) of Spain.
The 100-seater plane for China will share common features with the Airbus A320 family, which includes the A321 and A319, seating between 124 and 186 passengers. It will bring Airbus into a new segment fought over by Boeing and McDonnell Douglas.
News that McDonnell Douglas will act as a subcontractor for Boeing, announced on December 3, "didn't take us by surprise," said the Airbus spokesman. "It doesn't alter our agenda."
The aerospace industry had been expecting some of realignment by McDonnell Douglas after it announced at the end of October it was dropping studies of its MDXX wide-body plane. It also lost its place for a vital U.S. competition for the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) last month.
A two-stage privatisation France's Thomson SA electronics group would allow an early sale of its defence arm and make better economic sense than packaging defence with the loss-making consumer goods unit, stock market analysts said on Monday.
Conservative Prime Minister Alain Juppe said in an interview in the London Financial Times on Monday that the military electronics subsidiary Thomson-CSF could be separated from Thomson Multimedia to allow for a speedy privatisation.
The government was forced last week to drop its preferred choice of selling the whole Thomson group to the Lagardere Groupe conglomerate for a symbolic one franc after the independent Privatisation Commission rejected that option.
A break-up of Thomson runs directly against President Jacques Chirac's initial policy announced on February 22 on restructuring the French defence industry and selling Thomson as one unit.
But analysts said the two-part sale made good sense.
"We should have started with that...get on immediately with restructuring the defence industry," said an analyst at a French brokerage. "We can leave Thomson Multimedia (TMM) until 1998."
A second analyst said, "It's the privatisation of the Multimedia unit which poses the problem. The industrial logic of the merger between Thomson-CSF and Lagardere has not been criticised by anyone."
It was Lagardere's plan to sell TMM to South Korea's Daewoo Electronics, while keeping Thomson-CSF, which led the Privatisation Commission to rule out its bid. The Commission objected to planned technology transfers to Daewoo and the lack of binding commitments by Daewoo to retain jobs in France.
Privatising Thomson-CSF separately would meet the state's main aim of creating a defence electronics national champion, and shelve the problems of Thomson Multimedia. CSF is profitable, virtually clean of debt and 42 percent of the capital is quoted on the Paris bourse.
A source close to Thomson-CSF said the firm has not lost any contracts due to the privatisation uncertainty but it has had to run a corporate advertising campaing in countries where it feels its image has suffered.
Lagardere's Matra missile company still looks the favoured candidate for taking over Thomson's defence unit ahead of a rival offer from engineering group Alcatel Alsthom.
"We get the impression that the government wants Lagardere to get Thomson-CSF," said one analyst at a brokerage.
An analyst at a French bank said, "Insofar as the government has made its preference known and is sticking by it, Lagardere seems to be well placed."
Lagardere has the means to buy Thomson-CSF, without recourse to significant borrowing, one analyst said.
Taking a range of Thomson-CSF share price of between 156 and 200 francs per share, the company has a market capitalisation of between 18 and 24 billion francs ($3.4-4.6 billion), he said.
At the end of 1995 Lagardere had 10 billion francs in tradeable securities, 1.3 billion in free cash and is due to receive three billion in the first half of 1997 when share warrants are due to be exercised. Financial debt was around 8.4 billion.
Lagardere would bring some eight billion francs of Matra's assets in merging with Thomson-CSF, which would reduce the cash it would have to pay. It would however be expected to pay large amounts for goodwill.
Speculation that a vertical integration of missiles, electronics and airframe makers could now be tackled by merging Thomson, Matra, Dassault Aviation and Aerospatiale did not stand up to scrutiny, analysts said.
Combat plane maker Dassault is expected to be absorbed by the larger, civilian-aircraft manufacturer Aerospatiale as part of the defence industry consolidation. But as Aerospatiale is state-owned and the government still wants to privatise Thomson, that course seemed to be excluded, an industry executive said.
Economy ministry officials were not immediately available for comment. ($1=5.244 French Franc)
A two-stage privatisation France's Thomson SA electronics group would allow an early sale of its defence arm and make better economic sense than packaging defence with the loss-making consumer goods unit, stock market analysts said on Monday.
Conservative Prime Minister Alain Juppe said in an interview in the London Financial Times on Monday that the military electronics subsidiary Thomson-CSFcould be separated from Thomson Multimedia to allow for a speedy privatisation.
The government was forced last week to drop its preferred choice of selling the whole Thomson group to the Lagardere Groupeconglomerate for a symbolic one franc after the independent Privatisation Commission rejected that option.
A break-up of Thomson runs directly against President Jacques Chirac's initial policy announced on February 22 on restructuring the French defence industry and selling Thomson as one unit.
But analysts said the two-part sale made good sense.
"We should have started with that...get on immediately with restructuring the defence industry," said an analyst at a French brokerage. "We can leave Thomson Multimedia (TMM) until 1998."
A second analyst said, "It's the privatisation of the Multimedia unit which poses the problem. The industrial logic of the merger between Thomson-CSF and Lagardere has not been criticised by anyone."
It was Lagardere's plan to sell TMM to South Korea's Daewoo Electronics, while keeping Thomson-CSF, which led the Privatisation Commission to rule out its bid. The Commission objected to planned technology transfers to Daewoo and the lack of binding commitments by Daewoo to retain jobs in France.
Privatising Thomson-CSF separately would meet the state's main aim of creating a defence electronics national champion, and shelve the problems of Thomson Multimedia. CSF is profitable, virtually clean of debt and 42 percent of the capital is quoted on the Paris bourse.
A source close to Thomson-CSF said the firm has not lost any contracts due to the privatisation uncertainty but it has had to run a corporate advertising campaing in countries where it feels its image has suffered.
Lagardere's Matra missile company still looks the favoured candidate for taking over Thomson's defence unit ahead of a rival offer from engineering group Alcatel Alsthom.
"We get the impression that the government wants Lagardere to get Thomson-CSF," said one analyst at a brokerage.
An analyst at a French bank said, "Insofar as the government has made its preference known and is sticking by it, Lagardere seems to be well placed."
Lagardere has the means to buy Thomson-CSF, without recourse to significant borrowing, one analyst said.
Taking a range of Thomson-CSF share price of between 156 and 200 francs per share, the company has a market capitalisation of between 18 and 24 billion francs ($3.4-4.6 billion), he said.
At the end of 1995 Lagardere had 10 billion francs in tradeable securities, 1.3 billion in free cash and is due to receive three billion in the first half of 1997 when share warrants are due to be exercised. Financial debt was around 8.4 billion.
Lagardere would bring some eight billion francs of Matra's assets in merging with Thomson-CSF, which would reduce the cash it would have to pay. It would however be expected to pay large amounts for goodwill.
Speculation that a vertical integration of missiles, electronics and airframe makers could now be tackled by merging Thomson, Matra, Dassault Aviationand Aerospatiale did not stand up to scrutiny, analysts said.
Combat plane maker Dassault is expected to be absorbed by the larger, civilian-aircraft manufacturer Aerospatiale as part of the defence industry consolidation. But as Aerospatiale is state-owned and the government still wants to privatise Thomson, that course seemed to be excluded, an industry executive said.
Economy ministry officials were not immediately available for comment. ($1=5.244 French Franc)
Partners in European aircraft consortium Airbus must speed up plans to convert the partnership into a single company after news of a merger between its two U.S. competitors, an aerospace executive said on Sunday.
Boeing Co and McDonnell Douglas earlier announced a $13.3 billion merger plan which would create the world's largest aerospace firm, with 1997 sales of about $48 billion and employing 200,000 people, dwarfing rival Airbus.  
The merger meant Airbus's shareholders had "to get their act together quickly," the executive said.
Airbus is a consortium made up of Ste Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, British Aerospace Plc (BAe), Daimler-Benz Aerospace, a unit of Daimler-Benz AG and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA (CASA) of Spain.
The partners, who are also Airbus subcontractors, are in talks on how to change the grouping into a joint stock company from the present "groupement d'interet economique" (GIE) partnership. The aim is to create a more competitive and responsive organisation.  
"The need for the Europeans to integrate becomes more urgent," the executive said. The merger move showed "the arguments (between partners) are trivial."
BAe's group managing director John Weston has said the future Airbus should be a large, integrated company with design offices, manufacturing and sales functions, and have a solid balance sheet to finance aircraft sales, to better rival Boeing.  
But Aerospatiale's chairman Yves Michot has said he sees the new Airbus as essentially a large prime contractor, directing its suppliers' work, but retaining its design offices.
Some executives see the design office as the heart of the business, with the ability to create new aircraft. Aerospatiale's design office are in the southwestern city of Toulouse, next to Airbus headquarters.  
Eventually, BAe wants Airbus to be the civilian arm of a huge pan-European aerospace grouping, with a military wing to build future generations of combat planes, built from the national companies.
But for the time being, the partners also need to resolve differences over the valuation and transfer of assets.
Airbus declined comment. "We can't comment on things happening in North America," an Airbus spokeswoman said.
Officials at Aerospatiale were not available for comment.  
The Airbus negotiations slowed over the summer, when the government moved then-chairman Louis Gallois to the helm of troubled state railway operator SNCF and promoted his number two, Yves Michot.
A memorandum of understanding was due to be signed by the end of this year setting out the main lines of the new company, but the industry executive said the talks are due to last through the winter, up to March 31.
U.S. broker Lehman Brothers has estimated Airbus could be worth between $15-18 billion after its conversion, based on historical and prospective financial data.  
Previous major consolidation moves in the United States between fierce rivals such as Lockheed and Martin Marietta, and now Boeing and McDonnell Douglas, showed all that was needed was the ability to look ahead and for the political will to exist.
The internal debate over the shape and scope of the future Airbus has run on for years, with managing director Jean Pierson a fervent enthusiast of an integrated company. The new Airbus company is supposed to be formed by the end of 1999.
Airbus expects to notch up firm orders for more than 300 aircraft in 1996, worth around $20 billion, compared to 106 sales last year, worth $7 billion. Boeing said it has received orders for 621 planes at the end of November.
The irony is that Airbus held merger talks with McDonnell Douglas in 1988, but the U.S. firm was stronger in those days and Airbus had not consolidated its position in the world market. The European company has historically held around a 30 percent share of the market, with Boeing around 60 percent and McDonnell 10 percent.
Partners in European aircraft consortium Airbus must speed up plans to convert the partnership into a single company after news of a merger between its two U.S. competitors, an aerospace executive said on Sunday.
Boeing Co and McDonnell Douglas announced a $13.3 billion merger plan which would create the world's largest aerospace firm, with 1997 sales of about $48 billion and employing 200,000 people, dwarfing rival Airbus.
The merger meant Airbus shareholders had "to get their act together quickly", said the executive, who asked not to be identified.
Airbus is a consortium made up of France's Ste Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, British Aerospace Plc (BAe), Daimler-Benz Aerospace, a unit of Germany's Daimler-Benz AG, and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA (CASA) of Spain.
An Airbus spokesman said the U.S. merger would not alter the competitive threat to Airbus: "(McDonnell) Douglas hasn't been a competitor in the civilian aircraft business for a number of years," the spokesman said. "So it hasn't altered the equation in the commercial field at all for Airbus."
Boeing is effectively swallowing up McDonnell Douglas, he said. "It was expected Douglas would have to look in the civil field for its fortunes elsewhere, or merge, or opt out of the business altogether," he said. Boeing was the obvious merger candidate.
MD decided in October to drop plans to build the MD-XX wide body passenger jet, which would have doomed it to niche player status with its two current products, the MD-11 and MD-80/90.
Airbus, which has historically held around a 30 percent market share, with Boeing some 60 percent and McDonnell 10 percent, wants at least half the market by the end of the decade.
Airbus expects to notch up firm orders for more than 300 aircraft in 1996, worth around $20 billion, compared to 106 sales last year, worth $7 billion. Boeing said it has received orders for 621 planes at the end of November.
The Airbus partners, who are also Airbus subcontractors, are in talks on how to change the grouping into a joint stock company from the present "groupement d'interet economique" (economic interest group) partnership. The aim is to create a more competitive and responsive organisation.
"The need for the Europeans to integrate becomes more urgent," said the executive who spoke on condityion of anonymity. The merger move showed "the arguments (between partners) are trivial".
BAe's group managing director John Weston has said the future Airbus should be a large, integrated company with design offices and manufacturing and sales functions, and have a solid balance sheet to finance aircraft sales, to better rival Boeing.
But Aerospatiale's chairman Yves Michot has said he sees the new Airbus as essentially a large prime contractor, directing its suppliers' work but retaining its design offices.
Some executives see the design office as the heart of the business, with the ability to create new aircraft. Aerospatiale's design offices are in the southwestern French city of Toulouse, next to Airbus headquarters.
Eventually, BAe wants Airbus to be the civilian arm of a huge pan-European aerospace grouping, with a military wing to build future generations of combat planes, built from the national companies.
But for the time being, the partners also need to resolve differences over the valuation and transfer of assets.
The Airbus negotiations slowed over the summer, when the French government moved the then chairman, Louis Gallois, to the helm of troubled state railway operator SNCF and promoted his number two, Yves Michot.
An agreement was due to be signed by the end of 1996 setting out the main lines of the new Airbus but the industry executive said the talks are due to last up to March 31.
U.S. broker Lehman Brothers has estimated Airbus could be worth between $15-18 billion after its conversion, based on historical and prospective financial data.
The internal debate over the shape and scope of the future Airbus has run on for years, with managing director Jean Pierson a fervent enthusiast for an integrated company. The new Airbus company is supposed to be formed by the end of 1999.
Partners in European aircraft consortium Airbus must speed up plans to convert the partnership into a single company after news of a merger between its two U.S. competitors, an aerospace executive said on Sunday.
Boeing Co and McDonnell Douglas announced a $13.3 billion merger plan which would create the world's largest aerospace firm, with 1997 sales of about $48 billion and employing 200,000 people, dwarfing rival Airbus.
The merger meant Airbus shareholders had "to get their act together quickly", the executive said.
Airbus is a consortium made up of France's Ste Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, British Aerospace Plc (BAe), Daimler-Benz Aerospace, a unit of Germany's Daimler-Benz AG, and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA (CASA) of Spain.
The European company has historically held around a 30 percent share of the market, with Boeing holding around 60 percent and McDonnell 10 percent.
Airbus expects to notch up firm orders for more than 300 aircraft in 1996, worth around $20 billion, compared to 106 sales last year, worth $7 billion. Boeing said it has received orders for 621 planes at the end of November.
The Airbus partners, who are also Airbus subcontractors, are in talks on how to change the grouping into a joint stock company from the present "groupement d'interet economique" (economic interest group) partnership. The aim is to create a more competitive and responsive organisation.
"The need for the Europeans to integrate becomes more urgent," said the executive, who asked not to be identified. The merger move showed "the arguments (between partners) are trivial".
BAe's group managing director John Weston has said the future Airbus should be a large, integrated company with design offices and manufacturing and sales functions, and have a solid balance sheet to finance aircraft sales, to better rival Boeing.
But Aerospatiale's chairman Yves Michot has said he sees the new Airbus as essentially a large prime contractor, directing its suppliers' work but retaining its design offices.
Some executives see the design office as the heart of the business, with the ability to create new aircraft. Aerospatiale's design offices are in the southwestern French city of Toulouse, next to Airbus headquarters.
Eventually, BAe wants Airbus to be the civilian arm of a huge pan-European aerospace grouping, with a military wing to build future generations of combat planes, built from the national companies.
But for the time being, the partners also need to resolve differences over the valuation and transfer of assets.
Airbus officials in France declined comment. "We can't comment on things happening in North America," a spokeswoman said. Officials at Aerospatiale were not available for comment.
The Airbus negotiations slowed over the summer, when the French government moved the then chairman, Louis Gallois, to the helm of troubled state railway operator SNCF and promoted his number two, Yves Michot.
A memorandum of understanding was due to be signed by the end of this year setting out the main lines of the new company but the industry executive said the talks are due to last up to March 31.
U.S. broker Lehman Brothers has estimated Airbus could be worth between $15-18 billion after its conversion, based on historical and prospective financial data.
Previous major consolidation moves in the United States between fierce rivals such as Lockheed and Martin Marietta, and now Boeing and McDonnell Douglas, showed all that was needed was the ability to look ahead and for the political will to exist.
The internal debate over the shape and scope of the future Airbus has run on for years, with managing director Jean Pierson a fervent enthusiast for an integrated company. The new Airbus company is supposed to be formed by the end of 1999.
The irony is that Airbus held merger talks with McDonnell Douglas in 1988 but the U.S. firm was stronger in those days and Airbus had not consolidated its position in the world market.
The European Airbus consortium must resolve deep differences over the future shape of the aircraft-maker to meet the challenge posed by the merger of its U.S. rivals, industry executives said on Monday.
Boeing and McDonnell Douglas shook the aerospace world on Sunday by announcing they were joining to create a company with annual sales of $48 billion.
The strengthening of Boeing, which already outpaces Airbus in sales of civilian aircraft, puts further pressure on the four-nation Airbus Industrie consortium to agree a status change that might sharpen its commercial muscle.
But the four member companies from France, Germany, Britain and Spain are stuck over differing ambitions for changing their present partnership into an integrated company that could rival the new U.S. titan.
Historically Boeing has held around 60 percent of the world civilian aircraft market, Airbus 30 percent and McDonnell Douglas 10 percent.
Airbus, which had set a target of 50 percent by the end of decade, is a partnership made up of French state-owned Ste Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, British Aerospace Plc, Daimler-Benz Aerospace, a unit of Daimler-Benz AG and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA (CASA) of Spain.
The partners said on July 8 they aimed to reach an agreement by the end of 1996 on the timetable for setting up a new Airbus company, which could be formed by 1999. But an industry source in London said a pact looked likely to slip into the new year.
"The discussions go on. The partners are still working on negotiations for the Airbus Industrie restructuring," said an Airbus spokesman, speaking from its headquarters in Toulouse, southwestern France.
"I think this will clearly introduce a massive sense of urgency," aerospace analyst Sash Tusa, at broker UBS told Reuters Financial Television (RFTV).
A senior executive said the partners have three different positions on the future Airbus. Aerospatiale wants a "minimal" Airbus, Dasa seeks a "maximum", while BAe wants a transfer of "core assets" from the partners to the new company, he said.
Aerospatiale's chairman Yves Michot said in September he wanted Airbus to act as a prime contractor with enlarged powers to direct subcontractors. Aerospatiale does not think Airbus can take on more than its current marketing operations.
"You cannot go from one thing to the next overnight. Marketing is a business in its own right. Managing factories, manufacturing, people is something else," a French industry executive said.
That pits the French firm against Dasa which wants to deepen Airbus' integration to include the design and engineering of sub-assemblies as well as making the major systems such as wings and fuselages. The "maximum Airbus" would also handle procurement, final assembly and product support.
BAe would like to transfer design and manufacturing facilities and provide Airbus with a strong balance sheet to finance aircraft sales.
But Aerospatiale would stand to lose its industrial and intellectual crown jewels if it transferred its design office and manufacturing plant in Toulouse to Airbus.
Aerospatiale gains some 70 percent of annual sales from the civilian sector, more than BAe and Dasa which have military and motor vehicle sales respectively to boost their revenue streams.
Although Aerospatiale would receive Airbus dividends, it would lose key operations --  galling for a company which set up Airbus jointly with the Germans. It is joint senior partner with Dasa with 38 percent ownership.
Stripping out Airbus would leave Aerospatiale with missiles and satellites, both of which are being eyed by the acquisitive Lagardere Groupe, and helicopters -- a business under severe pressure.
Apart from the status change, Airbus also needs to develop a fuller product range.
"We have to enlarge the product line at the upper and lower end," a Dasa spokesman told RFTV. Airbus is studying a large plane seating between 500-600, dubbed the A3XX, and is planning a 100-seater with China and Singapore.
BAe chairman Richard Evans told the Wall Street Journal on Monday that while the A3XX large aircraft was important, it needed to be a sound business decision.
"I recognise that to be successful and compete with Boeing, we in Airbus need as wide a product mix as possible but not at any price, not at the cost of busting the business," he said.
BAe owns 20 percent of Airbus, while Casa owns four percent.
French state-owned aerospace group Aerospatiale, in the throes of merger talks, faces key questions on its strategic operations as Europe's aircraft industry gears up for competition with a new U.S. giant.
Aerospatiale is due to merge with combat plane maker Dassault Aviation as part of France's consolidation of its fragmented defence industry.
It is also fighting what executives see as a rearguard action to preserve its hold on building passenger jets for Airbus Industrie, in which it is a senior partner.
"France and Europe have no choice but to restructure," Jean-Marc Baron, aerospace specialist at consultancy KPMG Peat Marwick, said. "The Boeing-McDonnell Douglas merger is excellent because it confronts the Europeans with reality."
Sunday's surprise merger announcement by U.S. giant Boeing and McDonnell Douglas put the spotlight on speeding up European consolidation and a shakeup of the Airbus structure, in which Aerospatiale is expected to play a key role.
Airbus partners British Aerospace Plc (BAe) and Daimler-Benz Aerospace AG (Dasa) are pushing for a version of a future Airbus which could effectively take commercial aircraft production out of Aerospatiale's hands.
The Airbus shareholders, which also include Construcciones Aeronauticas SA of Spain (Casa), are negotiating the future shape of the Airbus group as part of a move to convert it to a joint stock company from a cumbersome partnership structure.
If, as the British and Germans want, the partners transfer key design and manufacturing assets to Airbus, Aerospatiale would be left with an uncertain future in missiles, satellites, helicopters and combat aircraft after taking over Dassault, a senior industry executive said.
"Aerospatiale wants to accelerate the merger with Dassault to give it more weight vis-a-vis Dasa in Airbus," Baron said.
Aerospatiale derives 70 percent of annual sales from the civilian sector, of which half comes from Airbus products, an Aerospatiale spokeswoman said.
Airbus contributed a 1995 operating profit of 1.06 billion francs ($203 million) to Aerospatiale and that figure is sure to rise for this year with Airbus deliveries at 111 at the end of November. Airbus delivered 102 planes in 1995.
Although Aerospatiale, which had 1995 turnover of 49.23 billion francs, would absorb Dassault in the merger, chairman Serge Dassault has said he wants to keep its identity distinct.
Dassault, smaller than Aerospatiale with 1995 sales of 11.6 billion francs, has consistently made profits and cultivates its own strong corporate culture as maker of the Mirage combat plane and Falcon small business jet.
The merged company would have annual turnover of around 60 billion francs and is expected to have a common purchasing centre. Purchasing makes up around 60 percent of turnover so if it made annual savings of around five percent, it could benefit to the tune of one to two billion francs a year.
The Aerospatiale spokeswoman said merger terms had not yet been agreed.
Aerospatiale wants Airbus eventually to have a military wing, similar to U.S. giants such as Lockheed Martin and Boeing and McDonnell Douglas, a source close to the company said.
The U.S. giants have defence businesses to balance out the business cycles and receive state research contracts for military projects which are viewed as indirect industry aid.
After merging with Dassault and breaking even, Aerospatiale can be privatised. This is expected to be a sale of capital to industrial partners rather than a stock market flotation, because of the strategic nature of Aerospatiale's business.
But so far, no timetable or partners have emerged.
On missiles and satellites, Aerospatiale executives are frustrated that they have been unable to close a deal to merge these activities with Dasa, despite years of negotiations.
The two activities, grouped under a space and defence heading, contributed 412 million francs operating profit in 1995, after a loss of 32 million in 1994.
Meanwhile, it feels the French conglomerate Lagardere Groupe breathing down its neck. Lagardere recently completed a merger of its Matra missiles unit with BAe to create the Matra BAe Dynamics joint venture, with annual sales of $1.5 billion.
Lagardere argues that by virtue of its British merger it should be the focus for the next consolidation between France and Germany in missiles, while its Matra Marconi Space satellites joint venture with Britain's GEC Plc should be the centre of a European space business.
Aerospatiale also has a Eurocopter joint venture with Dasa, which makes military and civilian helicopters. Eurocopter made an operating loss of 817 million francs last year, after a 45 million loss in the previous year.
Eurocopter faces a difficult medium-term outlook with an orders gap after the next two years until first deliveries in 2002 of the Tiger combat helicopter to the French army.
Aerospatiale made its first surplus since 1991 with a first-half 1996 net profit of 273 million francs and expects to break even in 1997 if the dollar stays at five francs.
It made a 1995 net attributable loss of 981 million, due to a 1.5 billion restructuring charge to cover 3,000 job losses. ($1=5.224 French Franc)
The French government said on Friday it would reveal early in the New Year how it plans to sell the Thomson-CSF state defence electronics firm and that the sale would be covered by a 1986 privatisation law.
The decision, announced by the finance ministry, makes the sale process slower than if it had been carried out under another 1991 privatisation decree.
The independent Privatisation Commission earlier this month forced the state to rethink its plan to sell the Thomson SA electronics group in a private deal to the Lagardere Groupe conglomerate, when it objected to a key element in the disposal.
Following that setback, the state decided to privatise Thomson SA in two parts, with a sale of Thomson-CSF first, followed by Thomson Multimedia, the loss-making consumer electronics unit, to speed up the process.
But the complex sale details mean any decision will only be made in the beginning of 1997, government officials said.
The Council of State, France's highest administrative court, ruled that the Thomson-CSF sale is covered under the 1986 act, after the government asked it to rule on the legal framework.
The court said that as Thomson-CSF constitutes an essential part of the assets of Thomson SA, the sale should be seen as a means of privatising the parent company, the finance ministry said in a statement.
"The privatisation of Thomson-CSF is covered, just as that of Thomson SA, by chapter II of the law of 6 August 1986 on privatisations," it said.
A number of possibilities have emerged for Thomson-CSF since the Privatisation Commission derailed the sale process.
Thomson-CSF's chairman Marcel Roulet and its executive committee have lobbied the Prime Minister Alain Juppe for a stock market flotation instead of selling it to an industrial company such as Lagardere.
A flotation would preserve Thomson-CSF's independence and would be faster than a "trade sale", a source close to the firm said. The company has all the financial details to hand and 42 percent of its capital is already traded on the stock market.
Floating Thomson-CSF would allow a faster restructuring of the defence industry, which was the aim of the privatisation move. It could still form alliances with other groups, such as the planned merger between aircraft companies Dassault Aviation and Aerospatiale.
Thomson-CSF wants a "clean" flotation, without the traditional cross-shareholding pact which protects companies from hostile takeovers. A flotation would also ensure clarity in the sale terms, a senior source close to Thomson said.
But Lagardere chairman Noel Forgeard argues a flotation could lead to a break up of Thomson-CSF as members of any shareholders pact would want to buy up parts of the business.
Shareholder democracy will grab the spotlight when investors in the troubled Channel Tunnel operator Eurotunnel SA/Plc vote on a complex debt deal aimed at keeping the company afloat.
The restructuring agreement with its bank lenders requires a two-thirds majority at an extraordinary meeting of shareholders expected to be held by March.
Potentially, two French shareholder groups could muster a blocking minority but the associations hold distinct positions and styles. Of Eurotunnel's estimated 750,000 small investors, around 600,000 are French.
Albert Jauffret heads the newer and smaller Association de Defence des Actionnaires d'Eurotunnel (Adacte), considered by some as the more "extremist" -- but possessing clear and strongly-held views on the restructuring and what he wants.
"Whether one agrees with his views or not he represents a group of shareholders and shareholder democracy requires each shareholder has a voice," said lawyer Sophie L'Helias, who acted as proxy agent for more than 20,000 Eurotunnel shareholders.
Jauffret, a retired headmaster, believes the restructuring gives too much to the banks. "We are very unhappy the debt is being treated at face value," he said.
In London's secondary debt market, Eurotunnel's 70 billion francs ($13.40 billion) of junior-ranked loans have been marked down to about 40 percent of face value, on a view they are distressed assets.
CALL FOR SOME DEBT CANCELLATION
The 225 lending banks should cancel at least a third of the debt, taking their lead from the market's valuation, instead of keeping most of the debt intact, Jauffret argues.
The restructuring takes out eight billion francs of loans to be swapped for shares at 10.40 francs per share.
The loans outstanding should be converted into Eurotunnel shares at 24 francs per share, the average level of the last three rights issues by Eurotunnel, Jauffret believes.
Adacte is highly critical of Eurotunnel's managers, whom Jauffret believes are cowed by its bankers. At the annual general meeting in June, he moved a resolution, which was easily defeated, to sack co-chairman Patrick Ponsolle along with six other executives, considered too close to the banks.
Adacte, which held proxies for about four percent of the votes at the AGM, was founded in September 1995 as a breakaway from the Eurotunnel shareholders association.
Christian Cambier, who runs the Prigest portfolio management company, heads the Eurotunnel shareholders association which was set up in 1992 and has around 3,000 members, most of whom are professional workers rather than the retired folk who make up Adacte.
DIFFERENT APPROACHES
The difference in constituencies partly explains the divergent approaches. Adacte members are angered by the loss of life savings, while Cambier's have limited losses to spare investment income, said one observer.
The contrasting styles was shown clearly after Eurotunnel announced the restructuring agreement with its bankers.
Adacte denounced it as a "declaration of war", because it did not cancel any debt. In contrast, the Eurotunnel shareholders association said it would seek a meeting with management to get more details.
"We support the management," Cambier says, adding that he does not want to change the board. He spends perhaps five percent of his time on Eurotunnel and the rest managing client funds.
Cambier does not fundamentally object to the restructuring but says the operating licence needs to be extended to 99 years from 65, to allow the company extra time to make money.
His clients hold around 1.5 million Eurotunnel shares and lend them in stock-lending operations, which he says poses no conflict of interest. They gain a running yield each month, even though the shares have fallen sharply in value.
However, both Cambier and Jauffret share common ground when they accuse some of Eurotunnel's banks and brokers of conflicts of interest.
They accuse some of the underwriters for the 1994 rights issue of short selling the shares in the months before the May capital increase.
Cambier garnered a near blocking minority of around 32 percent of the votes at the AGM, after a ground-breaking proxy solicitation, and wants to improve on that for the crucial EGM.
He says he will base his voting on the share price. If Eurotunnel trades below five francs, he will take that as the market's no-confidence in the restructuring, but if it is between 10 and 15 francs, he will approve the deal. ($1=5.225 French Franc)
A longstanding row over market share between rival plane makers Boeing of the U.S. and Europe's Airbus consortium resurfaced on Tuesday, when Airbus claimed to have overtaken the U.S. giant.
Airbus senior vice president for strategy John Leahy told reporters at the Farnborough air show that if 117 cancellations of previous orders at Boeing were taken into account, the U.S firm had added 216 net new orders this year rather than the gross orders of 333 planes announced.
"You have to be very careful when people are running around at air shows talking about gross order books because gross orders aren't what you can bill," he said. "Essentially a third of the Boeing order book has been cancelled this year."
Airbus, with 13 cancellations, has so far had 221 net orders this year, putting it ahead of the Seattle-based firm, he said.
Based on planes seating between 125-350 passengers in which Airbus fields a competitor product to Boeing -- Airbus does not have a 100- or 400-seater -- the European grouping claims a 52 percent share, crediting Boeing with 43 percent and McDonnell Douglas with five percent.
Leahy said since 1976, Boeing's share had shown a slow but noticeable decline while Airbus showed a strong increase. McDonnell Douglas had seen a steep loss.
But Boeing vice-president for marketing Bruce Dennis told Reuters, even with cancellations, the company was exceeding targets for this year of around 63-64 percent market share.
"Orders are exceeding our targets and are doing very well," he said. "We just don't agree with their numbers."
Although Airbus has increased its share over the years, this had not been at Boeing's expense but came out of McDonnell Douglas's sales. "It's not coming out of Boeing's hide."
Production figures gave a clearer view of the company's advance, he said. Boeing had recently increased production of its 777 giant twinjet to seven per month from five and would be turning out the 737 narrow-body at a rate of 17.5 planes per month late next year. He gave no figure for present output.
Airbus' Leahy reaffirmed the group's aim to develop the 3XX, a plane seating over 500, for $8 billion, or perhaps less, thanks to industry restructuring efforts.
The four-nation partnership aims to deliver the first 3XX in 2003, he said. He also defended the company's market forecast for the plane, which showed there was demand for the aircraft.
Airbus executive Volker Von Tein said of the 3XX, which is seen as key to attacking Boeing's lucrative monoploy at the top end of the market, "We are not in a race with Boeing on this programme. If Boeing were to launch a stretched derivative of their veteran, 34-year-old 747, it will come as no surprise to us." That would allow Airbus to "fine tune" the 3XX, he said.
He added that Boeing had said that there was not enough room in the market for two makers of large planes. "In that case I would suggest that they opt out of the competition because once the A3XX is on the market maybe they will be proven right -- there will be no room for old derivatives."
Boeing's Dennis said he could not see how Airbus could build the 3XX for the estimated $8 billion, "unless they see something that we can't."
Boeing Commercial Airplane Group president Ron Woodward said on Monday its studies showed it would cost over $5 billion to build large planes seating 460 and 560 derived from the existing 747 jumbo jet, which would be cheaper than creating a new plane like the 3XX.
The Airbus consortium comprises French Aerospatiale, British Aerospace Plc, Germany's Daimler-Benz Aerospace AG and CASA of Spain.
The four partners of the Airbus consortium Monday signed an agreement aimed at making the European planemaker a unified company better able to compete with U.S. rival Boeing Co.
Airbus Industrie said in a statement its four European partners had signed a memorandum of understanding to restructure Airbus into a limited liability company by 1999.
"The establishment of Airbus Industrie as a single corporate entity (SCE) is an important initial step in the consolidation of the aerospace industry within Europe," Airbus said.
Toulouse, France-based Airbus is currently a partnership between French state-owned Ste Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, British Aerospace Plc, Daimler-Benz Aerospace (DASA) and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA (Casa) of Spain.
The new Airbus will have a single management structure which would add engineering, testing, production, procurement and customer service to Airbus's current marketing, sales and product support activities, the statement said.
DASA Chairman Manfred Bischoff told reporters in Munich that differences remained among the partners in the consortium despite the signing of the deal on Monday.
He said there were still different views over the amount of productive assets that should be brought in to the limited liability company which is to replace the existing partnership.
An industry executive said what follows now would be "horse-trading" as the partners discuss what assets are deemed necessary now that the functions for the new Airbus have been decided. "Is this plant an essential part of the function of the future Airbus," will be the question to be asked, he said.
The Airbus statement said "Transfer of assets associated with these functions... will depend on how far the assets are essential for the described functions and their detailed valuation, to be completed by the end of 1997."
The British and Germans had argued for a high degree of integration in the new Airbus, while Aerospatiale wanted a more cautious approach, based on a largely static view of Airbus.
Airbus is mainly a sales and marketing organisation with the four partners making the planes. But the task of reorganizing Airbus took on an urgent note after Boeing and McDonnell Douglas said in December they would merge and form a civil and military giant with $50 billion in annual sales.
Airbus said the restructured company would help improvement in overall operational efficiency, the introduction of new international strategic partnerships and the longer term opportunity for "external participation" in Airbus.
Airbus spokesman Robert Alizart said that these options included a future stock market listing of Airbus.
In London, a British Aerospace spokesman said a share flotation for Airbus was a "long-term possibility."
Airbus said it was studying a launch of the A3XX, which would break the stranglehold on the lucrative high-capacity end of the market now held by Boeing's 747 jumbo jet.
Aerospatiale Chairman Yves Michot told journalists that he had met the chairman of U.S. giant Lockheed Martin, Norman Augustine, for cooperation talks and did not exclude a role in the A3XX project for the U.S. company.
"You cannot get enough of the right kind of partners in this sort of project..." Michot said, citing Lockheed Martin as a potential partner.
But Dasa's Bischoff told the Stern magazine that no decision was expected this year on the A3XX project as talks with airlines had shown detailed consultations were still needed, in view of the huge financial effort needed.
The goal of the new Airbus company must be to achieve a return on equity of at least 12 percent for its shareholders, Bischoff said. That meant that Aerospatiale must match cost cuts of 30 percent already made by DASA and BAe, he said.
Bischoff told reporters in Munich that Lockheed and Russian plane companies could become Airbus partners, as well as Saab of Sweden and Italy's Alenia.
The four partners of the Airbus consortium on Monday signed an agreement aimed at making the European plane maker a unified company better able to compete with Boeing Co.
In a statement, Airbus Industrie said its four European partners had signed a memorandum of understanding to restructure Airbus into a limited liability company by 1999.
"The establishment of Airbus Industrie as a single corporate entity (SCE) is an important initial step in the consolidation of the aerospace industry within Europe," Airbus said.
Toulouse-based Airbus is currently a partnership between French state-owned Ste Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, British Aerospace Plc, Daimler-Benz Aerospace(DASA), and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA(CASA) of Spain.
The French and Germans both have 37.9 percent, the British 20 percent and Spanish company 4.2 percent.
The new entity will have a single management structure which should add control of engineering, testing, production, procurement and customer service to Airbus's current responsibilities for marketing, sales and product support, it said in a statement.
"Transfer of assets associated with these functions... will depend on how far the assets are essential for the described functions and their detailed valuation, to be completed by the end of 1997," it said.
"The ultimate objective is the restructring of the entire European (aerospace) industry, of which Airbus in one element and not the integrating entity," Aerospatiale chairman Yves Michot told the Le Monde newspaper.
"Airbus will be made a single company before the end of 1999 with a shareholding strictly the same as now," he added
Currently Airbus is mainly a sales and marketing organisation with the four partners manufacturing the planes.
Airbus first announced a preliminary agreement in early January. The four partners decided last July to turn Airbus into a corporation to streamline decision-making and production.
These restructuring plans took on a more urgent tone after Boeing and McDonnell Douglas said in December they would merge and form a civil and military giant with nearly $50 billion in annual sales.
Airbus said in its statement that the restructured company would facilitate continuing improvement in overall operational efficiency, the introduction of new international strategic partnerships and the longer term opportunity for "external participation" in Airbus.
Airbus spokesman Robert Alizart said that these options included a future stock market listing of Airbus.
Airbus said that the restructured company "presented a great opportunity for business growth both for its existing shareholders and its future partners."
It said Airbus was studying expansion of its product range with an aircraft in the 100 seat category, with Alenia  ALEI.RO of Itlay in co-operartion with AVIC of China and Singapore Aerospace.
It is also mulling derivatives of the four-engined A340, the A340-500 with a range of 8,300 nautical miles and the A340-600 with seating capacity of close to 400 seats.
In the high-capacity long haul market it is planning to launch the A3XX, which would break the stranglehold on the lucrative top-end of the market now held by Boeing's 747 jumbo jet.
Airbus is also pondering work on the Future Large Aircraft (FLA), a military transport aircraft to match the future needs of Europe, next to its civil work.
British Aerospace said it expected its wing development and production operations, employing more than 4,000 people, to be transferred to Airbus.
French electrical equipment company Schneider aims to almost double its return on equity capital to 15 percent in the next three years, executive vice president Michel Staib told Reuters.
"Our objective is to have a net return on capital, before amortisation of goodwill, of 15 percent...in three years," he said in an interview. "It's a reasonable plan."
That compared to just over eight percent in 1995, he said. The improvement will come from pruning down Schneider to core electrical activities and an internal re-engineering programme.
Schneider shares have risen strongly in the past few weeks as analysts considered the stock undervalued and welcomed the pending sale of the Spie Batignolles unit, which has dragged on the group's results.
The stock has risen around 10 percent since mid-December when news of its Spie sale hit the market. The shares closed on Wednesday at 255.70 francs. About a third of the capital is in non-domestic hands.
All the group companies are profitable and with the sale of construction company Spie Batignolles, Schneider is at a "diamond point," Staib said.
Staib did not rule out further disposals depending on market and technology changes but Schneider is now well-focused.
Schneider will seek growth in emerging markets, in South America and Asia, including India. It wants Asia to contribute at least 20 percent of group turnover before the end of the decade compared to 11 percent in 1995.
Schneider has expanded its operations in China, increasing the number of employees to 2,500 from 200 five years ago.
The company also wants to increase its share in Germany from a tiny three to four percent of a market which Staib says is the world's third largest. Germany accounted for 2.5 percent of turnover in 1995, or three billion francs.
It will seek alliances with other industrial companies rather than acquire firms, as the Germany market is tightly held. Expansion in emerging markets will also be done through local alliances and joint ventures.
Schneider last year bought out Daimler-Benz AG's 50 percent share in AEG Schneider Automation unit.
Schneider posted 1995 sales of 59.42 billion francs and net attributable profit of 817 million. It reported 1996 first half net profit of 503 million francs, at the low end of market expectations.
Schneider is selling Spie to Amec Plc and to Spie employees for one billion francs, subject to regulatory approvals. Amec will gain between 40-48.6 percent of Spie for an injection of 40 million stg.
-- Pierre Tran, Paris newsroom +33 1 4221 5452
Eurotunnel Plc, the debt-laden Channel Tunnel operator, pledged on Monday to recover from the public relations disaster which followed last November's tunnel fire and said it expected to restore lost market share in 1997.
Speaking from Eurotunnel's Folkestone base in England, Patrick Ponsolle, chairman, outlined the group's review of 1996 with an update on sales and the debt refinancing in the aftermath of the fire which caused a partial shutdown of services in the key Christmas period.
Ponsolle assured investors that the financial fallout from last November's fire would not hit its debt rescue plan clinched in October or derail long-term growth.
"The board...believes that the November fire should not have any significant effect on the long-term financial performance of the company, nor will there be any need to review the financial restructuring plan," said Eurotunnel in a statement.
The shareholder meeting to approve the debt plan has been delayed to June, when all tunnel services resume.
Eurotunnel said its banking syndicate had taken the opportunity of the delay to the meeting to ask the remaining syndicate of bankers to extend the debt standstill arrangement to December.
Richard Hannah, analyst at UBS, said "The fact that the refinancing will not have to be restructured is the key message for investors."
Eurotunnel also provided evidence of its sales surviving last year's fire, with passenger numbers sharply ahead and an "encouraging" outlook for 1997.
Ponsolle told the Folkestone press briefing that revenues in the fourth quarter of 1997 were expected to be "substantially higher" than the same 1996 period, making him "cautiously optimistic" for 1998.
The embattled Anglo-French group which recently restructured near to nine billion pounds in debt, said its efforts to claw back lost sales coupled with cutbacks in cross-Channel capacity by the ferry companies would fuel the rise in revenues.
In the first major trading review since the fire, the group reported that unaudited estimated turnover for 1996 was 450 million pounds ($752.5 million), up from 300 million in 1995.
The group said the sales growth was achieved "despite a substantial loss of revenue in the last seven weeks (of 1996)."
Thirteen million passengers travelled through the tunnel last year by the Le Shuttle car service or the Eurostar passenger trains, up from eight million the previous year.
Eurotunnel said once full services resumed in June it should be able to increase its market share in the second half.
"This market share should be comparable to, if not higher than, autumn 1996, and revenues at the end of this year should be higher than at the end of 1996," it said.
"As expected, Eurotunnel has provided a morale booster," added UBS' Hannah. Sales growth was in line with expectations.
Eurotunnel sought to stress that no damage had been done to consumer confidence by publishing the results of a commissioned Gallup survey which found 77 percent of French questioned and 68 percent of British believed the tunnel was safe.
Looking at a breakdown of the latest Eurotunnel traffic data, Eurostar increased passenger numbers by 67 percent to 4.86 million for the full year and by 69 percent for the 11 months up to the November fire which led to a temporary closure.
Le Shuttle car tourist traffic rose 70 percent to 2.07 million cars in 1996, with coach traffic up 148 percent to 57,692 coaches. Le Shuttle freight traffic was up 33 percent to 519,003 trucks for the year.
Eurotunnel shares edged up two pence to 78 in London and rose 20 centimes to 7.10 francs in Paris.
The European Airbus consortium said on Tuesday it was confidently pressing ahead with studies on a 555-seat passenger plane despite a decision by archrival Boeing to scale back work on a larger jumbo jet.
Boeing on Monday said market conditions did not justify the risk and expense of building a new version of its 747 jumbo jet, the 747-X, and it was diverting half the 1,000 staff on that project to smaller planes.
"We are confident the A3XX will meet market needs," an Airbus spokesman said. "The signs from major airlines working with us on shaping the A3XX are definitely encouraging."
Airbus, ever quick to seize on any perceived gaps in Boeing's armour, says airlines want an all-new plane rather than Boeing's 747-X, which the Airbus spokesman said was the "end of the line for a product developed in the late 1960s".
"Airlines want to fly into the 21st century facing forward, not backwards," the spokesman added.
Airbus must attack Boeing's monopoly on the large-capacity segment and is studying designs for an A3XX product family which it hopes to launch in 1998 for service in 2003.
It wants to grab at least half of the aircraft market by the end of the decade, up from its estimated historic share of 35 percent. But it lacks large planes to compete with Boeing's 777 giant twinjet and the best-selling 747 jumbo.
The four-nation consortium differs with Boeing over the potential market and development costs for a new large plane.
Airbus forecasts a market of 1,383 planes seating more than 400 passengers over the next 20 years, while Boeing believes demand would only stretch to 470 planes seating 500 or more, which would not allow it to get a return on its money.
A basic A3XX would cost around $200 million, giving potential sales worth more than $275 billion on the Airbus forecast.
"A split market would have been a big challenge for two manufacturers but now Boeing is opting out, that enhances our prospects," the Airbus spokesman said.
Airbus accepts the view that the market will fragment further as people want to fly more frequently, non-stop, long distance between city pairs.
The "fragmentation" effect was one of the factors cited by Boeing for cutting demand for larger planes and reducing the importance of big airport hubs.
But Airbus believes it will meet that market change with its A340 long-haul plane and that the A3XX will co-exist.
Saturation of air routes and airport landing slots calls for higher capacity planes, it argues. Countering critics who point to already lengthy waits at airports, it says its A3XX designs would allow a quicker passenger turnaround than the jumbo.
Airbus is talking to 14 leading airlines on what the plane should offer and is confident that it can match or better the airlines' operating demands. These include fitting within an 80 metre "box" at the airport terminal.
It is officially sticking to its estimated $8 billion development cost for the A3XX, despite scepticism among some experts that it cannot be done for less than $15 billion.
Airbus is a consortium made up of French state-owned Ste Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, British Aerospace, Daimler-Benz Aerospace (part of Daimler-Benz) and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA of Spain.
The European Airbus consortium said on Tuesday it was confidently pressing ahead with studies on a 555-seat passenger plane despite a decision by archrival Boeing to scale back work on a larger jumbo jet.
Boeing on Monday said market conditions did not justify the risk and expense of building a new version of its 747 jumbo jet, the 747-X, and it was diverting half the 1,000 staff on that project to smaller planes.
"We are confident the A3XX will meet market needs," an Airbus spokesman said. "The signs from major airlines working with us on shaping the A3XX are definitely encouraging."
Airbus, ever quick to seize on any perceived gaps in Boeing's armour, says airlines want an all-new plane rather than Boeing's 747-X, which the Airbus spokesman said was the "end of the line for a product developed in the late 1960s".
"Airlines want to fly into the 21st century facing forward, not backwards," the spokesman added.
Airbus must attack Boeing's monopoly on the large-capacity segment and is studying designs for an A3XX product family which it hopes to launch in 1998 for service in 2003.
It wants to grab at least half of the aircraft market by the end of the decade, up from its estimated historic share of 35 percent. But it lacks large planes to compete with Boeing's 777 giant twinjet and the best-selling 747 jumbo.
The four-nation consortium differs with Boeing over the potential market and development costs for a new large plane.
Airbus forecasts a market of 1,383 planes seating more than 400 passengers over the next 20 years, while Boeing believes demand would only stretch to 470 planes seating 500 or more, which would not allow it to get a return on its money.
A basic A3XX would cost around $200 million, giving potential sales worth more than $275 billion on the Airbus forecast.
"A split market would have been a big challenge for two manufacturers but now Boeing is opting out, that enhances our prospects," the Airbus spokesman said.
Airbus accepts the view that the market will fragment further as people want to fly more frequently, non-stop, long distance between city pairs.
The "fragmentation" effect was one of the factors cited by Boeing for cutting demand for larger planes and reducing the importance of big airport hubs.
But Airbus believes it will meet that market change with its A340 long-haul plane and that the A3XX will co-exist.
Saturation of air routes and airport landing slots calls for higher capacity planes, it argues. Countering critics who point to the already lengthy waits at airports, it says its A3XX designs would allow a quicker passenger turnaround than the jumbo.
Airbus is talking to 14 leading airlines on what the plane should offer and is confident that it can match or better the airlines' operating demands. These include fitting within an 80 metre "box" at the airport terminal.
It is officially sticking to its estimated $8 billion development cost for the A3XX, despite scepticism among some experts that it cannot be done for less than $15 billion.
Even though, privately, Airbus executives concede that the cost could be nearer $10 billion, they say they will try to contain costs to $8 billion.
Airbus is a consortium made up of French state-owned Ste Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, British Aerospace Plc, Daimler-Benz Aerospace (a unit of Daimler-Benz AG) and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA (CASA) of Spain.
France's national audit office criticised on Monday a lack of clarity and insufficient competition in the water supply market, dominated by two giant companies Cie Generale des Eaux and Lyonnaise des Eaux.
"There is a high degree of concentration. That is not to say competition is absent, but it is organised competition," said Francois Logerot, author of the Cour des Comptes (court of auditors') report.
"It may be that concentration in this sector is accentuated by agreements between these companies...sometimes by creating joint subsidiaries at the request of local councils."
Logerot cited as an example the Saint-Etienne city council, where the water company Societe Stephanoise des Eaux is jointly owned by Lyonnaise des Eaux Dumez and Generale des Eaux (CGE).
The report, presented at a news conference, said the private sector held 75 percent of the supply of drinking water in France in 1991, up from 60 percent in 1980 and 31 percent in 1954.
The price of water rose by a national average 47.7 percent from 1990 to 1994, it said.
Significant price rises occurred where contracts were awarded to the private sector, Logerot said.
"Sometimes there was a catch-up effect but there were also excesses and abnormal situations."
But CGE noted in a statement that the report said the main reason for rising water prices was higher quality and increasing investment needs.
It said the official audit pointed to a near doubling of the cost of water treatment between 1990 and 1995, while the price to the consumer rose by 30 percent.
Logerot said local authorities often awarded contracts to the water companies in exchange for payments which the companies then recovered in the price charged to customers.
The study followed a 1995 law which banned "right of entry" payments that water companies paid to win an operating licence.
The report cited the Alpine city of Grenoble, where a contract with Lyonnaise des Eaux resulted in the conviction for bribery of the mayor, former Gaullist minister Alain Carignon.
Grenoble used the proceeds of the water contract to finance its general expenditure, while accounting principles call for water expenses to be kept separate from the general budget.
Lyonnaise said in a statement that each water company had given details of its contracts to the audit office and, of the 12,000 in France, only about 20 had drawn explicit comment. And these had been agreed under conditions prevailing before the 1995 law.
The CGE statement said much of the criticism in the report related to the past, when payment for contracts was legal. It added that the company was pleased such payments had been banned and the duration of those contracts was limited.
CGE said the water market was highly competitive and 1996 had shown that, when contracts expired, there was competition to win new licences. The sector was also subject to strict controls by a number of public bodies, including competition and quality experts.
France's national audit office on Monday criticised a lack of clarity and insufficient competition in the water supply market, dominated by two giant companies Cie Generale des Eaux and Lyonnaise des Eaux.
"There is a high degree of concentration. That is not to say competition is absent, but it is organised competition," said Francois Logerot, author of the Cour des Comptes (court of auditors) report.
"It may be that concentration in this sector is accentuated by agreements between these companies...sometimes by creating joint subsidiaries at the request of local councils."
Logerot cited as an example the Saint-Etienne city council, where the water company Societe Stephanoise des Eaux is jointly owned by Lyonnaise des Eaux Dumez and Generale des Eaux (CGE).
The report, presented at a news conference, said the private sector held 75 percent of the supply of drinking water in France in 1991, up from 60 percent in 1980 and 31 percent in 1954.
The price of water rose by a national average 47.7 percent from 1990 to 1994, it said.
Significant price rises occurred where contracts were awarded to the private sector, Logerot said.
"Sometimes there was a catch-up effect but there were also excesses and abnormal situations."
Lyonnaise officials were not available for comment. But CGE noted in a statement that the report said the main reason for rising water prices was higher quality and increasing investment needs.
It said the official audit pointed to a near doubling of the cost of water treatment between 1990 and 1995, while the price to the consumer rose by 30 percent.
Logerot said local authorities often awarded contracts to the water companies in exchange for payments which the companies then recovered in the price charged to customers.
The study followed a 1995 law which banned "right of entry" payments that water companies paid to win an operating licence.
The report cited the Alpine city of Grenoble, where a contract with Lyonnaise des Eaux resulted in the conviction for bribery of the mayor, former Gaullist minister Alain Carignon.
Grenoble used the proceeds of the water contract to finance its general expenditure, while accounting principles call for water expenses to be kept separate from the general budget.
The CGE statement said much of the criticism in the report related to the past, when payment for contracts was legal. It added that the company was pleased such payments were banned and the duration of those contracts was limited.
CGE said the water market was highly competitive and 1996 had shown that when contracts expired, there was competition to win new licences. The sector was also subject to strict controls by a number of public bodies, including competition and quality experts.
The audit office called for tighter water management and said higher water quality standards contained in a 1992 law would require annual investment of around 14 billion francs.
French subscriber television company Canal Plus said on Friday it was merging with Nethold, a Dutch satellite television company, to create one of the world's largest pay-TV groups.
Nethold is jointly held by Richemont SA, which is quoted on the Zurich and Johannesburg stock exchanges, and MIH Holdings Ltd, a listed holding company.
"This merger is a major strategic move, resulting in the creation of one of the largest television groups in the world...particularly in the field of pay-TV with over 8.5 million subscribers," Canal Plus said in a statement.
The new group will have significant positions in France, Italy, Spain, Scandinavia, the Benelux countries and Germany as well as a presence in several growing markets in central Europe.
The Paris stockmarket authorities had suspended trading in Canal Plus shares on Friday morning, sparking speculation of a link up between the French firm and Nethold.
Its stock closed at 1,169 francs on Thursday.
Utilities group Cie Generale des Eaux, a key shareholder in Canal Plus, said in a separate statement it was delighted with the merger plan, which marked big step in Canal Plus's international development.
The pact would give the French company access to the fast-growing Italian market, Generale des Eaux said.
It would also give the new group greater weight in negotiating purchases of copyrights and open opportunities for the launch of European theme channels.
Generale des Eaux said it was comfortable with its investment in Canal Plus. It said that in agreement with other Canal Plus shareholders, it would seek to maintain the same scale of investment in the new company.
Under the terms of the deal, Canal Plus will buy 100 percent of Nethold from Richemont and MIH, paying with 6.1 million new Canal Plus shares and $45 million in cash.
Following the issue of new Canal Plus shares, Richemont and MIH will respectively own 15 and five percent of Canal Plus.
Cie Financiere Richemont has interests in luxury goods and tobacco and owns such famous brandnames as Cartier, Mont Blanc, Rothmans and Dunhill.
Canal Plus said the deal had the backing of its main shareholders, media group Havas, Generale des Eaux, bank Societe Generale, and state bank Caisse des Depots et Consignations.
It is subject to regulatory and shareholder approval.
French subscriber television company Canal Plus said on Friday that it was merging with Nethold, a Dutch satellite television company, to create one of the world's largest pay-TV groups.
Nethold is jointly held by Richemont SA, which is quoted on the Zurich and Johannesburg stock exchanges and MIH Holdings Ltd, a listed holding company.
"This merger is a major strategic move, resulting in the creation of one of the largest television groups in the world...particularly in the field of pay-TV with over 8.5 million subscribers," Canal Plus said in a statement.
The new group will have significant positions in France, Italy, Spain, Scandinavia, the Benelux countries and Germany, as well as a presence in several growing markets in central Europe.
The Paris stockmarket authorities had suspended trading in Canal Plus shares on Friday morning, sparking speculation of a link up between the French firm and Nethold.
Its stock closed at 1,169 francs on Thursday.
Utilities group Cie Generale des Eaux, a key shareholder in Canal Plus, said in a separate statement that it was delighted with the merger plan, which marked big step in Canal Plus's international development.
The pact would give the French company access to the fast growing Italian market, Generale des Eaux said.
It would also give the new group greater weight in negotiating purchases of copyrights and open opportunities for the launch of European theme channels.
Generale des Eaux said it was comfortable with its investment in Canal Plus. It said that, in agreement with other Canal Plus shareholders, it would seek to maintain the same scale of investment in the new company.
Under the terms of the deal, Canal Plus will buy 100 percent of Nethold from Richemont and MIH, paying with 6.1 million new Canal Plus shares and $45 million in cash.
Following the issue of new Canal Plus shares, Richemont and MIH will respectively own 15 and five percent of Canal Plus. Cie Financiere Richemont has interests in luxury goods and tobacco and owns such famous brandnames as Cartier, Mont Blanc, Rothmans and Dunhill.
Canal Plus said the deal had the backing of its main shareholders, media group Havas, Generale des Eaux, bank Ste Generale and state bank Caisse des Depots et Consignations. It is subject to regulatory and shareholder approval.
Troubled Channel Tunnel operator Eurotunnel SA/Plc is due to release first-half results on Monday but analysts said any attempt to forecast the figures was futile, given the uncertainties over its debt restructuring.
"Everything depends on resolving the financial situation. If they announce a good figure...that might help, but it's really a face-off between the company and the bankers," Olivier Machou, analyst at brokerage Leven said.
Eurotunnel needs to agree a refinancing of its $12.3 billion bank debt by the end of September, having asked in July for two court-appointed mediators to stay on to negotiate a deal with its some 220-strong bank syndicate.
Machou said it was hard to forecast results due to "dumping" in the price war between Eurotunnel and ferry companies as they battle for a share of cross-Channel traffic between Britain and France.
"It's not a stock that you can take a view based on half-year figures, especially as the first half comes before the summer season," one analyst said.
However, one analyst at a large French brokerage said he had a rough forecast of a 2.5 billion franc ($492 million) net loss and an operating loss of around 100 million.
The Channel Tunnel operator posted first-half sales of 1.79 billion francs, up from 806 million a year ago. It made a net loss for the full year last year of 7.196 billion francs on turnover of 2.266 billion.
The headline figures will likely be flattered by the fact that Eurotunnel did not have all its services running a year ago, said Jeff Summers, head of research at debt specialist Klesch and Co in London.
Stripping out the minimum usage fee that the railway operators pay, he expected a 25-30 percent improvement in the underlying results from a year ago.
In sterling terms, Summers has pencilled in a 22 million pound ($34.45 million) pretax, pre-interest loss versus 121 million a year ago. With benign currency movements, it may break even.
Operating cashflow should at least double to 56 million sterling before interest and capital expenditure, compared with 29 million.
"Everything is going in its favour," Summers said. He cited the British government's recent decision to allow cooperation between ferry companies to pool their capacity and the European Commission's decision not to extend the duty-free sales regime beyond 1999.
Pooling by rivals such as P&amp;O and Stena would lead to "a reduction in direct competition" for Eurotunnel, while the loss of duty-free sales, representing 250 million sterling of soft subsidies for the ferries, would push ferry firms to raise ticket prices.
Eurotunnel could then raise its prices and boost turnover.
The cross-Channel market has also grown much faster even than Eurotunnel forecast, with traffic up 20 percent last year and estimated growth of 13-15 percent this year, Summers said.
Richard Branson, head of the London &amp; Continental Railways (LCR) group which runs the Eurostar high-speed train concession, has forecast it will hit six million passengers in the financial year 1996/97 and 10 million in 18 months.
If that happens, Eurotunnel could receive revenues above the minimum usage fee as higher service levels trigger extra payments. ($1=5.077 French Franc) ($1=.6385 Pound)
European aircraft consortium Airbus said on Friday it had no evidence that archrival Boeing was putting pressure on U.S. suppliers to prevent them from working on Airbus' planned A3XX large plane.
Daimler-Benz Aerospace (Dasa) chairman, Manfred Bischoff, said on Thursday he was concerned Boeing and merger partner McDonnell Douglas were signalling to a big U.S. subcontractor, understood to be Northrop Grumman, not to work on the Airbus project, newspapers reported.
"We have no evidence of any kind of pressure," an Airbus spokesman said.
But an industry source close to Airbus said Boeing had put pressure on Northrop to stay out of the A3XX project, which threatens Boeing's lucrative monopoly of the high-capacity segment with its 747 jumbo. "It is a fact," he said.
Dasa is a partner in Airbus Industrie, alongside France's Aerospatiale, British Aerospace Plc, and Casa of Spain.
Boeing was not immediately available for comment.
Airbus had been in exploratory talks with Northrop over supplying engine housing sections for the A3XX but those negotiations had ended, the industry source said.
Airbus has been looking for risk-sharing partners to supply up to 40 percent of the targeted $8 billion in the A3XX development costs. The plane would seat 550 passengers in the basic version, which it wants to enter service in 2003.
Airbus managing director Jean Pierson told journalists on Thursday at the Toulouse headquarters that he would lay out Airbus' competition concerns on the Boeing merger when he gives evidence to the U.S. Federal Trade Commission and the European Commission, as expected.
In the long term, the Boeing merger "will pose a problem for Europe's civil aviation industry," he said, adding there would effects in military markets, particularly helicopters.
The industry source said the merged Boeing/McDonnell company would have bigger clout on suppliers, have a wider technology base though its portfolio of patents and gain larger access to indirect state funds for research and development through military programmes.
But Pierson said the merger was inevitable. "The Boeing-McDonnell merger will go ahead," he said.
Airbus is determined to fight back and is holding to its aim of securing a half share of the world passenger plane market by the early part of the next decade. A niche player strategy was doomed to failure, as McDonnell Douglas and Fokker found out, he said.
The consortium needs to field products at the top and bottom end of the range, with respectively the A3XX and a 100-seater plane to be built with China and Singapore, as well as extend the A340 family of long-range jets to compete against Boeing.
