Shares of American Medical Response Inc fell sharply Wednesday for a second consecutive session amid concern that the ambulance company was straying from its successful acquisition strategy.
The steep decline came after American Medical Response announced Tuesday an agreement to buy STAT Healthcare Inc in a stock transaction valued at $145 million.
The planned acquisition moves American Medical Response, which has bought 69 ambulance companies since 1992, into hospital emergency rooms and disease management.  
Shares of American Medical Response tumbled 2-5/8 to 31-7/8 by midafternoon Wednesday. The stock dropped three points after the transaction was announced on Tuesday.
Wall Street analysts said the deal was strategically sound from a long-term perspective, but noted that investors were wary of the company's shift into a new area.
"The skepticism, which we don't share, is related to the company's going into a business outside their consolidation within the ambulance industry," said Randall Huyser of Furman Selz.  
STAT Healthcare provides staffing for hospital emergency rooms. It also offers outpatient medical services such as kidney dialysis.
"Although the transaction makes sense to us conceptually, this new direction for the company may elicit a wait-and-see attitude from some investors who want to see success first in the new venture. Others may question how the disease management division will fit into the puzzle," Lehman Brothers analyst Jeffrey Kessler wrote in a report issued Wednesday.
Industry sources also cited the company's prediction the deal will slightly dilute earnings this year.  
In a conference call with investors and analysts on Tuesday, American Medical Response said the transaction would be accretive in 1997. It also expects cost savings of $2.5 million from the merger.
Industry analysts also noted that the acquisition would mark a logical extension of the company's existing services.
"They're taking it beyond just driving you to the hospital," said Clifford Hewitt of Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Co Inc.
The stock of American Medical Response Inc. fell sharply for the second consecutive session Wednesday on concern that the Aurora, Colo.-based ambulance company is straying from its successful acquisition strategy.
The steep decline came after American Medical Response announced Tuesday an agreement to buy STAT Healthcare Inc. in a stock transaction valued at $145 million.
The planned acquisition moves American Medical Response, which has bought 69 ambulance companies since 1992, into hospital emergency rooms and disease management.
The stock of American Medical Response tumbled $4 on the New York Stock Exchange to $30.50. The stock dropped $3 after the transaction was announced on Tuesday.
Wall Street analysts said the deal was strategically sound from a long-term perspective, but noted that investors were wary of the company's shift into a new area.
"The scepticism, which we don't share, is related to the company's going into a business outside their consolidation within the ambulance industry," said Randall Huyser of Furman Selz.
Houston-based STAT Healthcare provides staffing for hospital emergency rooms. It also offers outpatient medical services such as kidney dialysis.
Industry sources also cited the company's prediction the deal will slightly dilute earnings this year.
In a conference call with investors and analysts on Tuesday, American Medical Response said the transaction will add to earnings in 1997. It also anticipated cost savings of $2.5 million from the merger.
Industry analysts noted that the acquisition marked a logical extension of its existing services by branching out into the hospital emergency room and providing more services for clients.
"They're taking it beyond just driving you to the hospital," said Clifford Hewitt of Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Co Inc.
Industry sources also noted that shareholders of STAT Healthcare were likely to be concerned about the steep stock decline because the transaction was not based on any fixed price for American Medical Response shares. The deal calls for each share of STAT common stock to be converted into one-quarter share of American Medical Response.
Officials from both companies could not be reached for comment.
STAT stock fell 87.5 cents to $7.375 on Nasdaq.
Analysts expect American Medical Response to continue its tradition of buying ambulance companies as it works to integrate the STAT acquisition.
"I think the outlook for this company is very good. There are 12,000 ambulance companies in the U.S. and they aren't geared to the needs of medical care as it is evolving," said Hewitt.
Republic Industries Inc., the aggressive Florida company run by businessman Wayne Huizenga, on Friday defended its plans to buy security firm ADT Ltd. after a New York newspaper reported that the transaction would be called off.
"The deal has not been killed. It is still moving forward," spokesman Ronald Castell said.
Huizenga, founder of Blockbuster Entertainment, owns the Florida Marlins baseball, Dolphins football and Panthers hockey professional sports teams. Republic has three major areas of business: electronic security, solid waste and used cars.
Originally valued at $5 billion when the stock transaction was announced in July, the deal has lost about 20 percent of its value due to a steep decline in Republic's share price. At the time the deal was first announced, Republic shares were trading at about $29.
Citing unnamed industry sources, the New York Post reported that ADT was expected to call off the deal because of the drop in value.
Shares of Republic closed up 62.5 cents at $25.125 on Nasdaq after trading as high as $26.125 as takeover traders rushed to cover short positions. ADT stock traded on the New York Stock Exchange closed up 50 cents at $19.125.
Boca Raton, Florida-based ADT declined to comment on the report, but Wall Street analysts said both companies were dismissing the article.
"What ADT has told me is that nothing has changed," said Andrew Jeffrey of Robertson Stephens &amp; Co., referring to the report that the deal was dead.
Some Wall Street traders have speculated that Republic may be forced to sweeten the terms of the deal to make up for the lost value in its stock price.
Republic's Castell declined to discuss details of the deal's value.
The transaction also has been clouded by concerns that Western Resources Inc., which owns 23.1 percent of ADT, may oppose the acquisition. Western has said it was not consulted about the merger, but has not yet determined if it will seek to block the deal.
The ADT acquisition represents a huge step for Republic, which has acquired 19 security companies since it entered the industry 10 months ago.
In yet another sign that utilities are branching out far beyond their traditional markets, PacifiCorp and Protection One Inc. on Friday announced a marketing alliance aimed at boosting customer loyalty in an increasingly competitive industry.
Under the venture, customers of PacifiCorp subsidiaries Pacific Power and Utah Power will be offered a security system from regional alarm company Protection One.
The unusual alliance is viewed as the first of many creative ventures in an uncertain era of utility deregulation.
"This is the start of what is going to happen all over the place. It's a whole new business that will coattail on the aggressive nature utilities are starting to take. One-stop shopping is becoming key from a marketing position," said Ron Chebra, manager of utilities and energy industries at AT&amp;T Solutions.
Utilities are becoming increasingly attracted to security companies as they prepare to enter new markets that previously had been off-limits due to federal regulations. In recent months, utilities have bought security firms or made large investments in them.
"We're looking for new products and services that we can bring to our customer base as a way to build loyalty and ultimately build preference with our residential customers," said Rene Carroll, consumer products manager at PacifCorp.
"We've been looking at different ways of entering the home security business for over a year," she added.
The alliance will give Protection One instant access to the 1.4 million customers served by the PacifiCorp subsidiaries and extends its reach to Utah. Previously, the regional security firm served six western states.
At a recent conference on mergers in the security industry, Protection One officials declined to discuss potential revenue from the alliance, but noted that capturing even 5 percent of PacifiCorp customers would be significant.
Customers accepting the offer will receive free installation of a home security system with the purchase of a two-year agreement for monitoring services.
The security system's alarm panel also will hold thermostat and lighting controls and remote access.
The alliance is expected to be just the first step for Protection One, which is trying to take advantage of new opportunities that are emerging from deregulation of the utilities and telecommunications industries.
"We think this is the first of quite a few announcements we'll be making in the next 12 months or so," Protection One Chief Financial Officer John Hesse told Reuters at the recent security conference.
The alliance re-establishes a link between the two companies that was dissolved several years ago. Protection One began as a subsidiary of PacifiCorp in 1988, but the alarm company split off in a management buyout three years later. Protection One then became a publicly-traded alarm company in 1994.
In yet another sign that U.S. utilities are branching out far beyond their traditional markets, PacifiCorp and Protection One Inc on Friday announced a marketing alliance aimed at boosting customer loyalty in an increasingly competitive industry.
Under the venture, customers of PacifiCorp subsidiaries Pacific Power and Utah Power will be offered a security system from regional alarm company Protection One.
The unusual alliance is viewed as the first of many creative ventures in an uncertain era of deregulation.  
"This is the start of what is going to happen all over the place.  It's a whole new business that will coattail on the aggressive nature utilities are starting to take.  One-stop shopping is becoming key from a marketing position," said Ron Chebra, manager of utilities and energy industries at AT&amp;T Solutions.
Utilities are becoming increasingly attracted to security companies as they prepare to enter new markets that previously had been off-limits due to federal regulations.  In recent months, utilities have bought security firms or made large investments in them.  
"We're looking for new products and services that we can bring to our customer base as a way to build loyalty and ultimately build preference with our residential customers," said Rene Carroll, consumer products manager at PacifCorp.
"We've been looking at different ways of entering the home security business for over a year," she added.
The alliance will give Protection One instant access to the 1.4 million customers served by the PacifiCorp subsidiaries and extend its reach to Utah.  Previously, the regional security firm served six western states.  
At a recent conference on mergers in the security industry, Protection One officials declined to discuss potential revenue from the alliance but noted that capturing even five percent of PacifiCorp customers would be significant.  Customers accepting the offer will receive free installation of a home security system with the purchase of a two-year agreement for monitoring services.
The security system's alarm panel also will hold thermostat and lighting controls and remote access.
The alliance is expected to be just the first step for Protection One, which is trying to take advantage of new opportunities that are emerging from deregulation of the utilities and telecommunications industries.  "We think this is the first of quite a few announcements we'll be making in the next 12 months or so," Protection One chief financial officer John Hesse told Reuters at the security conference.
The alliance re-establishes a link between the two companies that was dissolved several years ago.  Protection One began as a subsidiary of PacifiCorp in 1988, but the alarm company split off in a management buyout three years later. Protection One then became a publicly-traded alarm company in 1994.
Rite Aid Corp said it plans to swiftly integrate Thrifty PayLess Inc into its already-powerful company by attacking weaknesses in the regional drugstore chain's distribution and technology.
"To make this acquisition work, we have to reduce costs and we have to reduce costs rapidly," Rite Aid chief executive officer Martin Grass told more than 250 investors and analysts in a conference call.
In the latest drugstore merger to sweep the industry, Rite Aid announced plans to buy Thrifty PayLess for $1.4 billion.  
U.S. drugstores are consolidating at a feverish pace as the result of pricing pressures and costly computer upgrades that are essential in today's world of managed healthcare.
Industry analysts said Thrifty PayLess has been plagued by a weak distribution system and inefficient technology.
"It is our belief that our technology is a lot more sophisticated than what is being used at Thrifty PayLess and that there are significant benefits that we can bring -- not only to the store operations, but also to the customers," Grass said.  
Analysts expect Rite Aid to make significant progress reducing the Thrifty PayLess cost structure even though savings will not come from geographic overlap.  Rite Aid does not have any stores in Thirfty PayLess' West Coast markets.
"No one is as lean as Rite Aid," said Eric Bosshard of Midwest Research-Maxus Group.
But the proposed acquisition may create some new difficulties for Rite Aid, which typically has smaller stores and less varied merchandise than Thrifty PayLess.  Unlike Rite Aid, Thrifty PayLess sell plants, ice cream and shoes as well as traditional drugstore items.  
Concerns about Rite Aid's move into these new areas sent the company's stock down two to 33-7/8 in afternoon trade.
"This is something that is entirely outside their realm of experience.  That is a major question mark," said Joseph Ronning of Brown Brothers Harriman.
"These are completely different businesses.  These guys are general merchandisers," said Gary Vineberg of Merrill Lynch.
Grass addressed those issues in the conference call, saying that Rite Aid may add more merchandise experts to assess the different products.  
"There are certain lines of merchandise that we will continue to carry out West that we don't carry back East," Grass said.
Shares of Thrifty PayLess, which made its initial public offering in April at 14 per share, gained three to 21-3/8. Takeover stock traders said the deal values Thrifty PayLess at $23.32 per share.
The proposed acquisition of Thrifty PayLess seems to eliminate Rite Aid as a potential bidder for southeast drugstore chain Big B Inc.  Rite Aid has been viewed as a possible bidder for Big B, which is fighting a hostile takeover from Revco D.S. Inc.
But in announcing the Thrifty PayLess acquisition, Rite Aid also said that it is pulling out of Florida, Alabama and Georgia, which are Big B's key markets.
Shares of food and beverage giant PepsiCo Inc rose sharply Thursday on rumors that it could be a takeover target of Philip Morris Cos Inc.
Industry experts flatly dismissed the rumor, saying a pricetag on any potential transaction would be an astounding $60 to $80 billion.
Instead, they said the rumor, just the latest to surface about PepsiCo in recent months, underscores widespread dissatisfaction about the company's outlook.  
"I don't ever say no to anything, but I think this is a farfetched rumor," said Martin Romm of CS First Boston.
Officials from PepsiCo and Philip Morris declined to comment on the rumor, citing company policy.
But shares of PepsiCo, which have been active recently, jumped 1-3/8 to 30-1/2 and Philip Morris gained 1-1/8 to 97. Wall Street rumblings began earlier this week and the rumor picked up steam after a Thursday report in the New York Post.  
The New York Post cited a rumor on Wall Street that Philip Morris would offer $50 a share for PepsiCo.
The speculation of a deal with Philip Morris comes less than one month after PepsiCo announced a major plan to pull out of weak international beverage markets.
The restructuring, which called for a charge of more than $500 million against earnings, also included cost-cutting targets and continued focus on its Frito-Lay snack food unit.  
But Wall Street is disappointed with the company's indecision about its casual restaurant business, which has performed below expectations. PepsiCo said it is reviewing those operations and analysts widely expect the company to eventually sell the business.
In the meantime, earnings growth will rest heavily on the strong Frito-Lay division.  
"In 1997, a large (part of PepsiCo earnings) is going to be riding on the shoulders of Frito-Lay. Frito-Lay, in my opinion, has to deliver next year," said Skip Carpenter of Donaldson Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, who does not anticipate a major turnaround for the international beverage business until 1998 or 1999.
Analysts said PepsiCo reported third quarter earnings on Tuesday that met expectations, but failed to excite investors.
If PepsiCo sells the restaurant business as expected, the company may pour some of those proceeds into acquisitions to further beef up the solid snack food business, analysts said.  
Analysts also have dismissed recent rumors that PepsiCo would be interested in buying Starbucks Corp. They said a transaction between the two would likely dilute PepsiCo earnings and disappoint investors who want the company to exit the casual dining business.
Both companies declined to comment on the PepsiCo-Starbucks speculation. The two companies are in a joint venture for the production and sale of a cold coffee beverage called Frappucino.  
Philip Morris' huge product line includes Post breakfast cereals, Marlboro cigarettes and Kraft cheese.
Loewen Group Inc., the target of a $2.9 billion hostile bid by rival Service Corp. International is letting state authorities help mount its takeover defense.
So far, seven states, stretching from Hawaii to Pennsylvania, have launched antitrust investigations into the proposed transaction that would unite the two largest funeral service companies in North America, and Loewen has been quick to publicize their probes.
It is a defense strategy that has helped thwart other takeovers and mergers as states grow more more aggressive in challenging large transactions.
"The states are serious. Many of them have become quite knowledgable," said Dennis Yao, a former member of the Federal Trade Commission and now an antitrust expert at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.
But while state probes can certainly cause trouble for a friendly or hostile takeover, merger and antitrust experts said those investigations have rarely killed a deal.
"As a defense, it's got limited usage. It's hard to guarantee" that it will be effective, said Steven Wolitzer, co-head of mergers and acquisitions at Lehman Brothers.
Instead, the probes tend to be most successful when the states team up with federal agencies to fight a deal. In the Loewen case, the proposed transaction also is being investigated by a Canadian agency.
Early this year, state authorities were credited with helping to scuttle toymaker Mattel Inc.'s unsolicited bid for rival Hasbro Inc.
And, in April, state and federal complaints about antitrust implications of a friendly merger between drugstore giants Rite Aid Corp. and Revco D.S. Inc. led to the collapse of that deal.
States typically become involved in mergers that would impact consumers, such as in the retail or banking sectors.
Since rejecting Service Corp.'s bid, Loewen has used the state probes as part of its defense against the unwanted bid. Last Monday, Vancouver-based funeral services company announced that Pennsylvania was the latest state to launch an investigation of the proposed deal.
Pennsylvania officials said they had been unaware that Loewen had issued a news release about its probe.
"Loewen believes that the genie is out of the bottle in terms of government interest and there certainly is a precedent of attorney generals' looking at the situation and raising concerns, which ultimately derail those kinds of offers," said a spokesman for Loewen, adding that the company has been surprised by the level of state interest.
Loewen also has filed a federal antitrust lawsuit against Service Corp.
For its part, Service Corp. has rejected the antitrust argument and said that any potential problem could be resolved by divesting controversial properties.
Industry experts estimate a combined Service Corp-Loewen would hold a 10 percent market share in the highly fragmented industry.
Pennyslvania, California and New York are considered the most aggressive states in challenging mergers.
Pennsylvania has stepped up its merger probes since 1994 and so far has investigated 17 transactions this year compared with 13 in 1995 and far fewer in the merger boom of the 1980s, said Carl Hisiro, head of the antitrust section at the Pennsylvania attorney general's office.
Merger experts also said that state attention to big mergers typically intensifies in an election year, when officials are trying to convince voters that they are committed to protecting public interest.
Mobil Corp, widely credited with the most aggressive cost-cutting program of all U.S. oil companies, is not resting on its laurels.
The Fairfax, Va-based oil giant told analysts on Monday that it has implemented $760 million of cost savings so far this year as part of a $1.3 billion plan and expects the remaining $540 million to fall into place soon.
Furthermore, Mobil also expects to save at least another $300 million on an annualized basis by 1999 by streamlining purchases of everything from raw materials to computers.  
Mobil discussed cost-savings details after it posted a 10 percent decline in third quarter operating income due to a host of unfavorable conditions, including weak refining and marketing profits. A company spokesman confirmed the figures.
Industry analysts dismissed the earnings drop, saying Mobil's stock price had already reflected the poor industry fundamentals. Instead, Wall Street appeared more intrigued with the company's future cost-cutting plans.
"They have done an excellent job and I think they are determined to maintain the cost cutting," said Jack Aydin of McDonald &amp; Co Securities Inc.  
Some investors already have expressed concern about Mobil's ability to keep up its aggressive pace.
"People are wondering if they have squeezed everything out of the cost structure that they can and if their magic touch is over," said Smith Barney analyst James Falvey, who upgraded Mobil to a buy rating from outperform on Monday.
Chairman Lucio Noto sought to allay any concerns.
"Since we are in a very competitive industry that has significant price volatility, changes in the way we run our business are essential if we are to compete in the long term," Noto said in a news release about the company's earnings.  
Although Mobil is not expected to announce a major restructuring plan anytime soon, future savings are anticipated from purchasing and technology.
"Everybody has cut a lot of the fat and even some of the muscle," said John Parry, analyst at energy consulting firm John S. Herold Inc.
And Mobil is likely to soon start reaping benefits of its joint venture with British Petroleum Co Plc that calls for the merger of their downstream  operations in Europe.
The success of the joint venture will likely impact Mobil's plans for future savings as other firms also pursue similar pacts. Texaco Inc, Royal Dutch Shell Group and Star Enterprise are now exploring joining downstream operations. Star is a venture of Texaco and Saudi Arabia's state oil firm.
If other companies pursue such ventures and the BP pact is successful, analysts said Mobil eventually may seek a downstream partner in other parts of the world.
"I think the easy part of the cost cutting and restructuring has been announced. The key is going to be to remain on top of it," Aydin said.
CSX Corp may be hard-pressed to top an aggressive and pricey bid for Conrail Inc. unleashed Wednesday by rival Norfolk Southern Corp.
The Norfolk Southern $100-per-share offer came just eight days after CSX agreed to acquire Conrail in a cash and stock transaction valued at $8.4 billion, or about $92.50 per share.
"This (Norfolk Southern) bid comes without any regulatory risk, is all cash and is higher. So it's one-two-three - a knockout punch versus the old bid," said Anthony Hatch of NatWest Securities.  
At the very least, CSX will likely be forced to change its cash-and-stock offer to an all-cash bid if it wants to stay in the game, railroad and merger experts said.
"The Norfolk Southern bid is a very high bid. It's a rich premium and an attractive deal for Conrail shareholders. I don't know if CSX will be able to come up with an all-cash bid," said Carole Neely of Brown Brothers Harriman.
Norfolk Southern's bid did not completely surprise Wall Street because the Virginia-based railroad last week had expressed concern about the proposed CSX-Conrail transaction.
But some were startled by the nature of its offer.  
Norfolk Southern's bid aims to lure Conrail investors by offering immediate payment for their stock. It would then place the shares in a voting trust until the deal closes.
"The Norfolk Southern offer takes the risk away from (Conrail) shareholders. You've got to be impressed with that," said one takeover stock trader.
Under last week's Conrail-CSX agreement, Conrail shareholders would be required to authorize the tender of 40 percent of Conrail shares for placement in a voting trust. The rest of the shares would be exchanged for stock at a later date and would be subject to market fluctuations.  
Shares of Conrail, which said it will review the Norfolk Southern offer, soared 11-1/4 to 96.
The bid by Norfolk Southern represents its second attempt to buy the railroad that was formed by Congress in 1976 out of the remains of six bankrupt entities. Rumors about Norfolk Southern's interest in Conrail have surfaced on Wall Street periodically ever since it unsuccessfully tried to buy the railroad from the government in the 1980s.
"They're not usually very aggreesive from a financial point of view, but they've been keeping their balance sheet clean for a long time," Hatch said about Norfolk Southern.  
CSX and Norfolk Southern are eager to capture Conrail's valuable Northeast presence amid widespread industry consolidation.
Earlier this year, Union Pacific Corp bought Southern Pacific Rail Corp  for $3.9 billion after losing a fight for Santa Fe Pacific Corp, which was won by Burlington Northern Inc for $2.5 billion in 1995.
But unlike those acquisitions in which the target was viewed as a weak market player, Conrail is considered to be a much stronger railroad - a factor that could limit any potential cost savings or benefits to the successful bidder.
"Southern Pacific and Santa Fe were both not doing well and there was a lot of turnaround opportunity. Conrail is not sick. It's not a big turnaround situation and this is not a cheap price," said Cornelius Sewell of Argus Research.
The three-year-old partnership between British Airways Plc. and USAir Group Inc., already severely damaged by a potential competing alliance, moved closer toward collapse on Thursday when USAir said it was cancelling a key marketing agreement between the two carriers.
Arlington, Va.-based USAir said it will end the carriers' code-sharing agreement and sever the link between their frequent flier programmes as of March 29, 1997.
Code-sharing is a marketing agreement in which airlines share passengers and extend their reach to destinations they do not typically serve. Over the past several years, dozens of airlines have entered into such pacts.
In announcing the move, USAir cited the British carrier's proposed alliance with American Airlines, a unit of AMR Corp., that would link cargo and passenger services of the two powerhouse carriers.
USAir, which is 24.6 percent owned by British Airways, has fiercely opposed the British Airways-American partnership and sued both carriers, saying that they would dominate the trans-Atlantic market. A hearing on the suit is scheduled for Friday in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York.
"Clearly, it's difficult to simultaneously sue a partner and cooperate with a partner," said Samuel Buttrick of PaineWebber.
British Airways had no immediate comment on the action taken by USAir.
Although the relationship had certainly turned rocky, most analysts had expected USAir not to sever its relationship with the British carrier until the proposed British Airways-American pact was finalised.
The proposed alliance has raised antitrust concerns, awaits regulatory approvals and is tied to other aviation issues between the United States and Britain.
British Airways and American have argued that the deal would lead to greater competition on the routes because it would only go ahead if Britain and the United States agreed to a so-called "open skies" pact.
Although surprised by the move, industry analysts said it will have little impact on USAir, which received far less revenue from the alliance than did British Airways.
At the time the partnership began in 1993, USAir was a money-losing airline that desperately needed to reduce costs and expand its global presence.
British Airways invested $400 million under the partnership, but refused to pump any more money in the carrier because of its poor financial performance.
Since then, USAir's financial position has improved amid healthier times for the airline industry, but its costs are still higher than other major U.S. carriers.
"At the time the alliance was made, USAir received the cash which it needed, but today, it doesn't need it," said Glenn Engel of Goldman Sachs.
USAir's future plans are now more uncertain with the decision to sever ties with British Airways, especially because chief executive officer Stephen Wolf has stressed that he wants to expand USAir's transatlantic presence.
"I'm a little mystified. They don't have anything to replace it with yet," said Donaldson Lufkin &amp; Jenrette analyst James Higgins.
USAir Group Inc, determined to expand overseas, soon will be flying solo at a time when most of its competitors are entrenched in international alliances.
Industry experts said the Arlington, Va.-based airline will have a hard time finding a new partner to replace its passenger-sharing pact with British Airways Plc.
"USAir wants to duplicate something like the other major carriers have in Europe, but all the dance cards are already full," said one analyst who did not want to be identified.  
Over the past five years, cost-conscious airlines have struck marketing agreements with other carriers in order to extend their reach to new destinations that would be too expensive to serve on their own. Examples include links between Northwest Airlines Corp and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines NV and between UAL Corp and Deutsche Lufthansa AG.
On Thursday, USAir said it would terminate in March its passenger-sharing and frequent flier pact with British Airways due to the British carrier's proposed alliance with powerhouse AMR Corp.  
The move is expected to have little financial impact on USAir, which received far less revenue from the alliance than did British Airways.
Because most of the big carriers already have partners, analysts said USAir is likely to pursue international growth on its own for now.  It already is seeking the right to fly to London's coveted and restricted Heathrow Airport from several U.S. cities.
The desire for an expanded overseas role is also likely to prompt USAir to re-enter old markets, analysts said. It is best-known for its short-haul routes on the U.S. East Coast.  
"It may be that USAir may return to some of those areas," said John Steltzer, executive of airline consulting firm Worldwide Transportation Group Inc.
Although USAir has the highest cost structure of all major U.S. carriers, industry analysts said strong profit margins on long-haul flights would likely offset the expense associated with resuming service in some of those areas.
It also is likely to strike alliances with smaller European carriers that could transport passengers beyond any USAir destination.
"That would provide feed for their transatlantic operations, which they would need on that side of the ocean," said Raymond Neidl of Furman Selz.
In the longer term, however, many analysts remain convinced that USAir will need an extensive alliance or merger with another carrier.
French holding company CGIP said on Friday it could strike a deal in the next few weeks to acquire a 28 percent stake in automotive parts firm Valeo SA from Italian businessman Carlo De Benedetti.
In a meeting with reporters, CGIP chairman Ernest-Antoine Seilliere described negotiations as nearing a "momentum."
"In the coming weeks, we could come to a conclusion," he said. He said it would be a longterm investment for CGIP.
Seilliere declined to discuss a potential price for the stake owned by De Benedetti's holding company Cerus.  
CGIP's efforts to buy a piece of Valeo moved a step closer late Thursday, when it sold half of its 20 percent stake in Crown Cork &amp; Seal Co Inc for $560.6 million.
CGIP has said that profits from the sale would be used to finace the stake in Valeo.
"Now we have sold part of our assets, obviously we are seen as serious to buy Valeo, but we still have a way to go. We are serious about what we are doing," Seilliere said.
CGIP is a holding company with industrial and information technology investments.
Seilliere said the purchase of a stake in Valeo would fit its strategy to invest in firms that have a global presence. Seventy percent of Valeo's business is outside of France, he said.
He also dismissed the potential of Valeo falling prey to the cyclical nature of the autmotive business, saying that opportunities abound in growing economies around the world.
He noted that CGIP previously held a stake in Valeo and sold it in 1993. He also said that the company does not need any significant productivity or organizational changes.  
Although Seilliere appeared hopeful that a deal for the Valeo stake will be struck, he also said that CGIP would certainly consider another investment if the Valeo acquisition falls apart. He did not name any potential companies.
Regarding its stake in Crown Cork, which now totals 10.1 percent, Seilliere said CGIP's relationship with company had not been affected by the partial sale of its investment.
"Our team is still there. Nothing has changed," he said, noting that CGIP still has more than $600 million invested in the company.
CGIP decided to sell a portion of its Crown Cork &amp; Seal holdings after investors and analysts expressed concern that packaging had grown to 50 percent of CGIP's assets, up from about 21 percent in 1986, Seilliere said.
The three-year-old partnership between British Airways and USAir Group Inc, already severely damaged by a potential competing alliance, moved closer toward collapse on Thursday when USAir said it was cancelling a key marketing agreement between the two carriers.
Although surprised by the move, industry analysts said it will have little impact on USAir, which received far less revenue from the alliance than did British Airways.
British Airways still retains a 24.6 percent stake in Arlington, Va-based USAir.  
USAir said it would end its code-sharing pact and frequent flier programs with British Airways on March 29, 1997.
Code-sharing is a marketing agreement in which airlines share passengers and extend their reach to destinations they do not typically serve. Over the past several years, dozens of world airlines have entered into such pacts.
The USAir move cames amid increasing hostility between it and its British partner. British Airways earlier this year announced plans to form a massive alliance with powerhouse AMR, parent of American Airlines Inc.  
The move infuriated USAir, which promptly sued the two carriers and contended that their planned pact would undermine the USAir-British Airways partnership.
Although the relationship had certainly turned rocky, most analysts had not expected USAir to sever the tie until the proposed British Airways-AMR pact was finalized. That proposed alliance has raised antitrust concerns, awaits regulatory approvals and is linked to other aviation issues.
"Clearly, it's difficult to simultaneously sue a partner and cooperate with a partner," said Samuel Buttrick of PaineWebber.  
British Airways said in London that it would continue to work with USAir until the pact is terminated.
At the time the partnership began in 1993, USAir was a money-losing airline that desperately needed to reduce costs and expand its global presence. British Airways invested $400 million under the partnership, but refused to pump any more money in the carrier because of its poor financial performance.
Since then, USAir's financial position has improved amid healthier times for the airline industry, but its costs are still higher than other major U.S. carriers.
"At the time the alliance was made, USAir received the cash which it needed, but today, it doesn't need it," said Glenn Engel of Goldman Sachs.
USAir's future plans are now more uncertain with the decision to sever ties with British Airways, especially because chief executive officer Stephen Wolf has stressed that he wants to expand USAir's transatlantic presence.
"I'm a little mystified. They don't have anything to replace it with yet," said Donaldson Lufkin &amp; Jenrette analyst James Higgins.
Drugstore giant Revco D.S. Inc. said Monday it agreed to buy regional chain Big B Inc. in a sweetened takeover valued at $380 million.
The transaction calls for Twinsburg, Ohio-based Revco to buy all outstanding shares of Big B common stock for $17.25 per share, up from Revco's unsolicited offer of $15 per share, which Big B rejected last month.
"We are very excited about the combination of Revco and Big B. I am pleased we were able to bring this process to a fast and successful conclusion," said Dwayne Hoven, president and chief executive officer of Revco.
The deal will combine the nation's second- and 10th-largest drug store chains.
The companies said Big B's board of directors unanimously approved the latest offer and recommended that Big B shareholders tender their shares.
The sale of Bessemer, Ala.-based Big B marks the latest acquisition in the rapidly consolidating drugstore industry. Rite Aid Corp. signed an agreement this month to buy West Coast chain Thrifty PayLess Inc. for $1.4 billion, and Thrift Drug Inc., a unit of J.C. Penney Co. Inc., agreed in August to buy Fay's Inc. for about $285 million.
Although Big B rejected the initial offer, its stock recently had been trading at about $16 per share on views that the company would be sold for more than Revco's original $15 per share offer.
Revco's stock traded up 12.5 cents at $29.50 a share on the New York Stock Exchange. Big B's shares were at $17, up 43.75 cents, in afternoon trading on Nasdaq.
"With Revco's financial resources, technological expertise and marketing and sales capability, we can together grow our combined company's customer base and increase our sales potential. Among other efficiencies, this combination will allow the combined company to spread costs over a larger base of stores," Hoven said.
Big B said it will work with Revco to ensure a smooth transition.
Like many other regional drugstore chains, Big B has been fighting problems that have accompanied the burgeoning clout of managed health care companies and huge discount retailers. It has been hurt by deteriorating profit margins and sales and its earnings have disappointed Wall Street.
Industry experts say Revco is well-placed to capture profits in the Southeast by taking advantage of Big B's underused distribution centre and closing overlapping stores in Georgia.
"Revco will be able to integrate Big B really quickly," said Eric Bosshard of Midwest Research-Maxus Group.
Big B's profit margins began to tumble last year due to difficulty in calculating the impact of lower prescription prices paid by managed care providers. Although it invested heaviliy in a new computer system to better track profit margins, people familiar with the company have said its newly expanded distribution centre is operating at only 60 percent of capacity.
Analysts said one of Revco's first steps will be to assess store overlap, especially in Georgia, where Revco operates 180 stores and Big B has 160 stores.
"Once they get the distribution and the stores together, it will be a real profit centre for Revco," said John Strauss, of investment advisory firm Strauss Financial Group.
Revco also said it will revise and extend its tender offer for Big B shares until Nov 15. The offer had been set to expire Monday.
The two companies also said all litigation between them will be withdrawn.
After some haggling about terms, Revco earlier this month signed a confidentiality agreement with Big B, took a peek at its books and apparently liked what it saw.
The Big B board met over the weekend and accepted the new and higher offer from Revco. Details of other offers were not immediately known, although Eckerd Corp. was viewed as a potential bidder.
Eckerd declined to comment.
Big B, Inc. operates 397 units throughout the Southeastern United States.
Revco operates 2,202 stores in 14 contiguous Midwestern, Southeastern and Eastern states.
The deal with Big B was seen as a significant acquisition for Revco, which earlier this year was involved in a failed transaction with Rite Aid. The two companies had signed a pact for Rite Aid to buy Revco for $1.8 billion, but the deal collapsed after regulators expressed concern that the union would raise consumer prices.
Revco D.S. Inc is expected to leverage its size and experience to overcome the host of problems that pushed regional drugstore chain Big B Inc into a deal with the Ohio-based drugstore giant.
Industry experts said Revco is well-placed to capture profits in the southeast by taking advantage of Big B's underused distribution center and closing overlapping stores in Georgia.
"Revco will be able to integrate Big B really quickly," said Eric Bosshard of Midwest Research-Maxus Group.  
The two companies on Monday said that Big B had accepted a sweetened acquisition offer from Revco in a cash transaction valued at $380 million, or $17.25 per share.
It is the latest in a string of recent acquisitions in the drugstore industry. Just two weeks ago, Rite Aid Corp agreed to buy West Coast-based Thrifty PayLess Inc for $1.4 billion.
Big B initially fought a takeover by Revco, rejecting its unsolicited bid of $15 per share last month and inviting interested parties to submit formal offers.  
Like many other regional drugstores, Big B was burdened by problems that have accompanied the burgeoning clout of managed health care and huge discount retailers.
Big B's profit margins began to tumble last year due to difficulty in calculating the impact of lower prescription prices paid by managed care providers. Although it invested heaviliy in a new computer system to better track profit margins, people familiar with the company have said its newly-expanded distribution center is operating at only 60 percent of capacity.  
One of its first steps will be to assess store overlap, especially in Georgia where Revco operates 180 stores and Big B has 160 stores.
"Once they get the distribution and the stores together, it will be a real profit center for Revco," said John Strauss of investment advisory firm Strauss Financial Group.
Revco has said that the acquisition will boost its earnings in the first year of the combination.
After some haggling about terms, Revco signed a confidentiality agreement, took a peek at Big B's books and apparently liked what it saw.  
The Big B board met over the weekend and accepted the new and higher offer from Revco. Details of other offers were not immediately known, although Eckerd Corp was viewed as a potential bidder.
Eckerd declined to comment.
Revco's expanded southeast presence is expected to lead to heightened competition with Eckerd, CVS, a unit of Melville Corp, and Thrift Drugs, a unit of J.C. Penney Co .
The deal with Big B was seen as a significant acquisition for Revco which earlier this year was involved in a failed transaction with Rite Aid. The two companies had signed a pact for Rite Aid to buy Revco for $1.8 billion, but the deal collapsed after regulators expressed concern that the union would raise consumer prices.
Billionaire investor Marvin Davis on Wednesday announced an $835 million bid for closely-held Carter-Wallace Inc., maker of Trojan condoms and Arrid deodorant.
Davis offered to buy outstanding stock of Carter-Wallace for $18 a share, reflecting a 50 percent premium over its recent trading price.
Carter-Wallace confirmed in a three-paragrpah statement that it received the offer, saying it would refer the bid to majority sharheolder The CPI Development Corp.
Shares of Carter-Wallace jumped $3.875 to $15.625 on NYSE, but remained below the $18 offer level due to market speculation that Carter-Wallace might be reluctant to sell.
"I think the board is going to be completely unreceptive to this," said one trader who specialises in takeover situations and spoke on condition he not be identified.
Based on Carter-Wallace's 46.39 million shares outstanding, the offer from the financier's Los Angeles-based Davis Companies was valued at $835 million.
Most traders gave the bid slim chance of succeeding because Carter-Wallace has previously expressed little interest in selling the company. Furthermore, insiders control about 82 percent of Carter-Wallace via common stock and a special class of shares.
"With all of that control, they can do a 'just say no defence'," said another stock arbitrager.
Carter-Wallace is dominated by members of the Hoyt family. Chief Executive Officer and Chairman Henry Hoyt Jr. is the son of the executive who took over management of the Carter Medicine Company in 1929. Family members hold other key positions.
Davis urged the company to consider its bid.
"While we recognise that controlling interest in the company's stock is held by the Hoyt family, we believe the company's board of directors will act responsibly and in the best interests of all the shareholders in considering our offer," Davis said in a news release.
Market sources speculated that Davis has been buying up shares of Carter-Wallace in recent weeks. A spokeswoman for Davis said he had a "material interest" in the company, but she declined to be specific.
The 70-year-old Davis is well-known on Wall Street for his corporate investments.
A former chairman of Paramount, he recently was one of several dissident shareholders of Mesa Inc. who tried to wrest control from oilman T. Boone Pickens. Pickens has since passed the baton to financier Richard Rainwater. The Davis spokeswoman said he is no longer involved with Mesa.
Davis also is developing a riverboat casino and entertainment centre in Boonville, Mo.
Carter-Wallace has long been viewed on Wall Street as an acquisition candidate. At the company's meeting in July, some shareholders criticised its low stock price but a shareholder proposal to consider a merger was rejected.
Just last month, Carter-Wallace named Ralph Levine to the position of president and chief operating officer of the company. Levine, who had been vice president, secretary and general counsel, was named to replace a retiring executive.
In 1994, the company ran into trouble when the federal Food and Drug Administration advised physicians to stop prescribing its Felbatol epilepsy drug due to links with a bone marrow disorder.
- Supermarket chain Food Lion Inc. said Thursday it will buy Tampa, Fla.-based Kash n' Karry Food Stores Inc. in a transaction valued at $341 million.
The two companies had been in talks for a transaction earlier this year, but dropped those discussions in August. It was not immediately known when talks resumed.
Under the agreement, Kash n' Karry shareholders will receive $26 per share in cash. The companies also said Food Lion will refinance $221 million of Kash n' Karry debt.
Supermarket chains have been gobbling each other up rapidly in a wave of industrywide consolidation.
The deal came one day after California-based grocery giant Safeway Inc. offered $2.3 billion for the 65.5 percent of supermarket chain Vons Cos. Inc  that it doesn't already own.
Earlier this year, Dutch group Ahold NV bought Massachusetts-based grocer Stop &amp; Shop Cos. for $1.8 billion.
Salisbury, N.C.-based Food Lion is a unit of Belgian retailer Delhaize.
Food Lion is one of the 10 largest U.S. supermarket chains with more than 1,100 stores in 14 states. Kash n' Karry has 100 food stores and other facilities in west central Florida.
Shares of both companies were halted for trading shortly before the market closed. Earlier, Food Lion shares were up 6.25 cents to $8.56 on Nasdaq and Kash n' Karry stock rose 25 cents to $24, also on Nasdaq.
"This agreement will enhance competition in west central Florida by putting the financial resources of Food Lion behind the Kash n' Karry name, enabling Kash n' Karry to position itself more effectively as a viable competitor with the area's major supermarket chains," said Tom Smith, chief executive officer of Food Lion.
Food Lion said it planned to invest up to $150 million to improve Kash n' Karry stores in the next four years, with funding expected to come from Kash n' Karry cash flow from operations.
"While allowing us to continue operating our stores under the Kash n' Karry banner, it gives us access to the capital we need to accelerate our store remodeling programme and grow our business," said Kash n' Karry Chairman Ronald Johnson.
The companies said the transaction will increase earnings per share for Food Lion and result in cost savings. They were not specific.
They also said the deal, which is expected to close by early 1997, has been been approved by Kash n' Karry's board of directors. The board will also recommend that Kash n' Karry shareholders support the merger.
Institutional investors who together own more than 51 percent of Kash n' Karry common stock also support the deal, the companies said.
Food Lion said it has received a commitment from Chase Manhattan Bank to arrange and syndicate a new credit facility that will replace Food Lion's current borrowing facility and provide financing for the deal.
PaineWebber Inc. submitted a fairness opinion to Kash n' Karry's board and is acting as financial advisor to Kash n' Karry in connection with the transaction.
The U.S. food industry, besieged by years of slow growth, wants to whip up new business from people who don't cook.
Armed with a new study that predicts consumer spending on ready-made foods will accelerate in the next 10 years, food firms are reaching out to a generation that doesn't know the difference between baking powder and baking soda.  
"Consumers aren't looking anymore for a cake mix.  They want the slice of cake," said John Gray, executive director of the International Foodservice Distributors Association, which helped fund the study released this week.
Industry executives this week said they are developing fresh strategies to feed 18-to-24 year olds -- a generation that grew up with working mothers and microwave ovens.
"Cooking from scratch is diminishing: many consumers in 2005 will never have cooked a meal from basic ingredients," said the study by consulting firm McKinsey &amp; Co Inc titled "Foodservice 2005: Satisfying America's Changing Appetite."  
The study confirms trends that food manufacturers and food distributors already are seeing: harried consumers bypass the fresh meat and spice aisles of a supermarket in favor of sections selling barbecued chicken and ready-made salad.
The study projects the food industry will grow 1.6 percent per year to nearly $800 billion a year by 2005.  The foodservice sector is expected to capture nearly all of the anticipated incremental sales, pegged at $100 billion.  
"There is going to be a whole new plethora of different foodservice opportunities," said William Eacho, president and chief executive officer of  Atlantic Food Services, a Virginia-based foodservice distribution company.
Tomorrow's supermarkets are expected to have drive-up windows where consumers can buy ready-made meals.
Executives also envision stores that group food by meal categories so that shoppers can head right to the breakfast aisle instead of wandering throughout the store.  
The changes are expected to be especially challenging for food manufacturers, who may see shelf space for their products shrink as stores provide more ready-made products.
Nabisco Holdings Corp already is experimenting with ways to ensure its products are not lost in the shuffle.  The maker of items such as Oreo cookies and Grey Poupon mustard wants to leverage its brand popularity into ready-made meals.
"As a major food manufacturer, we ought to have our fair share of that growth," said Henry Lambert, president of Nabisco's food service company.  
That may mean developing a Grey Poupon-based sandwich spread for supermarket sandwiches or working with a dessert manufacturer to sell individual slices of cheesecake that contain Oreo cookies, Lambert said.
And demand for those kinds of products is expected to grow as consumers spend less time preparing meals.  Industry experts estimate people now spend about 20 minutes preparing a meal versus two hours of preparation time about 50 years ago.
"The meal is not the social setting of the evening anymore. It's a nuisance," said Robert Stauth, chairman and chief executive officer of food distributor Fleming Cos Inc.
Investor Carl Icahn resumed his campaign to break up RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. Monday by moninating a slate of directors he wants to replace the existing board members.
Icahn, who holds a 7.3 percent stake in RJR, named his intended nominees to RJR's board in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
In a letter to RJR Chairman Steven Goldstone that was attached to the SEC filing, Icahn reiterated his request that RJR spin off its Nabisco Holdings Corp. unit immediately.
Icahn, who began a campaign to split up RJR last year, said in his letter that the company's stock price had lost more than 20 percent recently while the company has lost market share to rival Philip Morris Cos. Inc.
RJR Nabisco Holdings said in response to Icahn that the slate of directors he submitted was weaker than the one assembled last year by Icahn and fellow investor Bennett LeBow, who had teamed up for a while in an effort to separate RJR's tobacco operations from its food businesses.
"Mr. Icahn's slate appears for the most part to be a group of lawyers, consultants and retired people with records that will not withstand scrutiny," RJR said in a statement.
RJR, which owns 80.5 percent of Nabisco, repeated that it favored a spin-off of the food unit but said this is not the right time to split up the company.
"We plan to do it when a spinoff will not endanger the company," RJR said. "But an attempt to spin off Nabisco in the current political and legal environment could do serious damage to the company, the tobacco industry and our shareholders," it added.
Icahn said in his letter that his proposed slate of directors will be headed by Thomas Rattigan, former chief executive officer of PepsiCo Bottling International and former chairman of G. Heileman Brewing Co.
"The management hasn't demonstrated that they're doing anything better than they were doing last year, so why not try again?" Rattigan said in a telephone interview.
Rattigan said the nominated directors intend to pursue a global settlement of tobacco litigation claims. He was not specific about those plans, but said any global settlement must be an industrywide effort.
"It's in the interest of everybody that some sort of global settlement be undertaken to permit these companies to get on with their corporate existence and do what they should be doing," Rattigan said.
In the letter to Goldstone, Icahn also said that the board nominees would raise the company's annual dividend to $2 per share and maintain that rate after the spin-off of Nabisco.
RJR raised its annual dividend last March to $1.85 per share from $1.50.
According to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Rattigan was hired by Icahn as a consultant on Nov. 1 for $2 million.
Icahn and LeBow failed earlier this year in a similar attempt to force a spin-off of the tobacco unit.
Icahn and LeBow split up after their defeat last year, although both said they would continue to individually press for an immediate spinoff.
Shares of RJR closed up 25 cents at $29.25 on the New York Stock Exchange.
CSX Corp. and Norfolk Southern Corp. said Monday they had entered discussions about their rival offers to buy Conrail Inc.
The two railroads did not disclose the specific nature of their talks, but Conrail's stock fell on views that the discussions would dampen the prospects of a bidding war for the Philadelphia-based railroad.
A source familiar with the companies said the discussions began late last week, continued through the weekend and into Monday.
Richmond, Va.-based CSX last month struck an agreement to buy Conrail in a $8.4 billion cash and stock transaction that valued Conrail at $92.50 per share. Norfolk Southern soon launched its own bid of $100 cash per share, or about $9 billion.
Since then, the two companies have been locked in a fight over their rival offers and taken the matter to court.
CSX, which said Norfolk Southern initiated the talks, said the discussions concerned "a possible sale by the post-merger CSX/Conrail of certain material assets."
Meanwhile, Norfolk Southern sought to quell speculation that it would abandon its bid for Conrail, saying that it was committed to its offer and has secured more than $15 billion to finance the proposed acquisition.
Norfolk Southern said the talks were started by CSX, adding that they were aimed at promoting competition.
"Our willingness to talk to CSX at its suggestion is consistent with my previously announced position that Conrail cannot be acquired by either CSX or NS without a plan to maintain a balanced competitive structure for Eastern railroad service. While I am heartened by CSX's willingness to discuss these matters, we have no reason to believe that Conrail is prepared to accept that reality," said Norfolk Southern Chief Executive Officer David Goode.
A battle for Conrail is viewed as being rife with difficulties for all the companies. Although Norfolk Southern has a higher offer on the table, analysts have said that Pennsylvania's corporate takeover law could be an obstacle to its proposed acquisition.
"This is not a good time to be having a long, drawn-out fight. The quicker they get to this, the better," said analyst Anthony Hatch of NatWest Securities.
Conrail shares had partly recovered from the early steep fall by late afternoon, trading down $1.50 per share at $93.75 on NYSE. CSX rose $1.50 to $44.50 and Norfolk Southern gained $1.375 to $90.75, also on the NYSE.
The executive tapped to lead a a dissident slate of directors in a proxy fight against RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp said the current management has shown little progress in solving the company's problems.
"The management hasn't demonstrated that they're doing anything better than they were doing last year, so why not try again?" said Tom Rattigan, who was nominated to the slate Monday by investor Carl Icahn.
Last year's similar effort by Icahn and investor Bennett LeBow was overwhelmingly defeated by shareholders.  
As of October 25, Icahn held a 7.3 percent stake in RJR.
The dissident slate supports an immediate spinoff of RJR's 80.5 percent owned Nabisco Holdings Corp food business.
RJR insists it also wants to spin off Nabisco, but says this is not an appropriate time to split up the company.
Rattigan told Reuters in a telephone interview that he began speaking with Icahn several months ago about a potential role and signed up with the investor on November 1.
"It appears to be an opportunity to get in and play a role at a company that seems to be having some major league problems," he said. Shares of RJR closed up 1/4 at 29-1/4.  
A former top executive at PepsiCo Bottling International and G. Heileman Brewing Co, Rattigan dismissed RJR's criticism that the slate does not contain any tobacco industry experts.
"Based on (RJR's) performance to date, I think that's good news," Rattigan said.
Rattigan said the slate intends to pursue a global settlement of tobacoo litigation claims. He was not specific about those plans, but said any global settlement must be an industry-wide effort.  
"It's in the interest of everybody that some sort of global settlement be undertaken to permit these companies to get on with their corporate existence and do what they should be doing," Rattigan said.
In a letter to RJR chief executive officer Steven Goldstone, Icahn also said the board nominees would raise the company's annual dividend to $2 per share and maintain that rate after the spinoff of Nabisco. RJR raised its annual dividend last March to $1.85 per share from $1.50.
According to a filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Rattigan was hired by Icahn's as a consultant on November 1 for $2 million.
Icahn noted in the letter to Goldstone that he will pay the expenses of the proxy fight and vowed not to enter into any agreement, merger or understanding at the company if the new board takes control.
CSX Corp. and Norfolk Southern Corp. said Monday they had entered discussions about their rival offers to buy Conrail Inc.
The two railroads did not disclose the specific nature of their talks, but Conrail's stock fell on views that the discussions would dampen the prospects of a bidding war for the Philadelphia-based railroad.
A source familiar with the companies said the discussions began late last week, continued through the weekend and into Monday.
Richmond, Va.-based CSX last month struck an agreement to buy Conrail in a $8.4 billion cash and stock transaction that valued Conrail at $92.50 per share. Norfolk Southern soon launched its own bid of $100 cash per share, or about $9 billion.
Since then, the two companies have been locked in a fight over their rival offers and taken the matter to court.
CSX, which said Norfolk Southern initiated the talks, said the discussions concerned "a possible sale by the post-merger CSX/Conrail of certain material assets."
Meanwhile, Norfolk Southern sought to quell speculation that it would abandon its bid for Conrail, saying that it was committed to its offer and has secured more than $15 billion to finance the proposed acquisition.
Norfolk Southern said the talks were started by CSX, adding that they were aimed at promoting competition.
"Our willingness to talk to CSX at its suggestion is consistent with my previously announced position that Conrail cannot be acquired by either CSX or NS without a plan to maintain a balanced competitive structure for Eastern railroad service. While I am heartened by CSX's willingness to discuss these matters, we have no reason to believe that Conrail is prepared to accept that reality," said Norfolk Southern Chief Executive Officer David Goode (corrects from Dean Goode).
A battle for Conrail is viewed as being rife with difficulties for all the companies. Although Norfolk Southern has a higher offer on the table, analysts have said that Pennsylvania's corporate takeover law could be an obstacle to its proposed acquisition.
"This is not a good time to be having a long, drawn-out fight. The quicker they get to this, the better," said analyst Anthony Hatch of NatWest Securities.
Conrail shares had partly recovered from the early steep fall by afternoon, trading down $2 per share at $92.25 on NYSE. CSX rose $1.625 to $44.625 and Norfolk Southern gained $1.125 to $90.50, also on the NYSE.
One day after rival bidders sent its stock on a rollercoaster ride, Conrail Inc was set Tuesday to formally consider a $9 billion takeover offer from Norfolk Southern Corp.
The company's board of directors was widely expected to reject the unsolicited Norfolk Southern offer in favor of a friendly $8.4 billion deal with CSX Corp.
"My guess is, at this point, that they stick with the CSX proposal," said Brian Routledge of Prudential Securities .  
Conrail's board was slated to meet Tuesday ahead of a Wednesday deadline to respond to the Norfolk Southern offer.
A Conrail spokesman declined to comment on the timing of its decision, but Wall Street experts expected the company to issue an announcement on Wednesday.
Conrail agreed on Oct. 15 to be bought by CSX in a cash and stock transaction valued at $8.4 billion, or $92.50 per share. Norfolk launched its $100-per-share bid on Oct. 23.
Since then, Norfolk Southern and CSX have vehemently attacked each other's offers and landed in court.  
The CSX-Norfolk Southern relationship between took a new twist Monday when the companies announced they were holding discussions about their bids, but offered conflicting accounts about the talks. Uncertainty about those talks prompted sharp stock declines on Monday.
Industry experts said Conrail is likely to defend the lower CSX bid by citing the strategic benefits of the transaction and the lack of potential legal problems associated with the friendly deal. Legal expoerts have said that Pennsylvania takeover law could impede a Norfolk Southern acquisition of Conrail.  
Experts also speculated that Conrail may try to convince CSX to sweeten its offer in an attempt to appease shareholders who may be upset by the rejection of a higher bid.
Railroad industry experts have said that CSX likely cannot afford to match Norfolk Southern's $100 cash offer, but may be able to restructure the bid to increase the cash portion of the transaction.
"I think it is a strong likelihood that any positive reaction from Conrail's bid toward the Norfok Southern bid will force CSX to sweeten their bid," said Carole Neely of Brown Brothers Harriman.
Conrail Inc. Wednesday revised its takeover agreement with CSX Corp. to give shareholders more cash in the proposed railroad merger valued at nearly $8.5 billion.
The new terms immediately drew fire from investors who said the value of the cash-and-stock deal remained well below that of the rejected offer from unwelcome bidder, Norfolk Southern Corp.
Philadelphia-based Conrail, which announced its original offer on Oct. 15, said its board had considered the merits of the rival bids and reaffirmed that a merger with CSX was a superior strategic combination, despite the higher offer from Norfolk Southern.
"Our two companies have now agreed to significantly increase the value to be received by the Conrail shareholders, and Conrail's other constituencies will continue to get tremendous benefits resulting from the CSX merger," Conrail Chairman David LeVan said in a statement.
A source close to the companies said the Conrail board met until late Tuesday night and the two companies then hammered out the new agreement in the early morning hours of Wednesday.
A merger of CSX and Conrail would create one of the largest transportation companies in the world, including a rail system with some 29,000 miles (47,000 km) of track in 22 eastern states.
Under the revised offer, Richmond, Va.-based CSX will pay $110 cash per share for 40 percent of Conrail shares instead of the previous amount of $92.50. The remaining 60 percent will be exchanged at the original ratio of 1.85619 CSX shares for each Conrail share.
Based on CSX's current stock price, the deal values Conrail shares at about $93 each, or $8.46 billion compared with the original pact of $8.42 billion, market sources said.
Norfolk Southern has offered to pay $100 a share in cash, or $9.1 billion, for all of Conrail's outstanding shares.
CSX Chairman John Snow said the company's decision to raise its cash offer followed an analysis that identified at least $730 million in cost savings in a CSX-Conrail combination -- $180 million more than originally anticipated.
"Clearly, the combination of CSX and Conrail provides the best overall package of benefits to our constituencies, including customers, the communities we serve, and the public-at-large," Snow said.
But Conrail stockholders expressed opposition to the deal in a conference call with investors and Wall Street analysts. They said the new terms effectively offset recent erosion in CSX's stock price and do not significantly raise the value of the transaction.
"Some of the shareholders were really angry and said this was being crammed down their throats," said one expert on takeovers who listened to the conference call.
Other sources who participated in the call said several investors threatened to tender their shares for $110 and then vote against the proposed merger.
In addition to the price of the CSX deal, investors were also unhappy with a three-month extension of the time in which Conrail is locked into the deal. The revised pact says Conrail cannot withdraw or agree to a competing bid before July 12.
"It's an outrage. This thing is now locked up tighter than ever," said another participant.
Norfolk Southern, meanwhile, reaffirmed its offer and said it was reviewing its options.
Wall Street analysts said they expect Norfolk to raise its bid for Conrail in an effort to ignite more shareholder unrest with the proposed Conrail-CSX merger.
They speculated that Norfolk Southern could raise its $100 per share bid by as much as 10 percent without hurting its balance sheet or the benefits of a merger.
"If they raise their bid, it will be the icing on the cake. It will take a bid that is superior and widen the gap further," said Carole Neely of Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Co.
"I think the price is getting rich, but I think there is at least a 50-50 chance they come back at least one more time," said Brian Routledge of Prudential Securities.
In addition to the new terms, Conrail also canceled its shareholders' meeting scheduled for Nov. 14 and said a new meeting would be held in mid-December.
It also said that, under the amended terms, CSX's tender offer's expiration date and withdrawal and proration rights were extended until midnight Nov. 20.
Norfolk Southern Corp is widely expected to raise its $9.1 billion offer for Conrail Inc in an attempt to ignite shareholder unrest over the company's acceptance of a lower offer from CSX Corp.
Industry analysts speculate that Norfolk Southern could raise its $100 per share bid by as much 10 percent without diluting its balance sheet or the benefits of a merger.
"If they raise their bid, it will put the icing on the cake. It will take a bid that is superior and widen the gap further," said Carole Neely of Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Co.  
Conrail and CSX earlier revised their October merger pact to increase the amount of cash in the transaction.
Shareholders reacted angrily to the new transaction, which effectively offsets recent stock erosion and does not significantly raise the value of the transaction.
Based on the new terms, the Conrail-CSX transaction values shares of Conrail at about $8.463 billion, or $93 per share, versus an original value of $8.418 billion, or $92.50.
Wall Street analysts said Norfolk Southern, which has long pursued Conrail, will likely seek to capitalize on the shareholder dissatisfaction.  
"I do believe we will, in very short order, hear something from Norfolk Southern," said Renee Johansen of Wheat First Butch Singer.
In addition to revising its pact with CSX, Conrail formally rejected Norfolk Southern's cash bid. The CSX-Conrail agreement calls for a cash and stock transaction.
Norfolk Southern could not immediately be reached for comment on the speculation it will raise the bid. However, the company said it plans to review its options and called the CSX-Conrail pact inferior to its offer.  
"I think the price is getting rich, but I think there is at least a 50-50 chance (Norfolk Southern) comes back at least one more time," said Brian Routledge of Prudential Securities.
They also said the dissatisfaction with the new deal was not limited to traders of takeover stocks.
"I've heard similar complaints from everybody," said one analyst who did not want to be identified, referring to large institutional holders of Conrail shares.
But experts also noted a higher bid from Norfolk Southern may still not be enough to wrest the railraod from the grasp of CSX.  
Instead, Conrail's future track may be determined by a federal judge in Philadelphia who is slated to hold a November 12 hearing on a Norfolk Southern lawsuit that contends the Conrail-CSX pact is illegal.
Pennsylvania corporate law, which allows a company's board to act in the interests of groups other than shareholders, is viewed as an obstacle to Norfolk Southern's efforts to buy Conrail.
"I think the court is going to play a big role," Johansen said.
Indeed, concern about the Pennsylvania law were viewed as contributing to a decline in Norfolk Southern shares on Wendesday. The company's stock fell two to 87-1/8.
"People know it's the higher bid, but historically speaking, in most of the cases, hostile deals in the rail sector don't make it," Neely said.
Shareholders of Conrail Inc blasted the company's revised merger pact with CSX Corp, charging that the new terms fall short of a rival bid launched by Norfolk Southern Corp.
In a conference call with Conrail, several investors also threatened to tender their shares for $110 and then vote against the proposed merger, according to market sources who participated in the call.
"Some of the shareholders were really angry and said this was being crammed down their throats," said an arbitrager.  
Conrail earlier announced that it was amending the proposed merger agreement with CSX to reflect a premium in the cash portion of the transaction. Under the new terms, CSX will pay $110 cash per share for 40 percent of Conrail shares instead of the previous amount of $92.50.
The remaining 60 percent will be exchanged at the original ratio of 1.85619 CSX shares for each Conrail share.
Based on CSX's current stock price, the deal values Conrail shares at about $93, market sources said.
Norfolk Southern has offered to pay $100 cash per share for all of Conrail's outstanding shares.  
Investors also were unhappy with a three-month extension of the time in which Conrail is locked into the deal. The revised pact says the Conrail board cannot withdraw from the pact or agree to a competing transaction before July 12, 1997.
"It's an outrage. This thing is now locked up tighter than ever," said another arbitrager.
Conrail defended the revised transaction by saying it provides more strategic benefits than the offer proposed by Norfolk Southern, said people who listened to the call.
In a move that had been widely expected, Conrail also earlier formally rejected the Norfolk Southern offer.  
A source familiar with the companies involved said the Conrail board met until late Tuesday night and then hammered out the revised pact with CSX in the early morning hours of Wednesday.
Shares of CSX fell 1 to 43 amid broad market gains. Conrail stock rose 1-3/4 to 94 and Norfolk Southern shares fell 7/8 to 88-1/4.
Meanwhile, Norfolk Southern described the new CSX offer as "significantly inferior" to its proposal and reaffirmed its bid of $100 per share.
Fast-growing Republic Industries Inc., which is led by Florida entrepreneur Wayne Huizenga, said Thursday it would buy Alamo-Rent-A-Car Inc. for $625 million in a move to sharply expand its automobile business.
The deal comes less than six weeks after the collapse of Huizenga's $4.3 billion plan to buy security firm ADT Ltd.
"Leisure travel is a fast growing segment of the automobile rental industry and Alamo's innovative leadership in this growth sector of the automobile rental marketplace is consistent with our strategy of building consumer-oriented, service related businesses with recognised brand names and strong management," Huizenga said in a statement.
Republic is expected to use Alamo to expand its burgeoning auto business rooted in used-car company AutoNation USA.
Huizenga "wants to be the largest used-car sales, leasing and rental provider. It makes sense to have the Alamo fleet as a warehouse for his vehicles," said Andrew Jeffrey, analyst at Robertson Stephens &amp; Co.
Alamo is the fourth-largest rental car company in the United States, with a fleet of about 130,000 vehicles. Alamo operates in 42 states in the United States and has operations in 10 European countries and Canada.
Alamo founder and Chairman Michael Egan, who owns about 94 percent of the company, will continue as chairman of Alamo.
Huizenga said Republic's AutoNation USA car business will benefit from Alamo's strong relationships with manufacturers and other automotive suppliers.
"The combination of Alamo with Republic's 'like-new' automobile retailing concept is an exceptional fit that will enable AutoNation USA to accelerate its business plan and create a unique, dedicated and predictable source of inventory for our megastore distribution system," he said.
Republic bought used-car company AutoNation earlier this year and opened its first superstore about two weeks ago in Florida. It plans to open three or four more AutoNation stores this year and quickly expand the chain so there are some 80 stores around the nation by the end of the decade.
AutoNation will be supplemented by Republic's recent $95 million purchase of used-car superstore firm CarChoice Inc.
Investors praised the latest acquisition by Republic, bidding the company's stock up $2.875 to $33.625 on Nasdaq. The deal will be accounted for as a pooling of interests.
In addition to the automotive industry, Republic specialises in electronic security and solid waste companies. Huizenga also owns the professional Florida Marlins baseball, Panthers hockey and Dolphins football teams.
Huizenga suffered a setback in late September when his plan to buy security firm ADT was called off after weeks of uncertainty. Although the stock deal was viewed positively from a strategic standpoint, it fell apart due to volatility in Republic's stock and the inability of the companies to revise terms of the transaction.
Analysts saw little chance of that happening with Alamo.
"I think Alamo provides Republic everything that ADT did, plus more, from the auto side," said Jordan Hymowitz of Montgomery Securities, who rates Republic shares as a buy.
Republic also said it will pursue more car deals.
"We're interested in growing in virtually every segment of the automobile industry," spokesman Ronald Castell said, citing rental, used cars, repairs and financing.
The acquisition of Alamo marks the latest in a flurry of transactions in the rental car industry.
On Wednesday, ADT said it planned to sell its U.S. auto-auction business, ADT Automotive. The unit is the nation's second-largest automobile auction company, and its sale would mark ADT's complete exit from that business after it sold its European auto-auction unit last year.
Last month, hotel and real estate operator HFS Inc. bought Avis Inc., the world's second largest car rental company, for about $800 million. HFS has said it will pursue another similar acquisition and launch an initial public offering for part of its rental car subsidiary next year.
Ford Motor Co., which owns Hertz, in July announced it was expanding its rental car business with the acquisition of Budget Rent-a-Car. Ford already had owned part of Budget.
Meanwhile, Chrysler Corp. wants to sell subsidiaries Dollar Rent-A-Car and Thrifty Rent-A-Car.
Less than six weeks after the collpase of his deal to buy security firm ADT Ltd, Wayne Huizenga on Thursday shifted gears to rental cars.
The founder of Blockbuster Entertainment and owner of the Florida Marlins baseball team announced earlier that his Republic Industries Inc had signed a definitive pact to buy privately-held Alamo Rent-A-Car for $625 million.
The move is expected to catapult Republic's growing automotive business, which is rooted in used-car company AutoNation USA.
Conrail Inc. Wednesday revised its takeover agreement with CSX Corp. to give shareholders more cash in the proposed railroad merger valued at nearly $8.5 billion.
The new terms immediately drew fire from investors who said the value of the cash-and-stock deal remained well below that of the rejected offer from unwelcome bidder, Norfolk Southern Corp.
Philadelphia-based Conrail, which announced its original offer on Oct. 15, said its board had considered the merits of the rival bids and reaffirmed that a merger with CSX was a superior strategic combination, despite the higher offer from Norfolk Southern.
"Our two companies have now agreed to significantly increase the value to be received by the Conrail shareholders, and Conrail's other constituencies will continue to get tremendous benefits resulting from the CSX merger," Conrail Chairman David LeVan said in a statement.
A source close to the companies said the Conrail board met until late Tuesday night and the two companies then hammered out the new agreement in the early morning hours of Wednesday.
A merger of CSX and Conrail would create one of the largest transportation companies in the world, including a rail system with some 29,000 miles (47,000 km) of track in 22 eastern states.
Under the revised offer, Richmond, Va.-based CSX will pay $110 cash per share for 40 percent of Conrail shares instead of the previous amount of $92.50. The remaining 60 percent will be exchanged at the original ratio of 1.85619 CSX shares for each Conrail share.
Based on CSX's current stock price, the deal values Conrail shares at about $93 each, or $8.46 billion compared with the original pact of $8.42 billion, market sources said.
Norfolk Southern has offered to pay $100 a share in cash, or $9.1 billion, for all of Conrail's outstanding shares.
CSX Chairman John Snow said the company's decision to raise its cash offer followed an analysis that identified at least $730 million in cost savings in a CSX-Conrail combination -- $180 million more than originally anticipated.
"Clearly, the combination of CSX and Conrail provides the best overall package of benefits to our constituencies, including customers, the communities we serve, and the public-at-large," Snow said.
But Conrail stockholders expressed opposition to the deal in a conference call with investors and Wall Street analysts. They said the new terms effectively offset recent erosion in CSX's stock price and do not significantly raise the value of the transaction.
"Some of the shareholders were really angry and said this was being crammed down their throats," said one expert on takeovers who listened to the conference call.
Other sources who participated in the call said several investors threatened to tender their shares for $110 and then vote against the proposed merger.
In addition to the price of the CSX deal, investors were also unhappy with a three-month extension of the time in which Conrail is locked into the deal. The revised pact says Conrail cannot withdraw or agree to a competing bid before July 12.
"It's an outrage. This thing is now locked up tighter than ever," said another participant.
Norfolk Southern, meanwhile, reaffirmed its offer and said it was reviewing its options.
Wall Street analysts said they expect Norfolk to raise its bid for Conrail in an effort to ignite more shareholder unrest with the proposed Conrail-CSX merger.
They speculated that Norfolk Southern could raise its $100 per share bid by as much as 10 percent without hurting its balance sheet or the benefits of a merger.
"If they raise their bid, it will be the icing on the cake. It will take a bid that is superior and widen the gap further," said Carole Neely of Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Co.
"I think the price is getting rich, but I think there is at least a 50-50 chance they come back at least one more time," said Brian Routledge of Prudential Securities.
In addition to the new terms, Conrail also cancelled its shareholders' meeting scheduled for Nov. 14 and said a new meeting would be held in mid-December.
It also said that, under the amended terms, CSX's tender offer's expiration date and withdrawal and proration rights were extended until midnight Nov. 20.
The outcome of a bidding war for Conrail Inc is increasingly likely to be decided by its investors, who will ultimately determine if the railroad should strike an $8.5 billion deal with CSX Corp when a $10 billion offer is also on the table.
Wall Street experts said Conrail was unlikely to be swayed from its planned merger with CSX despite a higher bid lobbed Friday by Norfolk Southern. "Nothing has changed. I think a lot will depend on what happens with the shareholder vote," said Jeff Medford of William Blair &amp; Co.  
Conrail has agreed to a stock and cash transaction with CSX valued at about $8.5 billion. Norfolk Southern, which had already outbid CSX, earlier Friday sweetened its all-cash offer to $10 billion.
Shareholders are considered key to the Conrail-CSX transaction because Pennsylvania corporate law prohibits CSX from buying more than 20 percent of Conrail in a tender offer without their approval. A shareholder meeting is slated for mid-December.  
Some shareholders have expressed unhappiness with the proposed CSX transaction. Conrail "won't win the shareholder vote," predicted one arbitrager.
Arbitragers, who have been among the most vocal opponents of the Conrail-CSX deal, said that Norfolk Southern would further strengthen its position by aggressively urging  Conrail shareholders to defeat the CSX proposal.
"It's got to be like Bob Dole's marathon, but with a more successful conclusion," said one, referring to the 96-hour campaign blitz launched by the losing U.S. presidential candidate in the days before this week's election.  
Norfolk Southern chairman David Goode declined to be specific about the company's plans to woo shareholders.
"The numbers in our bid speak for themselves. It should be readily apparent that it's a superior offer. We're willing to talk to all of the constituencies involved, including shareholders and others who are interested in this, and we are doing that," he told Reuters in a telephone interview.
Conrail has said it will review the new Norfolk Southern offer, but the Philaelphia-based railroad also has defended the CSX transaction as a better strategic match.  
"We have high regard for Norfolk Southern and its board, but we simply do not believe that a sale of Conrail to Norfolk Southern is in the best interest of Conrail and its constituencies," Conrail wrote Norfolk Southern on Thursday before the bid was raised.
The new Norfolk Southern bid reflects an 18 percent premium over CSX's plan, which values Conrail at about $93 per share. Norfolk Southern has raised its bid to $110 per share.
Shares of Conrail rose 2-1/4 to 95-1/4 after the new bid.
Wall Street experts said Conrail and CSX, which already revised the terms of their transaction once, may feel pressured again to increase the portion of cash in their deal. However, most industry experts do not expect a revised bid to top the offer made by Norfolk Southern.
Raising the stakes in the escalating battle for Conrail Inc., Norfolk Southern Corp. on Friday sweetened its hostile bid for the railroad to $10 billion in cash.
Norfolk Southern's original offer of $9.1 billion was already higher than a proposed $8.5 billion transaction planned between Conrail and CSX Corp., but the new bid of $110 per share further widened the gap.
"Our increased offer demonstrates our total commitment to this combination," Norfolk Southern Chairman David Goode said in a statement.
Philadelphia-based Conrail said it would review the new offer, but noted that it previously had determined the union with CSX was a better fit.
On Wednesday, Richmond, Va.-based CSX and Conrail revised the terms of their planned cash and stock transaction to give shareholders more cash. The Conrail-CSX union values Conrail shares at about $93.
Shares of Conrail jumped $3.375 to $96.375 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Wall Street earlier this week had speculated that Norfolk Southern would raise its bid to as much as $110 per share in the hope of igniting unrest with Conrail shareholders, some of whom already have expressed dissatisfaction with the CSX deal.
Industry sources also said Conrail was unlikely to be swayed from its planned merger with CSX.
Instead, they said the outcome of the bidding war was increasingly likely to be decided by Conrail's shareholders, who will ultimately determine if the railroad should strike the $8.5 billion deal with CSX when there is a $10 billion offer on the table.
"Nothing has changed. I think a lot will depend on what happens with the shareholder vote," said Jeff Medford of William Blair &amp; Co.
Shareholders are considered key to the Conrail-CSX transaction because Pennsylvania corporate law prohibits CSX from buying more than 20 percent of Conrail shares in a tender offer without their approval. CSX is seeking to acquire 40 percent of Conrail shares in a cash tender offer, with the remaining 60 percent to be exchanged for stock.
A shareholder meeting is scheduled for mid-December.
Takeover experts, who have been among the most vocal opponents of the Conrail-CSX deal, said that Norfolk Southern would further strengthen its position by aggressively urging Conrail shareholders to defeat the CSX transaction.
"It's got to be like Bob Dole's marathon, but with a more successful conclusion," said one, referring to the 96-hour campaign blitz launched by the losing U.S. presidential candidate in the days before this week's election.
Goode declined to be specific about Norfolk Southern's plans to woo Conrail shareholders.
"The numbers in our bid speak for themselves. It should be readily apparent that it's a superior offer. We're willing to talk to all of the constituencies involved, including shareholders and others who are interested in this and we are doing that," he said in a telephone interview.
Norfolk Southern said its latest offer of $110 a share was superior to CSX's bid because it was not contingent on regulatory approval and would provide immediate cash payment to Conrail shareholders.
Wall Street experts said Conrail and CSX, which already revised the terms of their transaction once, may feel pressured to again increase the portion of cash in their deal. However, most industry experts do not expect a revised bid to top the offer made by Norfolk Southern.
The next stop for railroad industry consolidation is likely to be a Philadelphia courtroom, where a judge next week may decide if Norfolk Southern Corp can block a proposed union between Conrail Inc and CSX Corp.
Wall Street's attention turned to the Nov. 18 hearing after Conrail on Wednesday rejected a $10 billion offer from Norfolk Southern and reaffirmed its commitment to the CSX transaction, without revising terms of the $8.5 billion pact.  
It was the second time that Conrail rebuffed an offer from Norfolk Southern that topped the CSX transaction.
Although Conrail shares rose earlier this week on the view that CSX would sweeten terms of the pact for a second time, analysts and traders expressed little surprise that the deal was not revised.
"I think that CSX is probably awaiting the outcome of the court challenge next week," said Brian Routledge of Prudential Securities.  
In rejecting the Norfolk Southern bid, Conrail and CSX also dangled the prospect of a sweeter deal in front of shareholders, but made no promises. The two companies said they are pursuing talks about increasing the value of the transaction once the deal is consummated.
Shareholders have expressed unhappiness with the Conrail-CSX deal, which is a cash and stock transaction that values Conrail at about $93 per share. Norfolk Southern has offered to buy Conrail for $110 per share in cash.  
According to Pennsylvania corporate law, Philadelphia-based Conrail is permitted to act in the interest of groups other than shareholders in determining the best partner. Conrail has contended that a union with CSX is a better strategic fit despite Norfolk Southern's higher offer.
"They have an iron-clad contract and they're just waiting to get into court," one arbitrager said about CSX and Conrail.
U.S. District Court Judge Donald Van Artsdalen has scheduled a hearing for next Monday to consider Norfolk Southern's suit to block the Conrail-CSX merger.  
Meanwhile, Norfolk Southern said it was not surprised by the latest rejection of its offer and accused Conrail's board of ignoring its fiduciary responsibility.
Norfolk Southern ran a full-page advertisement in the New York Times and Wall Street Journal on Wednesday, urging shareholders to support its bid.
Mattel Inc president Jill Barad said the proposed acquisition of Tyco Toys Inc is not expected to face antitrust problems and should fuel earnings in the first year of the transaction.
"The market shares are still low even when you look at the category breakdowns," she said in a telephone interview.
Mattel, the nation's largest toymaker, earlier announced plans to buy third-place Tyco in a stock transaction valued at about $755 million. The combined market share of the companies would be less than 20 percent of the overall toy market.  
Barad said the deal includes a topping fee of $40 million, which would payable to Mattel if another company lured Tyco with a higher bid.  It also calls for a break-up fee of $15 million if the transaction were not completed within a year.
The transaction is expected to be completed in the first half of 1997.
Barad declined to specify anticipated cost savings associated with the transaction, saying "there are a lot and they cover many categories."  She also said it was too early to assess the potential impact of the deal on Tyco's workforce.  
Barad said she approached Tyco about a transaction on Sept. 29 in a solitary meeting with Tyco chief executive officer Gary Baughman.  Representatives of both companies met again on Oct. 14.
The proposed transaction would significantly boost Mattel's position in the boys' toy market - an area that it sought to expand earlier this year with an unsolicited bid for number two toymaker Hasbro.  However, Mattel was forced to withdraw that offer after its proposal ran into fierce opposition on antitrust grounds.
"We really believe that the boys' toy business is a very important one.  We have never had big market share in that category," Barad said.
Any overlap in specific markets is not expected to be large enough to create antitrust concerns, Barad said.
For example, she noted Mattel's Hot Wheels holds a nine percent market share position in the "wheels" toy category and Tyco holds a 10 percent stake with Matchbox.
"It's very fragmented," Barad said, adding that the wheels category will become even more crowded as Hasbro emerges with a new product line.
Mattel Inc., seeking to expand in the market for boys' toys, agreed to buy third-ranked Tyco Toys Inc. for $755 million, the companies said Monday.
The proposed union will combine Mattel's Barbie dolls, Hot Wheels miniature cars and Fisher-Price toys with Tyco's Matchbox cars, Sesame Street toys and radio-controlled vehicles.
"We really believe that the boys' toy business is a very important one. We have never had big market share in that category," Mattel President Jill Barad said in a telephone interview.
Under the agreement, Tyco shareholders will receive Mattel stock valued at $12.50 per Tyco share, representing a 78 percent premium above Friday's closing price for Tyco stock.
Shares of Tyco jumped $4.50 to $11.50, while Mattel fell 75 cents to $29.875, both on the New York Stock Exchange.
The proposed transaction follows Mattel's unsuccessful effort earlier this year to acquire No. 2 rival Hasbro Inc. Mattel, the nation's largest toymaker, was forced to withdraw its unwelcome bid due to widespread concern about its effect on competition.
Mattel said the Tyco transaction was expected to be completed in the fist half of 1997 and would add to its earnings in the first year. The boards of both companies have approved the merger.
The proposed transaction followed discussions that began with a Sept. 29 meeting between Barad and Tyco Chief Executive Officer Gary Baughman. Representatives of both companies met again on Oct. 14.
Industry experts said the proposed acquisition will accomplish many of the same goals for Mattel as the failed Hasbro transaction.
"It's been something they have been trying to do for years and years," said Smith Barney analyst Jill Krutick of Mattel's desire to boost its presence in boys' markets.
"The outstanding worldwide potential for Tyco's well-known brands will be fully realised through this merger with Mattel," Mattel Chairman John Amerman said in a statement.
Although the union will combine two of the nation's biggest toymakers, Barad said antitrust issues were not expected to be significant. She noted that the combined companies will hold less than 20 percent market share in the highly fragmented industry.
"The market shares are still low even when you look at the category breakdowns," she said in a telephone interview.
Tyco, based in Mt. Laurel, N.J., had 1995 revenues of $709 million. Mattel, based in El Segundo, Calif., had 1995 sales $3.6 billion. No. 2 toy maker Hasbro had 1995 sales of $2.8 billion.
But some analysts cited concern about antitrust implications, citing potential market overlap of Mattel's Hot Wheels and Tyco's Matchbox units, two leading miniature car brands.
"I think it's going to be a long process in getting the OK of regulators. After the Hasbro debacle, anything Mattel does at this point will be looked at by the regulators," said one analyst who did not want to be identified.
For money-losing Tyco, the acquisition will represent the culmination of its turnaround efforts. The toymaker last year cut 10 percent of its work force as part of a restructuring aimed at returning to profitability.
With its deep pockets, leading market presence and long global reach, Mattel would easily capitalise on Tyco's products, analysts said.
"Mattel clearly has ways to enhance the revenue growth of Tyco and expand it internationally. Mattel is getting into a fairly cleaned-up situation," Smith Barney's Krutick said.
The proposed combination will also strengthen Mattel's position in plush toys, where Tyco is a market leader.
Barad said the deal includes a fee of $40 million that would be payable to Mattel if another company lured Tyco with a higher bid. It also calls for a break-up fee of $15 million if the transaction is not completed within a year.
Barad declined to specify anticipated cost savings associated with the deal, saying, "There are a lot and they cover many categories." She also said it was too early to assess the potential impact of the deal on Tyco's work force.
Forget about the pink Porsche. Barbie soon may have a whole fleet of cars at her disposal.
Seeking to expand in the market for boys toys, Mattel Inc said Monday it will buy third-ranked Tyco Toys Inc in a $755 million union that will wed the makers of Barbie dolls and Matchbox cars.
The move is considered hugely significant for top toymaker Mattel, which earlier this year pursued Hasbro Inc for similar reasons. Mattel was forced to drop its unsolicited Hasbro offer due to concerns about antitrust implications associated with joining the nation's top two toymakers.
Industry experts said the proposed acquisition will accomplish many of the same goals as the failed Hasbro transaction.
"Its been something they have been trying to do for years and years," said Smith Barney analyst Jill Krutick of Mattel's desire to boost its presence in boys' markets.
The proposed union will combine Mattel's highly successful product line, which includes Barbie, Hot Wheels and Fisher-Price, with Tyco's Matchbox, Sesame Street toys and radio control vehicles.
Shares of Tyco jumped 4-3/8 to 11-3/8 in afternoon trading. The stock transaction values shares of Tyco at about $12.50 each.
For money-losing Tyco, the acquisition will represent the culmination of its turnaround efforts. The toymaker last year cut 10 percent of its work force as part of a restructuring aimed at returning to profitability.
With its deep pockets, leading market presence and long global reach, Mattel is likely to easily capitalize on Tyco's products, analysts said.
"Mattel clearly has ways to enhance the revenue growth of Tyco and expand it internationally. Mattel is getting into a fairly cleaned-up situation," Krutick said.
But some analysts cited concern about potential antitrust implications, even though Tyco holds a far smaller market presence than Hasbro. They specifically cited potential market overlap of Mattel's Hot Wheels and Tyco's Matchbox units.
"I think it's going to be a long process in getting the OK of regulators. After the Hasbro debacle, anything Mattel does at this point will be looked at by the regulators," said one analyst who did not want to be identified.
In a telephone interview with Reuters, Mattel president Jill Barad said antitrust concerns are not expected to be an overwhelming issue in the transaction. She noted that the combined companies will still hold less than 20 percent market share in the highly-fragmented industry.
The proposed combination will also strengthen Mattel's position in plush toys, where Tyco is a market leader.
Diamond Shamrock Inc said it plans to close its merger with Ultramar Corp on December 3 and announce a new organizational structure shortly thereafter.
In a meeting with security analysts, chief executive officer Roger Hemminghaus said Diamond Shamrock is close to the sale of its telecommunications business and its natural gas exploration and production operations in Bolivia.
Hemminghaus also said that the new Ultramar Diamond Shamrock Corp will eagerly scour the industry for refining and marketing acquisitions and joint ventures.  
"There are bound to be some opportunities that are out there for us," Hemminghaus said.
Diamond Shamrock and Ultramar announced in September a merger that will create a new company with a combined equity value of more than $2.3 billion.  Hemminghaus, who will become chairman and chief executive of the new company, noted that opportunities will come from consolidation occuring elsewhere in the energy industry.  He noted a combination being discussed by Texaco Inc and Royal Dutch/Shell Group's Shell Oil Co "means there are going to be some quality assets that become available in certain markets."
Asked whether his new company would be interested in a joint venture similar to others taking place in the industry, Hemminghaus said "You bet we would".
He flatly dismissed speculation that Diamond Shamrock entered the pact with Ultramar because it was being targeted as an acquisition candidate.
"This was in no way a defensive move on our part," he said, adding Diamond Shamrock was not approached by another firm.  He also said Diamond Shamrock had considered a transaction with Unocal Corp, which on Monday announced the sale of downstream assets to Tosco Corp.
"Had this deal (Ultramar) not gone through, we would have been looking very seriously at this (Unocal) opportunity.  If the timing had been a little bit different, we would have been out there looking at it," he said.
Diamond Shamrock anticipates the union with Ultramar will result in cost savings and synergies that will add $0.20 per share to earnings in 1997 and $0.60 per share in 1998.
The merger with Ultramar marks the second major transaction for Diamond Shamrock since last December, when it bought National Convenience Stores Inc.
Hemminghaus said cost savings of that transaction have exceeded preliminary estimates.  Savings this year are expected to be $31.5 million compared with earlier estimates of $20 million and estimated savings for 1997 are now set at $46.5 million, he said.
Conrail Inc. and CSX Corp. so far have convinced the courts that their $8.6 billion merger plan should proceed, but they still need to win over unhappy shareholders who favour Norfolk Southern Corp.'s higher rival bid.
Lawyers and financial advisers were expected in the next few days to consider several plans aimed at persuading investors to approve a crucial measure needed for the deal.
Meanwhile, CSX said Thursday that its $110 cash tender offer for 19.9 percent of Conrail shares, which represents the first part of its plan to buy Conrail, was oversubscribed.
The proposed stock and cash transaction has angered many investors, who prefer an all-cash $10 billion offer by Norfolk Southern, based in Norfolk, Va.
Philadelphia-based Conrail has rejected the Norfolk Southern offer of $110 a share, saying the union with CSX provides more strategic benefits.
But Norfolk Southern refused to give up, on Thursday extending its tender offer through midnight EST on Dec. 16. The offer had been set to expire Friday.
Norfolk Southern said earlier it would also continue to pursue its legal case seeking to block the planned merger.
CSX said that as of Thursday afternoon about 1.4 million Conrail shares had been tendered and not withdrawn pursuant to Norfolk Southern's offer.
Sources close to the companies said no final decision has been made about how to woo Conrail shareholders, but options include sweetening the stock portion of the deal or setting a "collar" to guard against price volatility.
They will also consider revising the deal's terms to accelerate payment to investors, according to the sources, who did not want to be identified.
The two companies could also decide to keep the terms unchanged, betting that shareholders will ultimately choose the CSX offer over Norfolk Southern's bid, which cannot be formally considered by Conrail until July.
"There's only one thing they can do and that's to sweeten the offer. I don't know how they're going to get enough votes if they don't," said Thom Brown, managing director at investment firm Rutherford, Brown &amp; Catherwood Inc., which holds some 50,000 shares of Conrail.
Richmond, Va.-based CSX and Conrail declined to comment on their plans but acknowledged last week they were discussing increasing the value of the pact upon its consummation.
Sources close to the companies said there is no rush to make a decision, noting that Conrail can easily postpone the shareholder vote that is now slated for mid-December.
CSX and Conrail won a significant victory this week when a U.S. District Court judge denied a request by Norfolk Southern to block the CSX-Conrail deal. An appeals panel also declined to block the first step of the deal.
Norfolk Southern, meanwhile, withdrew its motion for an expedited appeal of the federal court ruling that allowed CSX to buy the 19.9 percent stake in Conrail since the tender offer expired at midnight Wednesday.
But a Norfolk Southern attorney said the company will continue to pursue its legal case seeking to block the Conrail-CSX merger.
"We will continue with the litigation," attorney Steven Rothschild said.
A group of Conrail shareholders pursuing a lawsuit and appeal similar to Norfolk Southern's did not withdraw their motion for expedited appeal. The group urged the court Wednesday to hear an expedited appeal and "sterilize" the 19.9 percent Conrail stake by preventing CSX from voting it at a shareholders meeting needed for the merger to occur.
Because Pennsylvania corporate law prohibits a company from buying more than 20 percent of another company in a cash tender offer, shareholders will be asked in mid-December to approve a measure that would permit CSX to buy 40 percent.
The CSX-Conrail transaction calls for CSX to buy 40 percent of Conrail shares for $110 per share in cash and exchange the remaining 60 percent for CSX stock.
Sources close to the company said Conrail and CSX were well aware of the potential difficulties in winning the necessary votes.
Industry experts believe shareholders may be more willing to approve the 40 percent measure if they were guaranteed more favourable terms for the stock portion of the deal.
"They can't get the vote until they improve the back end of the deal and they know that," one takeover specialist said.
Meanwhile, Conrail stock tumbled, reflecting the expiration of CSX's tender offer. The stock fell $2.25 to $94.625 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Based on Thursday's stock price, the Conrail-CSX transaction values shares of Conrail at about $95.10 each. The stock portion of the deal would be exchanged at a value of about $85.15 for each Conrail share.
Conrail Inc. and CSX Corp. so far have convinced the courts that their $8.6 billion merger plan should proceed, but they still need to win over unhappy shareholders who favour Norfolk Southern Corp.'s higher bid.
Lawyers and financial advisors were expected in the next few days to consider several plans aimed at persuading investors to approve a crucial measure needed for the deal.
Meanwhile, CSX said Thursday that its $110 cash tender offer for 19.9 percent of Conrail shares, which represents the first part of its plan to buy Conrail, was oversubscribed.
The proposed stock and cash transaction has angered many investors, who prefer an all-cash $10 billion offer by Norfolk Southern, based in Norfolk, Va.
Philadelphia-based Conrail has rejected the Norfolk Southern offer of $110 a share, saying the union with CSX provides more strategic benefits.
Sources close to the companies said no final decision has been made about how to woo Conrail shareholders, but options include sweetening the stock portion of the deal or setting a "collar" to guard against price volatility.
They will also consider revising the deal's terms to accelerate payment to investors, according to the sources, who did not want to be identified.
The two companies could also decide to keep the terms unchanged, betting that shareholders will ultimately choose the CSX offer over Norfolk Southern's offer, which cannot be formally considered by Conrail until July.
"There's only one thing they can do and that's to sweeten the offer. I don't know how they're going to get enough votes if they don't," said Thom Brown, managing director at investment firm Rutherford, Brown &amp; Catherwood Inc., which holds some 50,000 shares of Conrail.
Richmond, Va.-based CSX and Conrail declined to comment on their plans, but acknowledged last week they were discussing increasing the value of the pact upon its consummation.
Sources close to the companies said there is no rush to make a decision, noting that Conrail can easily postpone the shareholder vote that is now slated for mid-December.
CSX and Conrail won a significant victory this week when a U.S. district court judge denied a request by Norfolk Southern to block the CSX-Conrail deal. An appeals panel also declined to block the first step of the deal.
Norfolk Southern, meanwhile, withdrew its motion for an expedited appeal of the federal court ruling that allowed CSX to buy the 19.9 percent stake in Conrail, since the tender offer expired at midnight on Wednesday.
But a group of Conrail shareholders pursuing a lawsuit and appeal similar to Norfolk Southern's did not withdraw their motion for expedited appeal. The group urged the court on Wednesday to hear an expedited appeal and "sterlize" the 19.9 percent Conrail stake by preventing CSX from voting it at a shareholders meeting needed for the merger to occur.
Because Pennsylvania corporate law prohibits a company from buying more than 20 percent of another company in a cash tender offer, shareholders will be asked in mid-December to approve a measure that would permit CSX to buy 40 percent.
The CSX-Conrail transaction calls for CSX to buy 40 percent of Conrail shares for $110 per share in cash and exchange the remaining 60 percent for CSX stock.
Sources close to the company said Conrail and CSX were well aware of the potential difficulties in winning the necessary votes.
Industry experts believe shareholders may be more willing to approve the 40 percent measure if they were guaranteed more favourable terms for the stock portion of the deal.
"They can't get the vote until they improve the back-end of the deal and they know that," one takeover specialist said.
Meanwhile, Conrail stock tumbled, reflecting the expiration of CSX's tender offer. The stock fell $2.25 to $94.625 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Based on Thursday's stock price, the Conrail-CSX transaction values shares of Conrail at about $95.10 each. The stock portion of the deal would be exchanged at a value of about $85.15 for each Conrail share.
Conrail Inc. and CSX Corp. so far have convinced the courts that their $8.65 billion merger plan should proceed, but they still need to win over unhappy shareholders who favour Norfolk Southern Corp.'s larger bid.
Lawyers and financial advisors were expected in the next few days to consider several plans aimed at persuading investors to approve a crucial measure needed for the deal.
Meanwhile, CSX said Thursday that its $110 cash tender offer for 19.9 percent of Conrail shares, which represents the first part of its plan to buy Conrail, was oversubscribed.
The proposed stock and cash transaction has angered many investors, who prefer an all-cash $10 billion offer by Norfolk Southern, based in Norfolk, Va.
Philadelphia-based Conrail has rejected the Norfolk Southern offer of $110 a share, saying the union with CSX provides more strategic benefits.
Sources close to the companies said no final decision has been made about how to woo Conrail shareholders, but options include sweetening the stock portion of the deal or setting a "collar" to guard against price volatility.
They will also consider revising the deal's terms to accelerate payment to investors, according to the sources, who did not want to be identified.
The two companies could also decide to keep the terms unchanged, betting that shareholders will ultimately choose the CSX offer over Norfolk Southern's offer, which cannot be formally considered by Conrail until July.
"There's only one thing they can do and that's to sweeten the offer. I don't know how they're going to get enough votes if they don't," said Thom Brown, managing director at investment firm Rutherford, Brown &amp; Catherwood Inc., which holds some 50,000 shares of Conrail.
Richmond, Va.-based CSX and Conrail declined to comment on their plans, but acknowledged last week that they are discussing increasing the value of the pact upon its consummation.
Sources close to the companies said there is no rush to make a decision, noting that Conrail can easily postpone the shareholder vote that is now slated for mid-December.
CSX and Conrail won a significant victory this week when a U.S. district court judge denied a request by Norfolk Southern to block the CSX-Conrail proposal. An appeals panel also declined to block the deal's first step, but will consider Norfolk Southern's request for an expedited appeal.
Because Pennsylvania corporate law prohibits a company from buying more than 20 percent of another company in a cash tender offer, shareholders will be asked in mid-December to approve a measure that would permit CSX to buy 40 percent.
The CSX-Conrail transaction calls for CSX to buy 40 percent of Conrail shares for $110 per share in cash and exchange the remaining 60 percent for CSX stock.
Sources close to the company said Conrail and CSX were well aware of the potential difficulties in winning the necessary votes.
Industry experts believe shareholders may be more willing to approve the 40 percent measure if they are guaranteed more favourable terms for the stock portion of the deal.
"They can't get the vote until they improve the back-end of the deal and they know that," one takeover specialist said.
Meanwhile, Conrail stock fell sharply on the New York Stock Exchange, reflecting the expiration of CSX's cash tender offer for the first 20 percent of Conrail's shares at $110 per share. Shares of Conrail fell $2.375 to $94.50.
Based on Thursday's stock price, the Conrail-CSX transaction values shares of Conrail at about $95.10 each. The stock portion of the deal would be exchanged at a value of about $85.15 for each Conrail share.
A threatened proxy fight at Ashland Inc, coming at a time of widespread oil industry consolidation, may force the Kentucky-based energy company to restructure its diverse holdings.
Sources close to Ashland said the company is considering strategic alternatives, although it has not yet determined whether major action is necessary.
Meanwhile, Providence Capital Inc, which has been involved in similar efforts at other firms, is expected to pressure Ashland to enhance its value by breaking up its operations.  
Widely considered a regional oil refiner, Ashland owns 56 percent of Ashland Coal Inc, a substantial chemicals business and a highway construction unit. It makes Valvoline motor oils and owns SuperAmerica convenience stores.
Some industry analysts have said that Ashland, which is trading at around $46 per share, would be worth more than $60 per share if its businesses were separated.
Providence has formally told Ashland that it has nominated a three-man slate for election to the board at the January 30 annual shareholders' meeting. Shareholders will be asked to fill six slots on the 16-member board.  
Ashland spokesman Dan Lacey said the company has hired First Boston Corp to advise it on the proxy issue. A source familiar with the situation said Ashland also may discuss strategeic alternatives with investment firm Wasserstein Perella &amp; Co, which has worked with Ashland in the past.
Sources said New York-based Providence is not seeking control of Ashland, but instead wants to push a restructuring. Founded in 1991 by a group of merger experts at Jefferies &amp; Co, previous investments have included California Microwave, Duplex Products Inc and Ideon Group Inc It also has invested in Russia.  
Ashland earlier this month acknowledged Providence's interest, noting that it holds 100 shares of Ashland's 64 million outstanding common shares.
Ashland has declined to comment further on Providence, noting that it is prohibited from discussing the issue until it files documents with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, a move that is expected by mid-December.
Providence and Wasserstein also declined comment. Sources said both Ashland and Providence recently have held meetings with institutional investors to discuss shareholder value.  
Industry experts think Ashland is primed to participate in industrywide consolidation, especially as Ashland veteran and Chief Executive Paul Chellgren moves into the role as chairman. He is replacing retiring longtime Chairman and former Chief Executive John Hall.
"Under his leadership, Ashland could be restructured along individual lines of business. If done correctly, we think it could lead to an increase in shareholder value of 25 percent or more," Bear Stearns &amp; Co analyst Fred Leuffer said in a report issued Monday.
The push for a restructuring comes as giant oil firms join forces to combat poor refining profits. Texaco Inc and Shell Oil Co are mulling an alliance of U.S. refining and marketing operations, while Mobil Corp and British Petroleum Co Plc have a similar venture in Europe.
And smaller refiners also are seeking partners. Diamond Shamrock Inc has proposed a merger with Ultramar Corp, Tosco Corp is buying Unocal Corp's West Coast refining assets and just last week refiner Valero Energy Corp said it was seeking an alliance for its natural gas services unit.
A financial agreement between Barney's Inc and Hong Kong-based Dickson Concepts International Ltd will open the door to potential bidders for the famed New York luxury retailer.
Speculation about interested buyers has been rampant ever since Barney's filed for bankruptcy nearly a year ago.
Dickson and Saks Holdings Inc previously have expressed interest in privately held Barney's. Neiman Marcus Group Inc and Canada's Holt Renfrew also have been cited by industry experts as potential bidders.  
Barney's has repeatedly said that it is not for sale but only wants to talk with potential investors.
Under the pact announced Tuesday, Barney's will pay Dickson up to $1 million to complete its financial review of Barney's and Dickson will submit a recapitalization proposal.
In return, Barney's, which has been operating under bankruptcy protection since January, will make the financial information available to other prospective investors.
"We have the basis by which another investor can look at the information from that due diligence," said Barney's spokeswoman Sandra Sternberg.  
The pact with Dickson must be approved by the bankruptcy court, which may consider the issue as early as next week.
Officials at Saks, Neiman Marcus and privately held Holt Renfrew could not be reached for comment.
But Japanese retailer Isetan Co Ltd, which is tangled in court with Barney's over a soured business arrangement, said it was not interested in buying Barney's.
"I don't think we're considering it right now. We're sitting on the sidelines," said spokesman Yasuo Okamoto.
Saks and Isetan joined forces in July to explore a plan for Barney's, but they never reached terms on a proposal.  
Although Barney's has shuffled management to help turn around the business, the troubled retailer is still viewed as weak in the luxury retail sector even as other companies are performing well.
However, analysts think a new owner or partner can breathe new life into the company.
"It can be viable going forward. It needs to be trimmed down and it needs merchandising talent," said Howard Eilenberg of Johnson Redbook Service.
Founded in 1923 by Barney Pressman and operated under the leadership of his grandsons Robert and Gene, Barney's has long been plagued by a reputation for weak management.
A financial agreement between Barney's Inc. and Hong Kong-based Dickson Concepts International Ltd. will open the door to potential bidders for the famed New York luxury retailer.
Speculation about interested buyers has been rampant ever since Barney's filed for bankruptcy nearly a year ago.
Under a pact announced Tuesday, Barney's will pay Dickson up to $1 million to complete its financial review of Barney's and Dickson will submit a recapitalization proposal for the retailer.
In return, Barney's, which has been operating under bankruptcy protection since January, will make the financial information available to other prospective investors.
"We have the basis by which another investor can look at the information from that due diligence," said Barney's spokeswoman Sandra Sternberg.
Dickson and Saks Holdings Inc. previously have expressed interest in privately held Barney's. Neiman Marcus Group Inc. and Canada's Holt Renfrew also have been cited by industry experts as potential bidders.
Barney's has repeatedly said that it is not for sale but wants to talk with potential investors.
The pact with Dickson must be approved by the bankruptcy court, which may consider the issue as early as next week.
Officials at Saks, Neiman Marcus and privately held Holt Renfrew could not be reached for comment.
But Japanese retailer Isetan Co. Ltd., which is tangled in court with Barney's over a soured business arrangement, said it was not interested in buying Barney's.
"I don't think we're considering it right now. We're sitting on the sidelines," said spokesman Yasuo Okamoto.
Saks and Isetan joined forces in July to explore a plan for Barney's, but they never reached terms on a proposal.
Although Barney's has shuffled management to help turn around the troubled retailer, it is still viewed as weak in the luxury retail sector even as other companies are performing well.
Analysts, however, think a new owner or partner can breathe new life into the company.
"It can be viable going forward. It needs to be trimmed down and it needs merchandising talent," said Howard Eilenberg of Johnson Redbook Service.
Founded in 1923 by Barney Pressman and operated under the leadership of his grandsons Robert and Gene, Barney's has long been plagued by a reputation for weak management.
Ashland Inc. Monday announced a wide-ranging restructuring programme aimed at pumping up profitability in an era of weak refining margins and widespread energy industry consolidation.
The move by the Ashland, Ky.-based energy company appeased a New York investment firm, which withdrew its plan for a proxy fight at the company's annual shareholder meeting next month.
"Ashland's No. 1 priority is to improve returns in its refining and marketing segment," Chief Executive Officer Paul Chellgren said in a statement. "Many of the elements in the plan announced today focus on that priority and are aimed at continuing to build a basis for the long-term competitiveness of this business."
Under the plan, Ashland will restructure its business units to form a petroleum group consisting of its refining businesses, SuperAmerica retail convenience stores and Valvoline motor oil. The group will be led by Ashland executive Fred Brothers, who has run the company's chemicals business.
Ashland also said it will reduce 1997 capital expenditures for Ashland Petroleum to $150 million from $175 million and limit capital expenditures for refining to $100 million. It said the remaining $50 million in Ashland Petroleum's 1997 capital budget will be earmarked for petrochemical and branded marketing expansions.
The company will evaluate alternatives for its exploration unit, with the target of completing an evaluation and any resulting business transaction before the end of 1997.
It will review other options for strategic alliances amid widespread developments in the refining and marketing sector.
Ashland said it will authorise the repurchase of up to 1 million shares of its common stock annually in an attempt to eliminate dilution of its stock.
It also said it was halting a programme to offer up to $100 million in Ashland common stock. To date, about $50 million in common stock has been sold under the programme.
The company said it would evaluate corporate general and administrative expenses.
The actions were viewed as a significant step to convince investors that management will not stand by and watch profits erode.
"The question now is whether they can deliver. I think there will be more to come," said Smith Barney analyst James Falvey.
Ashland recently was pressured by Providence Capital Inc., a New York-based investment firm that nominated a three-person slate for election to the company's board of directors at the Jan. 30 annual meeting.
Providence President Herbert Denton said in an interview that he was satisfied by the plan. Representatives of Ashland met with Providence last week.
"They have addressed all the major issues we raised. We feel the plan is genuine and that they are sincere about defining a new era at Ashland," he said in a telephone interview.
Ashland stock rose 12.5 cents to $46.75 in afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange. Analysts noted the stock has risen about $10 per share since September on views that a restructuring would be forthcoming.
They said the restructuring was a good reflection on CEO Chellgren, a company veteran who is set to replace retiring Chairman John Hall.
"I think this is positive. This is a quicker-than-expected start on restructuring," said Fred Leuffer of Bear Stearns &amp; Co.
Ashland Inc has quashed a threatened proxy fight by restucturing its core business, but the independent refiner must still prove its ability to prosper in an industry plagued by poor profit margins.
A series of actions unveiled Monday by Ashland was viewed as a significant step to convince investors that management will not stand by and watch profits erode.
"The question now is whether they can deliver. I think there will be more to come," said James Falvey, analyst at Smith Barney.  
Ashland earlier announced a series of steps aimed at enhancing profitability. They included a restructuring of business units, a share buyback program, the evaluation of strategic alternatives for its non-core exploration unit, and a program to evaluate and cut costs.
The Kentucky-based refiner has recently been pressured by a New York investment firm that had nominated a three-person slate for election to the company's board of directors at the January 30 annual meeting.
In announcing the restructuring on Monday, Ashland also announced Providence Capital Inc had withdrawn its slate.  
"They have addressed all the major issues we raised. We feel the plan is genuine and that they are sincere about defining a new era at Ashland," Herbert Denton, president of Providence Capital, told Reuters in a telephone interview.
Denton said representatives of Ashland met with Providence last week. Ashland also recently has met with institutional investors.
Although shares of Ashland showed little reaction to Monday's plan, analysts noted the stock has risen about $10 per share since September on views of a restructuring. The stock was trading unchanged at 46-5/8 in afternoon trading.  
Analysts widely expect Ashland to sell the exploration unit and participate in widespread consolidation taking place throughout the industry. The company did not disclose any cost-cutting targets or timeframe to implement the actions.
But analysts said the restructuring is a solid reflection on company veteran and chief executive officer Paul Chellgren, who is set to move into the role of chairman to replace retiring John Hall.
"I think this is positive. This is a quicker-than-expected start on restructuring," said Fred Leuffer of Bear Stearns &amp; Co, who values the exploration unit at $425 to $450 million.
Analysts also said that the restructuring is likely to be an evolutionary process.
"It's not going to happen tomorrow. The results will prove themselves over time and if they don't, there will be further initiatives," said Barry Sahgal of Ladenburg, Thalmann &amp; Co.
Meanwhile, Denton said his group will continue to monitor the company's progress.
An independent shareholder advisory firm recommended Thursday that investors of Conrail Inc reject a key provision in the railroad's proposed acquisition by CSX Inc.
Maryland-based Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS), which provides corporate analyses to institutional clients, suggested that shareholders defeat a proposal that would permit CSX to pursue its proposed $8.5 billion stock and cash transaction.  
In making the recommendation, senior analyst Peter Gleason noted Norfolk Southern Corp's rival $10 billion cash bid that has been rejected by Conrail.
"We believe that all shareholders should be treated equally in any merger transaction, and because of NS's higher offer currently outstanding, we do not believe it would be in shareholders' best interest to opt out of the fair price provision at this time," Gleason wrote in a 16-page report.
Conrail investors are being asked to waive a Pennsylvania law that requires an all-cash payment by CSX, which already has bought 19.9 percent of Conrail in a cash tender offer.  
In October, CSX and Conrail announced a merger that calls for CSX to buy 40 percent of Conrail in cash and the rest in stock. Although Norfolk Southern has submitted a higher all-cash bid, Conrail contends the CSX offer is a better fit.
ISS disputed that argument, saying that both potential combinations would create an East Coast railroad powerhouse.
"However, CSX's front-end loaded, two-tiered takeover does not treat all Conrail shareholders fairly, and the lock-ups provided in the agreement have denied Conrail shareholders the possibility of accepting a higher payment for their shares," Gleason wrote.  
Under the agreement between Conrail and CSX, Conrail would be prohibited from entering a pact with another company before July 1997.
"The only thing prohibiting the higher offer from being presented to sharheolders are the barriers erected by Conrail to ensure the company merges with CSX," Gleason wrote.
CSX declined to comment on the report. Conrail also did not have any immediate comment.
Conrail has scheduled a special shareholder meeting for December 23 to consider a waiver of the Pennsylvania law.  
ISS, which held meetings with Conrail and Norfolk Southern, also recommended that shareholders reject a Conrail request to adjourn the meeting if more votes are needed to ensure passage of the waiver.
"In this case, shareholders already have the information they need to make their voting decisions. Once their votes have been cast, there is no justification to spend extra money to continue pressing shareholders for more votes," Gleason wrote.  
ISS also said the Conrail-CSX union could run into trouble from the Surface Transportation Board (STB), the federal regulatory agency overseeing railroads.
"Although Conrail and CSX believe STB approval and/or concessions will not create significant problems, we see the competitive issues as a major concern, and do not share Conrail's belief that STB approval of the transaction is assured," Gleason wrote.
He also noted that many shareholders expected CSX and Conrail to amend their pact to sweeten the stock portion of their proposed transaction.
"Conrail has indicated that it has had discussions with CSX about raising the back end of the consideration to make the offer more equitable to shareholders, but no decisions have been made to date," Gleason wrote.
He also said that Norfolk Southern would likely raise its rival offer if CSX sweetened the deal.
An independent shareholder advisory firm recommended Thursday that investors of Conrail Inc. reject a key provision in the railroad's proposed acquisition by CSX Corp.
Maryland-based Institutional Shareholder Services, which provides corporate analyses to institutional clients, suggested that shareholders defeat a proposal that would permit CSX to pursue its proposed $8.5 billion stock and cash transaction.
In making the recommendation, senior analyst Peter Gleason noted Norfolk Southern Corp.'s rival $10 billion cash bid that has been rejected by Conrail.
"We believe that all shareholders should be treated equally in any merger transaction, and because of NS's higher offer currently outstanding, we do not believe it would be in shareholders' best interest to opt out of the fair price provision at this time," Gleason wrote in a 16-page report.
Conrail investors are being asked to waive a Pennsylvania law that requires an all-cash payment by CSX, which already has bought 19.9 percent of Conrail in a cash tender offer.
In October, CSX and Conrail announced a merger that calls for CSX to buy Conrail in a cash-and-stock deal.
CSX is offering to pay $110 in cash for 40 percent of Conrail's outstanding shares. Based on Thursday's closing stock prices, the remaining 60 percent would be bought for about $83 per share.
Although Norfolk Southern has submitted a higher all-cash bid, Conrail contends the CSX offer is a better fit.
Institutional Shareholder Services disputed that argument, saying that both potential combinations would create an East Coast railroad powerhouse.
"However, CSX's front-end loaded, two-tiered takeover does not treat all Conrail shareholders fairly, and the lock-ups provided in the agreement have denied Conrail shareholders the possibility of accepting a higher payment for their shares," Gleason wrote.
Under the agreement between Conrail and CSX, Conrail would be prohibited from entering a pact with another company before July 1997.
"The only thing prohibiting the higher offer from being presented to sharheolders are the barriers erected by Conrail to ensure the company merges with CSX," Gleason wrote.
CSX declined to comment on the report. Conrail also did not have any immediate comment.
Conrail has scheduled a special shareholder meeting for Dec. 23 to consider a waiver of the Pennsylvania law.
Institutional Shareholder Services, which held meetings with Conrail and Norfolk Southern, also recommended that shareholders reject a Conrail request to adjourn the meeting if more votes are needed to ensure passage of the waiver.
"In this case, shareholders already have the information they need to make their voting decisions. Once their votes have been cast, there is no justification to spend extra money to continue pressing shareholders for more votes," Gleason wrote.
The shareholder advisory firm also said the Conrail-CSX union could run into trouble from the Surface Transportation Board, the federal regulatory agency overseeing railroads.
"Although Conrail and CSX believe STB approval and/or concessions will not create significant problems, we see the competitive issues as a major concern, and do not share Conrail's belief that STB approval of the transaction is assured," Gleason wrote.
He also noted that many shareholders expect CSX and Conrail to amend their pact to sweeten the stock portion of their proposed transaction.
"Conrail has indicated that it has had discussions with CSX about raising the back end of the consideration to make the offer more equitable to shareholders, but no decisions have been made to date," Gleason wrote.
He also noted that Norfolk Southern would likely raise its rival offer if CSX sweetened its deal.
Separately on Thursday, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said it planned to intervene in any Conrail merger and would hire a consultant to analyse the impact of any transaction.
The proposed union of Boeing Co and McDonnell Douglas Corp dramatically raises the stakes for survival in the defense industry, which already has experienced intense consolidation.
Global players, including Northrop Grumman Corp, Raytheon Co and Hughes Electronics Corp, are expected to seek partners in a new cycle of mergers.
"This has broken an uneasy truce in the defense industry," said Jon Kutler, president of Quarterdeck Investment Partners Inc, which specializes in aerospace and defense.  
Although the pace of defense mergers recently has slowed from the booming levels of early 1996, the Boeing-McDonnell Douglas combination is expected to trigger a resurgence of activity, industry experts said.
"This transaction establishes a level of scale that is going to urge additional consolidation. It's clearly going to drive us toward, instead of eight or 10 large firms, three or four mega-corporations," said James Schwendinger, director of Deloitte &amp; Touche's aerospace and defense practice.  
Northrop Grumman is viewed as a leading buyer of defense electronics properties. Shares of the company jumped 1-3/4 to 81-1/8 on views that the Boeing-McDonnell Douglas transaction may speed up its acquisition plans.
"All of a sudden, the scale of Northrop Grumman has been diminished by this merger," said one defense industry source who did not want to be identified.
Formed in 1994 from a union between Northrop and Grumman Corp, the company earlier this year bought Westinghouse Electric Corp's defense business for $3.6 billion in one of the biggest defense deals of 1996.  
A spokesman for Northrop Grumman declined to comment on merger activites, but noted that electronics is a growing part of the company's business.
"We have clearly embarked on a strategy of transforming the company from primarily an airplane builder to electronics," said Tony Cantafio.
Meanwhile, current defense industry leader Lockheed Martin Corp, which early this year bought Loral Corp for $9.1 billion, is viewed as well-positioned to compete against the new and larger Boeing. Lockheed Martin said in a statement on Monday that ongoing industry consolidation is vital.  
"They've gone from being king of the hill to having to share it. They're in an extremely strong position," Kutler said of Lockheed Martin.
The defense sector already has seen several consolidation cycles due to declines in federal spending. But those deals were dwarfed by the latest $13.9 billion merger announced on Sunday.
Industry experts said prices and bidding is expected to intensify for attractive properties, noting that reported seller Hughes Electronics is likely to benefit. Industry sources previously targeted McDonnell Douglas as a potential buyer of Hughes.  
A spokesman for Hughes could not be reached for comment, but the company previously has said in an SEC filing that it would consider acquisitions and consolidation.
Hughes is a unit of General Motors Corp.
The Boeing-McDonnell Douglas combination also is expected to trigger consolidation around the globe.
"This may set the stage for a whole new set of (buyers) from Europe," said Thomas Gallagher, head of the aerospace division at CIBC Woody Gundy, who expects cross-border consolidation in Europe to intensify.  
"The key dimension of defense today is scale. This business takes a huge amount of investment," Gallagher said.
The proposed union of Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Corp. dramatically raises the stakes for survival in the defence industry, which already has experienced intense consolidation.
Global players, including Northrop Grumman Corp., Raytheon Co. and Hughes Electronics Corp., are expected to seek partners in a new merger cycle.
"This has broken an uneasy truce in the defence industry," said Jon Kutler, president of Quarterdeck Investment Partners Inc., which specialises in aerospace and defence.
Although the pace of defence mergers recently has slowed from the booming levels of early 1996, the Boeing-McDonnell Douglas combination is expected to trigger a resurgence of deals, industry experts said.
"This transaction establishes a level of scale that is going to urge additional consolidation. It's clearly going to drive us toward, instead of eight or 10 large firms, three or four mega-corporations," said James Schwendinger, director of consulting firm Deloitte &amp; Touche's aerospace and defence practice.
Northrop Grumman is viewed as a leading buyer of defence electronics properties. Shares of the company jumped $1.125 to $80.50 on views that the Boeing-McDonnell Douglas transaction may speed up its acquisition plans.
"All of a sudden, the scale of Northrop Grumman has been diminished by this merger," said one defence industry source who did not want to be identified.
Formed in 1994 from a union between Northrop and Grumman Corp., the company earlier this year bought the defence business owned by Westinghouse Electric Corp. for $3.6 billion in one of the biggest defence deals of 1996.
A spokesman for Northrop Grumman declined to comment on merger activites, but noted that electronics was a growing part of the company's business.
"We have clearly embarked on a strategy of transforming the company from primarily an airplane builder to electronics," said Tony Cantafio.
Meanwhile, current defence leader Lockheed Martin Corp., which early this year bought Loral Corp for $9.1 billion, is viewed as well-positioned to compete against the new and larger Boeing. Lockheed Martin said in a statement Monday that ongoing industry consolidation was vital.
"They've gone from being king of the hill to having to share it. They're in an extremely strong position," Kutler said of Lockheed Martin.
The defence sector already has seen several consolidation cycles due to declines in federal spending. But those deals are dwarfed by the latest $13.9 billion merger announced Sunday.
Industry experts bidding was expected to intensify for attractive properties, noting that reported seller Hughes Electronics was likely to benefit. Industry sources previously targeted McDonnell Douglas as a potential buyer of Hughes.
A spokesman for Hughes could not be reached for comment, but the company previously has said that it would consider acquisitions and consolidation. Hughes is a unit of General Motors Corp.
The Boeing-McDonnell Douglas combination also was expected to trigger consolidation around the globe.
"This may set the stage for a whole new set of (buyers) from Europe," said Thomas Gallagher, head of the aerospace division at CIBC Woody Gundy, who expects cross-border consolidation in Europe to intensify.
"The key dimension of defence today is scale. This business takes a huge amount of investment," Gallagher said.
Western Resources Inc. Wednesday offered to buy the rest of ADT Ltd. for $3.5 billion in cash and stock in a deal that would transform the Kansas utility into the nation's top provider of electronic security services.
The move marks the latest step in Western's aggressive strategy to dominate the highly fragmented security industry, which has grown increasingly attractive to utilities and telecommunications companies.
Topeka, Kan.-based Western Resources, which already owns 27 percent of ADT, said it would take its unsolicited bid for the rest of ADT directly to that company's shareholders. It also said it would call a special meeting of shareholders to replace the existing ADT board of directors.
"We have demonstrated our belief in ADT's future through our investment. The benefits of this transaction are compelling, offering a natural extension of our respective businesses," Western Resources Chairman John Hayes said in a statement.
Hayes advised ADT of the offer in a letter in which he noted that ADT previously said it was not interested in a transaction with Western Resources.
"We firmly believe that this combination will provide significant benefits to our respective shareowners, customers and employees not available to either company on its own," Hayes wrote to ADT Chairman Michael Ashcroft.
Western said it would pay $22.50 for each share of ADT, consisting of $15 in Western Resources common stock and $7.50 cash. The offer would give ADT holders a 12 percent premium over Tuesday's closing stock price of $20.125 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Industry experts said the bid was deliberately low and merely reflected an opening salvo in a hostile transaction.
"The price is a low-ball price. There is a very good chance this deal will be done at a higher price," said Andrew Jeffrey, analyst at Robertson Stephens &amp; Co.
ADT shares climbed $3.125 to close at $23.25 on the New York Stock Exchange on views that a transaction will take place at a higher price. Western Resources' stock rose 12.5 cents to close at $31.375, also on NYSE.
"I feel this stock will go to $25 to $30 on earnings in 1997. Anything below that range is not acceptable," said Rosario Ilacqua of Rothschild Inc.
Boca Raton, Fla.-based ADT said it would review the offer and advised shareholders to await a recommendation from its board.
Long considered a leader in the electronic security industry, ADT earlier this year was to be acquired by Republic Industries Inc. for $5 billion in a deal valued by ADT at $29 a share. But the deal collapsed in September after months of uncertainty due to volatility in Republic's stock price.
In a telephone interview, Western President Dave Wittig declined to discuss a potential higher bid, noting only that shares of ADT have appreciated considerably in recent months.
"I think that what we're putting on the table is a fair and full price," Wittig said.
Western Resources has spent much of 1996 laying the groundwork to buy the rest of ADT. It opposed Republic's bid for ADT and has agreed to buy six security properties this year, including Westinghouse Electric Corp.'s security business for $368 in a deal announced on Monday.
Last week, Western Resources announced plans to sell its natural gas assets to focus on its electricity and security businesses.
Although Western Resources has long been considered a potential buyer of ADT, the company was not yet expected to pursue a transaction.
Wittig said Western Resources did not pursue an offer for ADT while Republic was bidding because Western was consumed with its hostile $1.9 billion bid for Kansas City Power and Light. That transaction is still not resolved, but Western Resources is holding merger talks with the Kansas City, Mo.-based utility.
"They've got a lot on their plate, but as far as wanting to run the electronic security business, this is the way to do it," Jeffrey said.
The electronic security business has grown increasingly attractive to utilities and telecommunications companies in recent months as they prepare to enter new markets that previously were off-limits due to government regulation. The phone companies and utilities hope to add protection to their menu of services and expand in homes and businesses.
