The largest electricity provider in the United States marched into Asia on Thursday with a US$2.7 billion deal to buy independent Hong Kong power producer, Consolidated Electric Power Asia Ltd.
Atlanta-based Southern Co said it made a general offer to all CEPA's shareholders after agreeing to buy most of a 60.4-percent stake held by CEPA parent, Hopewell Holdings Ltd.  
"The plan is to use this company as our growth vehicle in Asia," Ray Harris, regional director of Southern Electric International Inc, a unit of the Southern Co, told a news conference in the British colony.
"We think we paid a fair price and we see it as completing our geographical diversification from the United States," he said.
Hopewell said Southern aims to acquire 80 percent of CEPA's shares through a straightforward cash deal of HK$18.50 per share, or a cash and stock offer, he said.  
Hopewell has already agreed to tender 80 percent of its stake under an alternative cash and stock option, which offers one new CEPA share, cash of HK$69.50 and a contingency payment of HK$8.00 for every five CEPA shares.
The contingency payment depends on the company managing to secure a limited recourse debt for a power plant in Indonesia.
Hopewell will retain between 12.1 percent and 20 percent of the new company depending on which option shareholders choose.  
Southern's planned acquisition of 80 percent of CEPA's shares will effectively privatise the company, reducing its public float below Hong Kong stock exchange requirements and requiring it to de-list.
Shareholders, banks and regulators must still approve the deal, with shareholder meetings slated for November. Closing is expected before the end of the year.
Both Southern and CEPA said the takeover complements each other's strengths, with Southern renowned for its operating ability and CEPA one of the first to exploit Asia's quickening thirst for power.  
"This is, we felt, a very, very good marriage," said Stewart Elliott, CEPA's chief executive officer and managing director. "If we're going to see Asian growth as everyone has predicted, a massive amount of power is required."
Founded in 1993 as a holding company for Hopewell's power assets, CEPA owns some of southern China's largest power plants.
Its flagship Shajiao B project in Guangdong province was completed in 1987 at a cost of US$4.1 billion followed by the 1994 start-up of the US$1.87 billion Shajiao C power station.  
CEPA also owns substantial assets in the Philippines, and said it is negotiating to build more generating plants in southern China, the Philippines, Indonesia, India and Pakistan.
Harris said Southern was committed to pursuing all CEPA's existing plans, which he hopes will be augmented by Southern's expertise and financial muscle.
"We are very optimistic about the future... We would hope we would have some announcements in relation to new power plants (in the next six to 12 months)," Harris said.
Elliott and Gordon Wu, CEPA's executive chairman and the founder of Hopewell, will remain in place, he said.
Hong Kong conglomerate Wheelock &amp; Co Ltd has launched a search for a new partner for its fledgling Hong Kong fund management company following NatWest Group's decision to pull out.
"We've got nobody on the hook but there are people with whom we're having discussions," said Nicholas Sibley, deputy chairman of Wheelock NatWest Ltd, a 50-50 joint venture between Wheelock and Britain's National Westminster Bank Plc.
Wheelock NatWest revealed last week that NatWest wants to dispose of its stake in the fund management division following its acquisition of British pension giant Gartmore Plc in February for 472 million stg.
"The decision to buy Gartmore meant the support and distribution and all of that that had been hoped for from NatWest in support of Wheelock NatWest Investment Management obviously weren't going to be available. They were going to use Gartmore as their fund management arm instead," Sibley said.
Sibley expressed disappointment at NatWest's decision, but rejected speculation that the remaining divisions under the joint venture -- corporate finance and equity stockbroking -- could also become vulnerable to NatWest pulling out.  
"Yes, obviously we're disappointed," he said. "But there's no question of the equity and corporate finance business breaking up or anything like that. That is running along perfectly satisfactorily."
The joint venture, which offers corporate finance and equity stockbroking services as well as investment management in Hong Kong, became fully operational one year ago.
Sibley said he understood why NatWest wanted Gartmore.
"They had a very weak fund management side themselves and they needed to make a sort of quantum jump in that activity, which is what the acquisition of Gartmore did for them."
However, NatWest's decision to pull out comes at a particularly sensitive time for the new fund manager.
Wheelock NatWest Investment Management is experiencing rising commissions but the completion of its research division, considered essential to attract major institutional clients, has only just been completed, Sibley said.
"It takes a long time to build up a research product, which we only just got about a month ago," he said.  
"The commission figures go up and up and up every month. They haven't had a single down month since we started. But the big jump comes over the next six months when you can offer the full service to the major institutions and hope that we can attract them to deal with us through the quality of our research and execution service."
Wheelock now hopes to find a European or North American partner, said Wheelock NatWest chief executive David Miller.
He said he hoped a decision would be made by Christmas.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6441
Twentieth Century Fox joined the hunt for a larger slice of the Asia-Pacific video market on Thursday by announcing a new regional office in Hong Kong for its home entertainment division.
"We believe this is an under-developed market and therefore represents one of the best growth opportunities we have," said Jeffrey Yapp, president of Twentieth Century Fox Home Entertainment International. Twentieth Century Fox is owned By News Corp Ltd.
The new regional headquarters, which forms a crucial part of Fox's recent restructuring, will oversee marketing and distribution for video subsidiaries in Japan, Korea, Australia and India.
"In the last two years, Fox Home Entertainment International has completely restructured the way we do business," Yapp said.
"We set out to establish regional offices to provide a regional focus and give us an opportunity to better coordinate local efforts," he said.
About US$2 million has been spent and 15 people hired as part of the expansion into Asia, which accounts for 38 percent of the video division's revenue and contains its largest territory in terms of revenue contribution, Japan.
"It's for sure Japan is our major market and ahead of Hong Kong but this is a regional office and Hong Kong is the place in Asia to put your regional office," said Marc Cudennec, senior vice-president at Fox Home International.
The international focus was one of three critical strategies adopted in a drastic overhaul of Twentieth Century Fox 18 months ago, Yapp said.
"Fox realized that to become the premier filmed entertainment company, it had to focus on the international market place," he said.
Yapp said Asia's rising revenue contribution played a big role in reinforcing the importance of international expansion, as did an evening out of theatrical revenues from a prior ratio of 30 percent international, 70 percent U.S.
Fox's two other restructuring strategies, setting up four distinct production units and beefing up executive and creative talent, are well underway and reaping rewards, he added.
The number of films in development on the lot has increased from 60 to over 450 while the number of pictures being released by the studio has grown to 23 this year from 14 last year.
Fox also hopes to increase its share of the top 10 all time best selling live action videos from five to six with the video release on December 3 of its new blockbuster, Independence Day, which has grossed US$600 million in box office sales this year.
"Fox Home Entertainment is off to a very strong start on the road to the future," Yapp said. "Our projected revenues will increase 30 percent in 1997 and contribution will increase by 43 percent. The goal has been established our objectives have been set and the path to the future has been charted."
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6441
Indonesia's nascent funds industry will remain dormant until the government steps in and provides a boost, experts attending a mutual fund conference said on Monday.
"There needs to be somebody giving them a push. The push can come not just from banks, not just from private institutions, but from the government," said Venkatagiri Mudeliar, deputy general manager of Dresdner Thornton Asset Management in Singapore.
Despite its obvious promise, Indonesia's mutual funds industry faces substantial obstacles, including unbeatable returns from bank deposits offering up to 17 percent per annum.
One speaker said that more than 60 percent of pension fund assets valued at US$2.4 billion were held in bank deposits. Seven newly-established mutual funds with assets of about US$642 million were similarly invested.
Among recommended measures at the conference were tax benefits for mutual fund investors, permission to allow domestic savings to flow offshore and a major educational drive.
Felia Salim, director of the Jakarta Stock Exchange, told the conference that government discussions to provide a tax break to mutual fund investors were underway, and more than 40 percent of the bourse's budget for 1997 was dedicated to educating the public about the benefits of mutual fund investment.
But delegates said with international investment prohibited and foreign investment restrictions of 49 percent, incentives to setting up investment management subsidiaries in Indonesia were limited despite the industry's promise.
"Internationally, it's always a nervous position for a foreign fund manager to be in when it appears investment is a one-way street," said Paul Smith, managing director at the Bank of Bermuda in Hong Kong.
Foreign fund managers would be more likely to establish fund management subsidiaries in Indonesia if there were opportunities to manage Indonesian money offshore, he said.
"It's a hard call to make for a foreign fund manager to come down here and set up shop just to manage Indonesian domestic mutual fund business, which at the moment is a very small pie," Smith said.
Mudeliar said Indonesia is clearly committed to speeding up the establishment of its financial infrastructure, and catching up with its more developed Southeast Asian neighbours.
"Yes, they have lost out for a number of years but as you know nowadays knowledge is so freely available that they don't have to wait a full 15 years or 20 years," Mudeliar said.
"(They can make a) quantum leap in another five years. They can buy expertise, they can buy information ... I think Indonesia will be something to reckon with in the next 10 years."
-- Jakarta Newsroom
Indonesia's infant mutual funds industry is poised for rapid growth with far-reaching consequences for the country's financial markets and economy, a mutual funds conference in Jakarta was told on Monday.
"There is enormous potential for change," John Booth, Asia managing director for the mutual funds services firm DST International, told fund management experts.
The adoption of a Capital Markets Law earlier this year paved the way for the creation of open-ended mutual funds in Indonesia, which, until recently, offered only one closed-end fund.
"These are sweeping changes which, if successful, could change the savings profile of the country, deepen the secondary market significantly and have a profound effect on the banking and mutual funds industries," Booth said.
Indonesia's population of nearly 200 million people, combined with the forecast economic growth rate of 7.5 percent this year and a high savings rate typical of most Asian nations, promise lucrative returns to mutual fund trailblazers, he said.
Seven open-ended mutual funds, or "reksa dana," have been established so far with a value of US$640 million, and five more are in the pipeline.
Most, however, will focus on fixed income instruments rather that equities because of high-yielding bank deposits and uneven returns from Jakarta's illiquid stock market, where four large stocks account for 25 percent of volume and foreign investors account for about 70 percent of trading value.
"Obviously, equity markets are more volatile, and if people invest in them initially and they have a bad experience, it could harm the industry," Booth said.
He declined to predict how long it would take for mutual funds to boost liquidity on the Jakarta Stock Exchange. But exchange director Felia Salim suggested a guaranteed return to first-time mutual fund investors would speed up the development of a domestic funds industry and, hence, market efficiency.
"If we are to produce a domestic investor base, this would be something of a short-cut," Salim said. "If we rely on education it will take forever. The best pull is to experience an immediate capital gain."
Salim noted a guaranteed return was successfully used by Malaysia, which has set up two state funds in an attempt to even out socio-economic disparities. Malaysia has a domestic investor base of 3.31 million compared with Indonesia's tiny base of under 400,000, or less than one percent of the population.
Salim said Indonesia was unlikely to follow precisely the same model, adding that the country has an upper class of 1.2 million households with an average of 2.5 million rupiah in savings per year. However, surveys have shown a very low awareness of mutual funds within this group.
She added that while Indonesia's potential as a mutual fund investing nation remains spectacular, the stock exchange faces a substantial hurdle in education: only 17 percent of the population knows what a stock exchange is.
DST's Booth said the stock exchange and financial market regulators would also have to work hard to enhance transparency.
Ambitious plans to establish Islamic mutual funds in Indonesia include the "cleansing" of profits disallowed under Islamic law, a senior fund manager told a mutual funds conference on Tuesday.
Islamic law prohibits Moslems from earning interest on bank deposits or investing in certain types of equities.
But Nik Ezar Nik Bolia, chief executive officer of Malaysia's DCB-RHB Unit Trust Management Berhad, said the company had come up with a tried and tested method of working around the rules.
"The cleansing process takes out the impact of the interest earned," he said. "It's against Islam to gain interest on a deposit, so we remove and give to charity a proportion of the total profit."
DCB-RHB's efforts have lured US$80 million into a domestic Islamic fund in Malaysia, where 54 percent of the population is Moslem, he said.
More than 85 percent of Indonesia's population of nearly 200 million is Moslem, suggesting an equally promising future awaits any fund that appeals to the nation's religious principles.
"Southeast Asia has a combined population of 220 million Moslems," Nik said. "Therefore any product based on Islamic principles will be highly successful."
To allay concern about stock market investments, Malaysia's Bank of Islam has set up panels of scholars to vet individual stocks to ensure they are "halal", or comply with Sharia law by avoiding liquor, gambling, pornography or footwear, Nik said.
"Then we look at the core business," he said. "If it is halal that is fine, but if a subisidiary is not halal, the parent company will be rejected. However, if the subsidiary is halal and the parent company not, the subsidiary is halal and will be accepted."
The same system will be set up in Indonesia by DCB-RHB's subisidiary, P.T. Rashid Hussain Asset Management, Nik said.
However, there are substantial obstacles blocking the path to Moslem mutual fund investment in Indonesia. Among the most obvious is a relatively casual approach to religion.
"In Malaysia, the law is enforced. If you are not fasting the police can come and catch you, but in Indonesia, religion is encouraged but if you don't do it no one really cares," said one delegate to the conference.
Nik countered that 40 percent of Indonesia's Moslems are observant, but conceded that a 1,000-person survey disclosed that most were already investing in prohibited bank deposits.
"Earning interest on bank deposits is a no-no under Sharia law and 61 percent said they knew that, but there is no alternative investment," Nik said.
He admitted that persuading these investors to switch into lower-yielding stock market funds subject to profit-cleansing presented a formidable challenge. But he said that savings put towards the Moslem pilgrimage to Mecca offered hope.
"That will be the trick that we have to perform...but every year Indonesia has a high proportion of people going to Mecca," he said.
"This is my target market. If one of them were to save from ground zero to seven million rupiah into our fund before they redeem to go to Mecca, it is a captive market."
Each year 195,000 Indonesian Moslems pay 7.55 million rupiah to participate in the government-organised pilgramage to Mecca.
(US$1 = 2,327 rupiah)
Regulations issued by Indonesia earlier this year promoting the creation of mutual funds have become a landmark for the local industry, delegates to a conference said on Wednesday.
"The recognition of open-end funds or mutual funds by the Capital Market Law has been quite instrumental in the development of the Indonesian investment fund industry over the past few months," said Melli Darsa of the law firm Hadiputranto, Hadinoto and Partners in Jakarta.
Darsa was one of several fund experts attending a mutual fund conference in Jakarta who predicted a bright future for the domestic industry, with seven open-end mutual funds already established and five more in the pipeline.
Indonesia released regulations in May outlining accounting methods, reporting procedures and valuation methods for open-end mutual funds, which were allowed for the first time by the country's 1995 Capital Market Law.
The new legal framework gives Indonesia an edge, placing it half-way between the high risk and reward markets in China and India and the most exciting developed countries, most of which have hostile tax regimes, said Anthony Travers of the Hong Kong law firm Maples and Calder.
"In many respects, Indonesia is a halfway house," Travers told the conference. "Indonesia has a much more developed (financial) infrastructure than China and India."
But delegates saw significant obstacles ahead, including an almost complete ignorance of mutual funds among Indonesians, high-yielding bank deposits that lure domestic savings away from Jakarta's illiquid stock market, and restrictions on foreign investment.
Although Indonesian pension funds hold nearly US$2.4 billion they are prohibited from investing overseas, prompting some foreign fund managers to question the benefits of establishing Indonesian subsidiaries that will be restricted to managing domestic funds onshore.
But government officials made it clear that the purpose of the new rules was to persuade Indonesians to invest at home to spur development of domestic capital markets.
"We want to enhance domestic self-sufficiency. That is why you can only invest in Indonesian securities or new offerings," said Iwan Pontjowinoto, president director of P.T. Danareksa Fund Management, a state-controlled finance company that launched the first of the new open funds.
"We want to have local funds that can help the government by investing in the stock market," he said.
The new funds can only invest in domestic securities and are prohibited from selling more than one percent of their shares or units to any one investor, ensuring a wide investor base.
The new rules also ensure the funds are broadly invested, prohibiting them from spending more than 10 percent of their net asset value on any one company or buying securities representing more than five percent of the issuer's paid-up capital.
The conference, which attracted about 40 delegates from fund management companies, law firms, rating agencies and fund custodians around Asia, ended on Wednesday with a workshop on how to structure and price mutual funds.
Zero tax and limited regulation are luring billions of dollars into offshore mutual funds, spurring a growth industry in famed tax-free locations such as the Cayman Islands, according to a mutual fund legal expert.
"I think every indication is that the offshore part of the mutual fund industry will grow. In the offshore jurisdiction you have no taxation and a more appropriate level of regulation as a rule of thumb," said Anthony Travers, senior partner at Maples and Calder in Hong Kong.
Anecdotal evidence suggests these advantages have drawn nearly US$900 billion into offshore mutual funds so far out of an entire industry sometimes valued at US$5 trillion, he said.
A lack of professional infrastructure is often a compelling disincentive to authorising funds in countries offering the greatest returns, while high taxation levels deter mutual funds from setting up in promising developed markets, he said on Friday.
The alternative is to authorise the fund in an offshore region, avoiding tax while reaching into some of the world's most rewarding investment regions.
There are, however, drawbacks.
"If you go offshore and you invest into the onshore jurisdiction from your mutual funds, you have things like withholding tax and tax treatments that may be imposed on your profits, and marketing is very much an issue," Travers said.
Certain double tax treaty networks can allow investors to avoid some onshore tax requirements, but these treaties vary from country to country, as do marketing restrictions, he said. For example, offshore mutual funds are prevented from marketing to more than 100 investors in the United States, while the United Kingdom prohibits marketing of offshore retail mutual funds unless they are based in designated jurisdictions, such as Bermuda, Jersey and Guernsey.
It is possible to market a Cayman Islands-registered mutual fund in the United Kingdom, but only as a private placement and not as a retail fund, Travers said.
Despite their obvious benefits, Travers warned that investing in offshore mutual funds is not for everyone.
The lack of regulation gives greater flexibility in the establishment and administration of mutual funds but it also provides little recourse for unsophisticated retail investors, which partly explains why these funds cannot be marketed freely in the United States or the United Kingdom.
"You are essentially talking about mutual funds which are established by institutions for other institutions or very high net worth and sophisticated individuals, in which case it is felt additional layers of regulation are not appropriate or necessary," he said.
It is possible to market offshore retail funds in Europe, but funds must meet the requirements of the "Undertakings of Collective Investment and Transfer of Securities" (UCITS) directive, which ensures certain standards are met.
"They are supposed to be able to sell UCITS cross-border in Europe but in fact the European Union is still something of a myth when it comes to cross-border marketing," Travers said.
"And you find in these jurisdictions commensurately higher fees. Three to six basis points on net asset value is the price you pay to market to the retail sector," he said.
Zero tax and limited regulation are luring billions of dollars into offshore mutual funds, spurring a growth industry in famed tax-free locations such as the Cayman Islands, according to a mutual fund legal expert.
"I think every indication is that the offshore part of the mutual fund industry will grow. In the offshore jurisdiction you have no taxation and a more appropriate level of regulation as a rule of thumb," said Anthony Travers, senior partner at Maples and Calder in Hong Kong.
Anecdotal evidence suggests these advantages have drawn nearly US$900 billion into offshore mutual funds so far out of an entire industry sometimes valued at US$5 trillion, he said.
A lack of professional infrastructure is often a compelling disincentive to authorising funds in countries offering the greatest returns, while high taxation levels deter mutual funds from setting up in promising developed markets, he said on Friday.
The alternative is to authorise the fund in an offshore region, avoiding tax while reaching into some of the world's most rewarding investment regions.
There are, however, drawbacks.
"If you go offshore and you invest into the onshore jurisdiction from your mutual funds, you have things like withholding tax and tax treatments that may be imposed on your profits, and marketing is very much an issue," Travers said.
Certain double tax treaty networks can allow investors to avoid some onshore tax requirements, but these treaties vary from country to country, as do marketing restrictions, he said.
For example, offshore mutual funds are prevented from marketing to more than 100 investors in the United States, while the United Kingdom prohibits marketing of offshore retail mutual funds unless they are based in designated jurisdictions, such as Bermuda, Jersey and Guernsey.
It is possible to market a Cayman Islands-registered mutual fund in the United Kingdom, but only as a private placement and not as a retail fund, Travers said.
Despite their obvious benefits, Travers warned that investing in offshore mutual funds is not for everyone.
The lack of regulation gives greater flexibility in the establishment and administration of mutual funds but it also provides little recourse for unsophisticated retail investors, which partly explains why these funds cannot be marketed freely in the United States or the United Kingdom.
"You are essentially talking about mutual funds which are established by institutions for other institutions or very high net worth and sophisticated individuals, in which case it is felt additional layers of regulation are not appropriate or necessary," he said.
It is possible to market offshore retail funds in Europe, but funds must meet the requirements of the "Undertakings of Collective Investment and Transfer of Securities" (UCITS) directive, which ensures certain standards are met.
"They are supposed to be able to sell UCITS cross-border in Europe but in fact the European Union is still something of a myth when it comes to cross-border marketing," Travers said.
"And you find in these jurisdictions commensurately higher fees. Three to six basis points on net asset value is the price you pay to market to the retail sector," he said.
NatWest Markets, the investment banking arm of National Westminster Bank, said on Tuesday it had agreed to buy out Wheelock and Company Ltd's stake in their 50-50 joint venture, Wheelock NatWest.
The announcement ends a short and bumpy association between one of the world's biggest banks and Wheelock, a Hong Kong-based conglomerate led by Peter Woo Kwong-Ching, one of the leading candidates for the post of chief executive following Hong Kong's return to Chinese sovereignty next year.
NatWest Markets said recent trading scandals around the world have made it more difficult for joint ventures to operate under British rules in Asian markets with the highest growth, such as equity and derivatives trading.
"We did recognise at a very early stage that there was a certain amount of risk we could accommodate within the joint venture vehicle," said NatWest Markets' newly appointed chairman for Asia Pacific, John Howland-Jackson.
"We were perhaps not bargaining on a series of events around the world in a variety of traded markets that would cause such scrutiny of trading businesses," he said. "The whole environment has tightened up considerably."
Terms and details of the deal were not disclosed, but Howland-Jackson said both partners had contributed US$125 million in capital towards the joint venture before the shareholders went their different ways.
The move followed last month's announcement that NatWest Markets was pulling out of the fund management arm of the joint venture because of its acquisition of British pension giant Gartmore Plc  earlier in the year.
"I think that might have caused some disagreement between the shareholders," said Vincent Kwan, analyst at Vickers Ballas.
But representatives of both companies denied that termination clauses in the original joint venture deal signed in May 1994 were enacted.
Nicholas Sibley, managing director of Wheelock Capital, said his company had no immediate plans to replace the joint venture with another financial services subsidiary, but instead would focus on its goal to act as a bridge between China and the rest of the world.
"Financial services isn't the first thing that comes to mind," he said, but declined to elaborate.
Analysts warned that although the break-up will not affect Wheelock's earnings, it could signify a substantial strategic setback for a company with stated plans to diversify its earnings base away from Asia's volatile property sector.
"They've always said they wanted four major operating divisions by the year 2000 and financial services was going to be one of them," said another analyst, who declined to be identified.
"Now that the joint venture is gone some people may be wondering what the commitment is to diversifying the earnings base."
Some analysts said the joint venture had failed to perform as well as expected, and company projections of a break-even date by the end of 1997 were unduly optimistic.
"Investment banking in Asia is a very competitive market," one analyst said.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6441
The architect of Hong Kong's currency link to the U.S. dollar on Wednesday defended the peg's continued existence well beyond the British colony's return to Chinese sovereignty next year.
John Greenwood, the author of the 1983 paper upon which the peg was based, said China must uphold the currency link to comply with the Basic Law, Hong Kong's future constitution.
"If (China is) going to respect and honour the letter and spirit of the Basic Law then it is going to be quite difficult to move from this currency system to anything else, and I think that has tremendous value in terms of stability for the future of Hong Kong," said Greenwood, who is now chairman and chief economist at LGT Asset Management.
Greenwood said articles outlined in the Basic Law require China to preserve key features of the existing system, such as maintenance of 100 percent reserves for the Hong Kong dollar float, full convertibility and the existence of private banknote issuers with reserves held by the government.
"In my view, unless the (Chinese) government intends to undermine completely the Basic Law, it will find it very difficult to depart from the linked rate system for the Hong Kong dollar as it operates today," Greenwood said.
Although the Basic Law is silent on the mechanism or rate at which the currency should be pegged, most proposals for change are impractical and very risky, he said.
Any change in the rate of HK$7.80 to the U.S. dollar or a switch to another currency or basket of currencies would reduce prized stability created by the existing system, while non-convertibility of China's renminbi would make any integration of the two currencies virtually impossible, he said.
"I would argue that in order to become a reserve currency, the renminbi would be required to be fully convertible with no trade and capital controls," he said.
China hopes to attain convertibility of its current account by the end of the century, but broad and deep capital markets will be required before full convertibility of its capital account would become possible, he added.
Greenwood also said the peg's ability to withstand upheavals, such as China's Tiananmen Square crackdown in 1989 and global stock market instability in 1987, suggest a speculative attack before the transition at midnight on June 30 next year was extremely unlikely.
"If for some reason there was political shock, then we might see some kind of speculation. But in the absence of that, I would not expect large-scale speculation," he said.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6441
Guinness Flight Asia said on Thursday that the selection of Hong Kong's new chief executive next month could give further support to the territory's soaring Hang Seng Index, which it expects to rise to 14,000 points soon.
"Once the chief executive is chosen, the direction of economic policy after the handover will be clearer," the fund manager said in an Asian quarterly outlook.
"Since it is clearly in China's interest that the handover should proceed smoothly, China will seek to ensure that it does nothing to adversely affect sentiment. Investors are increasingly coming to regard the handover as a positive rather than a negative."
The British territory returns to Chinese rule on July 1, 1997. The chief executive, who will govern Hong Kong as a special administrative region of China following the transition, will be announced on December 11.
Guinness Flight is maintaining a heavily overweight position on the Hong Kong stock market, and investment director Nerissa Lee said she holds a three-month target of 14,000 points for the Hang Seng Index.
"Hong Kong has done very well and we're still very bullish," she said. "I think it will continue to do well for some time because money will flow into Hong Kong as the preferred market (in Asia) and will stay here for some time."
Lee said Hong Kong will benefit from the credit easing in China, which will offset any interest rate hike in the United States this year or next, with additional support from subdued inflation and a strong property market.
Guinness Flight is also overweight in China, where it expects company profits to recover strongly as the effects of the austerity programme ease.
"It's time to take a look at China," Lee said. "We are at the start of a cyclical uptrend."
She forecasts Chinese economic growth of 9.8 percent this year, rising to 10.2 percent next year, in a context of a carefully controlled credit easing that will be channelled into selective sectors and industries.
While exports are expected to recover from this year's weakness, China's economy will also benefit from an increase in investment and consumption, she said.
"The last cycle of growth was led by exports but in this cycle we believe it will be very much more broadly based," Lee said, who favours power, automobiles and consumer products as China's most promising sectors in the short term.
Huaneng International Power Company is her top power stock, thanks to an aggressive capacity expansion, while Qingling Motors Co Ltd leads the automobile pack.
Qingling stock is trading in single digit multiples, despite a 20-percent share of China's expanding car market that is expected to rise to 30 percent next year.
Earnings at Guangnan Ltd, an integrated food distributor poised to exploit a boom in Chinese supermarket consumption, could rise 30 percent each year for the next three years, Lee said.
Goldlion Holdings Ltd remains Guinness Flight's favoured retail stock, reporting an annual net profit growth of more than 40 percent each year for the past seven years.
"This is an excellent track record and proof of the quality of management at the company," Lee said.
Hong Kong is among the world's most efficient economies but its continued success as a global financial centre and entrepot is far from certain, Harvard-based economic adviser professor Jeffrey Sachs said on Monday.
Uncertainty associated with the British colony's return to Chinese rule next year could compromise Hong Kong's leading position as the world's most competitive economy behind Singapore, said Sachs, whose Harvard Institute of International Development produced the Global Competitiveness Report 1996.
"I'm not predicting doom and gloom," Sachs, an adviser on economic reform to governments around the world, told reporters at the World Economic Forum in Hong Kong.
"I'm just saying that if you want to maintain a high-precision, finely-honed, world-class financial and trading centre such as this there isn't that much room for playing around."
Hong Kong will continue to flourish past the transition only if the rule of law is strictly observed, media freedoms are upheld and the economy remains completely open, he said.
But only time will tell whether the commercial underpinnings of Hong Kong's successful, highly-complex and capitalist economy will be maintained, he said.
"After Chinese sovereignty comes in July 1997 we're going to see whether the judicial system remains independent, whether the media remain free, whether there's ample opportunity for the full flow of financial and economic and political information that is vital for an entrepot of this kind," he said.
Sachs also adopted a cautious view of China's economic promise, warning that its economic institutions need drastic overhaul in order to maintain high rates of economic growth beyond the short-term.
"These institutions are not good enough to carry China toward long-term growth. China's dynamism now is undoubted and it's not going to come klunking to a halt, but it's based on the fact the starting point is so low," Sachs said.
Cheap labour, low taxation and access to foreign exchange along China's coastal regions have fuelled the world's most impressive exports boom, Sachs said. But in order for that momentum to be maintained, China must clarify property rights, develop financial markets and establish legal certainty.
"The Chinese government is going to have to run very fast and keep very clear sights on its goals in order ... for institutional change to keep up so that the goal of high growth can be sustained in the future," Sachs said.
A major obstacle to long-term success is the state enterprise sector, which employs 20 percent of the population. While it is not sufficiently large to submerge the entire economy, the state enterprise sector is a definite drag on the economy and poses a risk to the entire financial system, Sachs said.
Sachs lauded China's efforts so far to privatise businesses at the local and regional levels.
"Parts of China are reforming from the bottom up with local and regional governments making experiments in privatisation that can be models for the rest of China," he said.
Foreign cash is holding steady in Thailand, hoping for economic and stock market recovery even though there are few signs of either so far.
"I think a lot of fund managers will be doing a lot of wishful thinking, but at the end of the day I don't think (Thailand) will be going anywhere in a hurry," Christopher Day, joint managing director at Thornton Management (Asia) Ltd said.
Most funds appeared to be neutral on Thailand against Morgan Stanley's widely-used Far East Asia ex-Japan free index.
Salomon Brothers said last week that research data suggested funds were neutral to overweight, while Nomura Research Institute said funds were neutral to underweight.
Thailand stock exchange data suggested a one-percent retail fund sell-off in October brought most funds into neutral.
"The worst should be over, both in terms of politics and economics," said Stephen Leung, BZW Asia's chief investment officer.
Investor nervousness has abated somewhat following the recent election of a new coalition government headed by the New Aspiration Party. But most commentators agreed the immediate direction of Thailand's SET index, which closed on Friday at 970.30 compared to a year-high of 1,402.81, depends on the announcement of cabinet appointments and new economic measures.
"There's a good chance we'll have a little rally back up to, say, 1,000 if (coalition leader) Chavalit Yongchaiyudh brings good people into his cabinet," said Christine Rowley, investment manager with LGT Asset Management in Hong Kong.
Rowley also said the SETI has performed strongly through December and January every year for 10 years.
"There's a very high seasonality element in Thailand," she said. "So we might see some little rally ... but I expect foreigners to sell into that and bring the market back down again, maybe even lower than it has been before."
Others agreed that more selling can be expected with funds assuming an underweight position while Thailand grapples with gaping trade and current account deficits, a slump in corporate earnings and a weak bank sector.
"Further market downside exists, though the extent of a decline will not be large," Nomura said in a research report.
Poor corporate earnings are considered the prime culprit. Jardine Fleming has reduced its corporate earnings forecast for 1996 to four percent from 14 percent, following a decline in price-earnings ratios to 16 from 18 earlier in the year.
Offsetting the bad news are falling inflation, some hopes of improved export competitiveness next year and expectations of better trade and current accounts on a decline in imports.
"Without the new measures, without an improvement in the current account deficit, we think the market will find it difficult to break through the 1,000 level," said Patrick Wong, investment director at Jardine Fleming Unit Trusts.
Wong is expecting some turnaround in the first or second quarters of 1997, partly because slower imports will ease the trade deficit and improve the current account deficit.
Most agree improvements in a current account deficit of seven percent of gross domestic product are needed before Thailand can turn around. But there is considerable scepticism about common forecasts of an economic and stock market recovery within six months.
"It's been six months away for a long time now. Lo and behold, the second quarter of 1997 is also conveniently six months away," Rowley said.
Jardine Fleming Holdings Ltd said in Hong Kong on Thursday that clients should be reassured that revelations of front-running by one of its fund managers had prompted much greater emphasis on regulatory compliance.
"Clients must look at this going forward," Alan Smith, chairman of Jardine Fleming Holdings Ltd, told Reuters. "The important thing is to make sure you take the right action, and we've taken the right action."
A five-month probe by regulators in London and Hong Kong uncovered a series of irregular trades by a former senior fund manager at Jardine Fleming Investment Management Ltd, one of Asia's largest fund houses with US$22 billion under management.
The United Kingdom's Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO) and the Securities and Futures Commission (SFC) in Hong Kong said fund manager Colin Armstrong delayed processing deals, allowing for changes in the trading price. Some of the deals involved his personal trading account.
In addition to the fines, Jardine Fleming agreed to pay the disadvantaged clients US$19.3 million.
"This incident was regrettable and we've expressed regret for it," Smith said. "Clearly as a result of this incident we've conducted a major review and we have a new emphasis on dealing and compliance procedures."
The SFC said it revoked the registration of the chief executive at Jardine Fleming Investment Management in Hong Kong, Robert Thomas. It also issued a public reprimand to the company.
"The SFC is committed to maintaining Hong Kong's reputation as an investment management centre in which bad practice will not be tolerated," SFC executive director Gerard McMahon said.
London-based Jardine Fleming Asset Management (JFAM) was fined 400,000 sterling and had its authorisation revoked, while three London-based companies in the Robert Fleming group were fined 100,000 sterling each.
The London-based companies delegated fund management to Jardine Fleming Investment Management in Hong Kong, which the SFC said failed to facilitate investigation when misconduct was suspected and lacked an effective audit trail.
"IMRO's investigation has amply illustrated the danger of firms paying insufficient attention to the responsibilities that arise when they delegate business to another entity, whether in the United Kingdom or overseas," said Phillip Thorpe, IMRO's chief executive.
Jardine Fleming was taking it on the chin, Smith said, but he noted that the five-month investigation identified problems with only one of about 40 fund managers.
"I'm not seeking to minimise the seriousness of what happened, but I think it's important you're balanced," he said.
Jardine Fleming has appointed a new chief operating officer at JFIM and a new head of compliance. The compliance section is being beefed up and centralised dealing structures are being created in Hong Kong and Tokyo.
"I think clients will understand that steps have been taken, and these do include a significant beefing up in the compliance system we have in place," Smith said.
Rival fund managers in Hong Kong condemned Jardine Fleming Investment Management (JFIM) on Friday and expressed shock at revelations of front-running at the British territory's biggest and most prominent fund manager.
"It's appalling that a leading, well-respected portfolio manager was profiting at the expense of his clients," said Gregory Neumann, executive director at Scudder Stevens and Clark Asia Ltd. "Any institution worth their salt will fire them."
Most fund managers, including major competitors, said they were stunned to learn of the severity of the JFIM's actions and stressed concern about Hong Kong's regulatory integrity.
"How could this have been an isolated incident when clearly there was a culture there that this was fine?" asked one competitor. "Why did one guy have to take the fall? If they're regulating properly they should fire everyone who did that."
A five-month investigation by the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO) in London and the Securities and Futures Commission (SFC) in Hong Kong exposed late allocation of trades by Colin Armstrong, a charismatic and senior member of Hong Kong's fund management community.
The late trades, many involving Armstrong's personal account, allowed for a change in the trading price which Armstrong turned to his benefit, the investigation concluded.
Jardine Fleming was fined 700,000 sterling. JFIM's former chief executive Robert Thomas, who had earlier resigned, has had his registration in the United Kingdom and Hong Kong revoked.
London-based Jardine Fleming Asset Management lost its authorisation.
"I think the disciplinary action was minor given the severity of what they did," said one fund manager.
Jardine Fleming declined to respond to the criticism, but the SFC said it was convinced Jardine Fleming would function in the future as a fully compliant firm.
"What people are saying in the market, the scepticism they're voicing, is not unreasonable but I don't think it quite takes into account that these guys have really received the blast of a lifetime," said SFC director Deborah Glass. "They know their credibility is at stake. They know we will be back."
Another commentator remained unconvinced, suggesting that the Jardine Fleming incident was merely the tip of an iceberg.
"This is rife in Asia. It's rife in all emerging markets," said Gary Greenberg, deputy managing director at Peregrine Asset Management. "But Hong Kong and Singapore are no longer emerging markets and all of a sudden people are paying attention."
Glass said that Hong Kong's short regulatory history and relatively light reliance on "black letter law", or written regulations, should not suggest that its regulation is lax.
She also rejected comparisons between the Jardine Fleming scandal and that of Nick Leeson, the rogue trader who brought down the prestigious Barings bank through unauthorised options trading in Singapore last year.
"There is no parallel between the actions of Nick Leeson in Singapore and the activities of a fund manager in Hong Kong," Glass said. "I understand there is a certain symmetry but one of the enormous differences here is that the regulatory system identified the misconduct, worked with regulators in London and dealt with the problem, unlike Singapore."
The Jardine Fleming incident should serve as a reminder to all Hong Kong fund managers that a corporate culture of compliance is required and will be enforced, Glass said.
Hong Kong funds are expected to erect "Chinese walls" between asset management and traders after revelations of unsanctioned trades at the colony's biggest fund manager, Jardine Fleming Investment Management.
Central dealing, a system that prevents fund managers from executing their own trades, is gaining favour in Asia after last week's shocking disclosure of late allocation of trades by one of Hong Kong's most prominent fund managers, Colin Armstrong.
"There is an awareness in the pension (fund) community that this is an issue in Hong Kong," said Gregory Neumann, executive director at Scudder Stevens &amp; Clark Asia Ltd. "I think this could turn out to be a positive for the investment management industry -- no-one will get hired going forward without central dealing."
Regulators unveiled severe punishment last week for Armstrong's actions, which involved delaying the allocation of his trades until the price had changed. Some of the deals involved his own personal trading account.
London's Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO) and the Securities and Futures Commission (SFC) in Hong Kong fined Jardine Fleming 700,000 stg, revoked the registration for Jardine Fleming Investment Management's former chief executive and cancelled the authorisation for Jardine Fleming Asset Management in London.
Jardine Fleming, jointly owned by the Jardine Matheson and Robert Fleming groups, also paid US$19.3 million in compensation.
Regulators said they were convinced Jardine Fleming was committed to establishing a culture of regulatory compliance, and that central dealing was one useful step towards that goal.
"Central dealing simply means all the people managing money should place their orders through a central desk," said Deborah Glass, senior director at the SFC.
"If a fund manager can run his orders through all the brokers in town it's very difficult to track."
Placing another layer between the fund manager and his or her client creates a Chinese wall, reducing the opportunity for a fund manager to manipulate his or her orders. Three people are involved the transaction rather than two.
Chinese walls are supposed to be invisible but inviolate divisions between asset management operations that invest for clients, and sister broking and corporate finance departments whose clients are often bought by the funds.
Jardine Fleming said it would have central dealing desks set up in Tokyo and Hong Kong by the end of the year.
Most major investment managers in New York and London employ central dealing, but a quick review of major fund houses in Hong Kong revealed that many here do not.
One of Jardine Fleming's major competitors said all trades were put through different trading desks dedicated to individual markets rather than a central desk. Another competitor said a new automated order input system would eliniate the need for a central desk.
Other fund managers warned that central desks do not eradicate the opportunity for fraud, especially if there is a culture of non-compliance among the organisation's dealers.
It would be possible for fund managers and brokers on a central dealing desk to work together to move markets in a favourable direction before certain trades are executed.
"From time to time people in Hong Kong have had trouble with dealers," the fund manager warned. "It removes one area but it opens up the door to another."
Regulators last week stressed the importance of a "culture" of compliance throughout an organisation, and said they would be carefully watching Jardine Fleming and other fund companies operating in Hong Kong.
"One of the leading asset consulting firms here who was, I believe, acting on behalf of several institutional pension clients, just called to reconfirm that the managers of those various pension clients did have central dealing," Neumann said.
"This raises concerns for individuals in any institution," said Esther Heathcote, vice-president at BT Fund Management. "They have to have regard for internal controls and compliance."
As a subsidiary of an American bank based in Australia, BT Fund Management is regulated by the Australian Securities Commission and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
Hong Kong experts helping Beijing establish its funds industry said Chinese planners wanted to use domestic savings to build capital markets rather than offer lucrative opportunities to foreigners.
"I do get the sense they are more keen to mobilise their own domestic savings," said Andrew Lo, chairman of the Hong Kong Investment Funds Association on Monday.
Lo had just returned from Beijing where he met Vice-Premier Zhu Rhongji who told him China would release a set of rules and regulations governing a domestic funds industry by the end of the year.
Lo said he also received firm confirmation from Zhu that Hong Kong's position as a strong financial centre will continue following the territory's handover to Chinese rule next year.
"And while China will continue to develop its capital markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen they see this very much as complementary to Hong Kong rather than as competition," Lo said.
He said he was convinced that China appreciates the importance of an active funds management industry in the development of a national economy with capital markets.
But China's dearth of investment vehicles, a product of its underdeveloped capital markets, and a currency not yet fully convertible will thwart foreigners seeking early access to China's nascent, but potentially huge, funds industry.
The immediate role of foreign investors will be to provide expertise to allow China's domestic funds industry to develop on the back of domestic savings, Lo said.
"While we would not anticipate immediate direct overseas participation in the mainland's domestic fund markets, we believe that Hong Kong is in a unique position to play a key role in fostering the development of the fund industry," he said.
A series of training sessions are being set up in Hong Kong under the auspices of the Hong Kong Investment Funds Assocation and Hong Kong's financial markets regulator, the Securities and Futures Commission, Lo said.
China is studying the feasibility of pilot schemes to allow Sino-foreign joint venture fund management companies to be set up to tap overseas fund management expertise, Lo said.
"This won't happen immediately, it's likely to take some time," Lo said. "Ultimately, they very much see an investment industry as a way to develop their own economy.
"(Zhu) confirmed his understanding that our industry is very open and international and plays a major role fostering development of markets and the economy."
Investors are already prepared for the moment China unveils the regulations governing the domestic funds industry.
"Once the rules are out, there are quite a few domestically managed funds waiting to start up," Lo said. Existing domestic financial markets and yuan-denominated bonds are likely recipients of interest from these funds, he said.
There are already about 70 closed-end funds in China with a total asset size of 5 billion yuan invested in projects, properties, stocks and bonds. ($1 = 8.3 yuan)
Hong Kong business groups hit back on Wednesday at attempts to link China's permanent most favoured nation (MFN) trading perks with how Beijing handles Hong Kong after it reverts to Chinese control later this year.
U.S. Congressman Jim Kolbe, leading a 22-member delegation from the House of Representatives to Beijing, said on Tuesday the United States will probably want to monitor Hong Kong for at least a year before granting China permanent MFN status.
"If MFN were conditioned or taken away, especially during the transition period, it would clearly have a devastating effect and make it much more likely that all the things we want for Hong Kong would not be achieved," said Mark Michelson, former chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce.
China currently enjoys MFN, subject to annual review.
Hong Kong, which depends heavily on China-U.S. trade, fully supports China's application for full MFN status, which would allow China the same treatment as other big U.S. trading partners without the annual review.
"MFN should be the norm rather than a favour," said Selina Yen at the Hong Kong government's trade and industry branch.
"To us, MFN status is not a privilege. It should be granted to everybody as a normal trading basis. This is our position."
But few in Hong Kong expect to see China win full MFN status in 1997, the year that China takes back Hong Kong from Britain.
"It's unfortunate. Were it not for this being the year of the return of Hong Kong to China, I think it would have been an opportune time for the U.S. Congress to finally extend permanent MFN status," said Frank Martin, the American chamber president.
"But it is going to be difficult this year. Many members of Congress are very likely to want to take a wait-and-see attitude."
Legislation on permanent MFN has been submitted to Congress but has not been voted on.
China, which argues full MFN status is essential for healthy Sino-U.S. relations, granted Kolbe's congressional delegation an interview with President Jiang Zemin on Tuesday.
Political analysts said Kolbe was committed to achieving permanent MFN status for China, but had tried to remind Beijing the United States wants to see a smooth handover in Hong Kong, where many are worried that China might impose repressive rule.
"Would a vote to tie MFN to the transition be a good idea? No," said one analyst, who declined to be identified.
"But to kind of use it one last time to signal concern while everyone knows annual MFN is going to go through doesn't hurt."
China's annual application for MFN status goes to Congress in May. It has won approval every year since 1990.
However, former U.S. president George Bush was occasionally forced to use his presidential veto to eliminate various conditions that Congress attempted to attach.
U.S. President Bill Clinton, who accused Bush of coddling tyrants in the 1992 U.S. presidential election campaign debates, de-linked the annual review of MFN from China's human rights record in 1995.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6441
Hong Kong business groups hit back on Wednesday at U.S. attempts to link China's most favoured nation (MFN) trading perks with how Beijing handles Hong Kong after it reverts to Chinese control later this year.
U.S. Congressman Jim Kolbe, leading a 22-member delegation from the House of Representatives to Beijing, said on Tuesday the United States will probably want to monitor Hong Kong for at least a year before granting China permanent MFN status.
"If MFN were conditioned or taken away, especially during the transition period, it would clearly have a devastating effect and make it much more likely that all the things we want for Hong Kong would not be achieved," said Mark Michelson, former chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce.
China currently enjoys MFN, subject to annual review.
Hong Kong commentators noted that permanent MFN, which would allow China the same tariff treatment as other big U.S. trading partners without an annual review, was unlikely in 1997, the year that China takes back Hong Kong from Britain.
"It's unfortunate. Were it not for this being the year of the return of Hong Kong to China, I think it would have been an opportune time for the U.S. Congress to finally extend permanent MFN status," said Frank Martin, the American chamber president.
"But it is going to be difficult this year. Many members of Congress are very likely to want to take a wait-and-see attitude."
Legislation on permanent MFN has been submitted to Congress but has not been voted on.
China, which argues full MFN status is essential for healthy Sino-U.S. relations, granted Kolbe's congressional delegation an interview with President Jiang Zemin on Tuesday.
Political analysts said Kolbe was committed to achieving permanent MFN status for China, but had tried to remind Beijing the United States wants to see a smooth handover in Hong Kong, where many are worried that China might impose repressive rule.
"Would a vote to tie MFN to the transition be a good idea? No," said one analyst, who declined to be identified.
"But to kind of use it one last time to signal concern while everyone knows annual MFN is going to go through doesn't hurt."
As the leading entrepot for China-U.S. trade, the Hong Kong government has always backed China's application for MFN status. But on Wednesday it declined to comment on Kolbe's remarks.
China's annual application for MFN status goes to Congress in May. It has won approval every year since 1990.
However, former U.S. president George Bush was occasionally forced to use his presidential veto to eliminate various conditions that Congress attempted to attach.
U.S. President Bill Clinton, who accused Bush of coddling tyrants in the 1992 U.S. presidential election campaign debates, de-linked the annual review of MFN from China's human rights record in 1995.
An uproar over the sudden departure of Hong Kong's chief immigration official last July is expected to gather momentum this week, when the territory's top civil servant appears before a Legislative Council enquiry.
Anson Chan, the territory's popular chief secretary, is expected to resist demands by Legislative Council (Legco) committee members that she release confidential reports on former immigration boss Laurence Leung.
Chan's appearance before the committee on Wednesday sets the stage for a showdown between the Hong Kong government, now facing accusations of a political cover-up, and the Legco select committee investigating the Leung affair.
Committee chairman Ip Kwok-him last week threatened to use a powerful ordinance to slap Chan with contempt if she fails to unveil the reports -- statements which drew a sharp response from the government on Sunday.
If the committee uses the Legco (Powers and Privileges) ordinance to open the reports, "then it will have to be solved in the court", civil service secretary Lam Woon-kwong told the South China Morning Post newspaper.
At issue are two investigations, one an anti-corruption probe and the other a police integrity check, both performed before Leung left his post where he enjoyed access to highly sensitive information.
British press reports have since alleged that Leung was spying for China, which takes back Hong Kong after 150 years of colonial rule on July 1 this year.
Leung, whose daughter was murdered with a cross-bow in Canada four years ago, has denied being a spy. But a few days ago, Leung contradicted earlier claims that he resigned for personal reasons and announced that he was forced to quit.
The Hong Kong government said on Saturday that no decision had yet been made on whether to release the reports but stressed its concern to uphold the privacy rights of civil servants.
It also noted that witnesses before the select committee enjoy all the rights and privileges of a witness in court.
"If that witness claims public interest immunity in relation to any document, he is entitled to put his reasons before the chairman for a ruling," the government said in a statement.
Governor Chris Patten on Sunday reiterated his support for Chan and civil service secretary Lam Woon-Kwong, but declined to comment on how the government would respond to the committee's demands next week.
"Everything that's been done by the Secretary for the Civil Service and others has been with my complete support and endorsement," Patten said.
Political commentators said the Leung case had highlighted Legco's power to hold the Hong Kong government accountable.
In so doing, it has drawn attention to the sensitive issue of the future relationship between the executive and legislative branches of government in Hong Kong, and created something of a dilemma for Beijing, which has long argued that Legco became too powerful under Patten.
"The irony is that Beijing might find it extremely difficult to discredit Legco for doing the wrong thing now that the Government is being challenged on all fronts," political columnist Chris Yeung wrote in the South China Morning Post.
"But if it gives legislators a pat on the back, it would find itself giving credit to a body which it has decided to scrap on July 1."
Asia can expect to see a long-term inflow of money from a group of huge California pension funds now on an eight-day swing through the region, Asian fund managers said last week.
"The very positive thing is they've come to Asia and issued a clean bill of health in that they've pencilled in large amounts that will come here in the next five to 10 years," said Richard Nicholas, managing director at Hambro Pacific Fund Management.
Representatives of seven pension funds with combined assets of $234 billion are scouring the region for investments, taking the opportunity to promote their home region to Asian venture capitalists at the same time.
"This is just an acknowledgment that this region is set for enormous growth and they want to be a part of that," said Christopher Ryan, managing director at HSBC Asset Management in Hong Kong.
Ryan said the fund managers' presence reflects renewed interest in Asia after the slumps of 1994 and 1995.
"We are seeing a growing level of inquiry from the United States," he said. "It would be fair to say the peak of activity was during 1993 but it's building up again, that much is clear."
However, the immediate effect of the visit, which includes Singapore and Taiwan as well as China, will be limited.
William Crist, board president of the California Public Employees Retirement System or CALPERS, said last week that the Shanghai Stock Exchange was too small and opaque to justify investment at this stage.
CALPERS, one of the world's largest pension funds with $107 billion under management, is expected to join other funds opting for private equity stakes in individual projects rather than buying up shares in listed companies.
"We'll see greater interest in private equity funds and while it's not something we find particularly attractive there will probably also be interest in infrastructure-type investments as well," Ryan said.
Nicholas said renewed interest by U.S. pension funds signalled an awareness that Asia was healthier economically than many suspected last year, along with the recognition that regional allocation of global portfolios would reach about 12 percent by the early 2000s.
"The recent broad Southeast Asian slowdown is, we believe, a quite natural early stage better described as growing pains," Nicholas said.
"We see Asia-Pacific as maybe one-third of the way into its emergence as a global trading power which could span 20 to 30 years -- and that's before fully factoring in China or the Indian sub-continent."
Over the past 15 years Asia has grown at an average rate of seven percent compared to an average of less than three percent for the developed Group of Seven industrialised nations.
While Nicholas expects Asia's average growth rate to decline to six percent over the next few years, the region will still offer a higher return than developed nations if one assumes a connection between economic growth and market performance.
However, improved knowledge of individual markets will be required to reap the best returns.
"In terms of stock markets, they are maturing faster, and foreign investors and investment bankers are becoming increasingly educated," Nicholas said.
"In contrast to the earlier bland and broad asset allocation, we believe that in future each market should be analysed on a more individual basis within the context of its own development."
Fallout from a scandal involving late allocation of trades at Jardine Fleming was still attracting attention in Hong Kong on Wednesday, but the company escaped further sanctions and said business continued as usual.
"We've had some redemptions. We've also had some subscriptions," a company spokesman told Reuters. "The business pattern is very much as usual."
Jardine Fleming retained its seat on the executive committee of the domestic industry association, the Hong Kong Investment Funds Association, despite media reports that moves were afoot to knock the company off the committee.
In election results released on Wednesday, Jardine Fleming continues as one of 12 member firms with a representative on the board, but the association stressed the election began in early August and ballots were collected by mail.
"There isn't any particular relationship (between the elections and the scandal)," an association spokeswoman said.
Jardine Fleming did, however, earn a stinging rebuke from the group, which announced a new industry drive towards best professional practice.
"It was felt that some aspects of Jardine Fleming's past practices were unacceptable to the industry's general standards of professional integrity," said Andrew Lo of INVESCO, who was reappointed chairman of the association for another year.
Regulators hit Jardine Fleming with heavy fines and revoked the licence of its London-based fund management company, along with the registration of the company's chief executive following last week's revelations of late allocation of trades by a senior fund manager. Some of the trades involved the fund manager's personal trading account.
Lo said a new working group will work with the British colony's chief markets regulator, the Securities and Futures Commission, to establish a code of practice for personal account dealing by its members.
"What the HKIFA must do is to learn from this experience," said Lo, who described the punishment meted out to Jardines as "appropriate" and "severe."
The association will also work with the SFC to set up guidelines for internal controls.
"In light of the concerns on the impact of the case on the industry, we have resolved to work even harder to uphold the highest level of professional integrity in our industry," Lo said. "To be worthy of the high fiduciary trust placed on it, the investment management industry must be able to demonstrate to investors a clean and fair environment."
Economic commentators in Hong Kong are sounding alarms about the unbridled optimism spurring stock and property prices to new highs ahead of the British colony's return to Chinese sovereignty on July 1.
Concerns are mounting that rising price pressures could inflate a collapsible bubble on the assumption that China will support Hong Kong's economy through the transition regardless of any political disruption.
"The term 'moral hazard' refers to the apparently growing belief in local markets that there is little dramatic down-side risk -- as opposed to short-term volatility -- because ultimately China will suppport Hong Kong markets," Ian Perkin, chief economist with the Hong Kong Chamber of Commerce, wrote in a column in the South China Morning Post.
In contrast to earlier fears that political uncertainty could torpedo Hong Kong's economy in 1997, domestic confidence in China's determination to keep the economy stable through the transition is so high that an unexpected problem has arisen -- price instability.
INFLATION FORECASTS ON THE RISE
Economists are starting to revise upwards their inflation forecasts for 1997 in response to booming stock and luxury property prices.
"The outlook for 1997 is going to be less good than we thought," said Kevin Chan, economist at Salomon Brothers.
Salomon has raised its 1997 forecast for the territory's benchmark consumer price index to seven percent from 6.6 percent late last year, and Chan said further increases are possible.
Sudden strength in Hong Kong's stock market in the middle of last year was welcomed as proof of confidence in the colony's future under China, and evidence of an economic turnaround following an export slump early last year and three years of austerity in China.
But the optimism became concern in November when speculation emerged in the luxury end of Hong Kong's property market.
Citing anecdotal evidence, Perkin argued that overseas and domestic investors confident of China's commitment to economic stability in Hong Kong are rushing to buy high-end properties in anticipation of short-term gains.
The Hong Kong government has since strongly supported a set of anti-speculation measures by the Real Estate Developers Association, and warned it will step in if there are signs that speculation is filtering down to the middle or low end of the property market.
But economists said property price volatility would eventually stimulate overall inflation, even though it has been restricted so far to the high end of the market.
"This will not be good for inflation expectations," Chan said. "In general, people will expect the higher prices in the luxury sector to affect medium and small flats."
RENTS TO RISE 15 PERCENT THIS YEAR
Chan estimates an overall rise of 30 percent in property prices will translate into at least a 15 percent increase in rents this year, which account for 25 percent of the Hong Kong government's benchmark consumer price index (A).
Food prices, which account for 37 percent of CPI(A), are expected to rise by at least eight percent this year after holding steady last year.
Hong Kong will also suffer from its currency link to the U.S. dollar. If the United States raises short-term interest rates this year by 25 to 50 basis points, as many expect, real rates in Hong Kong -- the difference between nominal rates and inflation -- will fall to about one percent, Chan said.
Such low rates will propel growing momentum in both private consumption and retail sales.
China, with its well-documented aversion to the socially destabilising effects of inflation, has done little to stoke further exuberance over Hong Kong's post-1997 economy beyond saying it backed Hong Kong's currency link.
"There seems little doubt Hong Kong's new sovereign wants to see the local economy prosper throughout the year of transition and in the early years of its resumption of sovereignty," Perkin wrote. "It (is) probably true that it does not want to see the local economy going on a speculative spree that will eventually run out of steam and cause a collapse."
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6441
Economic commentators in Hong Kong are sounding alarms about the unbridled optimism spurring stock and property prices to new highs ahead of the British colony's return to Chinese sovereignty on July 1.
Concerns are mounting that rising price pressures could inflate a collapsible bubble on the assumption that China will support Hong Kong's economy through the transition regardless of any political disruption.
"The term 'moral hazard' refers to the apparently growing belief in local markets that there is little dramatic down-side risk -- as opposed to short-term volatility -- because ultimately China will suppport Hong Kong markets," Ian Perkin, chief economist with the Hong Kong Chamber of Commerce, wrote in a column in the South China Morning Post.
In contrast to earlier fears that political uncertainty could torpedo Hong Kong's economy in 1997, domestic confidence in China's determination to keep the economy stable through the transition is so high that an unexpected problem has arisen -- price instability.
Economists are starting to revise upward their inflation forecasts for 1997 in response to booming stock and luxury property prices.
"The outlook for 1997 is going to be less good than we thought," said Kevin Chan, economist at Salomon Brothers.
Salomon has raised its 1997 forecast for the territory's benchmark consumer price index to 7 percent from 6.6 percent late last year, and Chan said further increases are possible.
Sudden strength in Hong Kong's stock market in the middle of last year was welcomed as proof of confidence in the colony's future under China, and evidence of an economic turnaround following an export slump early last year and three years of austerity in China.
But the optimism became concern in November when speculation emerged in the luxury end of Hong Kong's property market.
Citing anecdotal evidence, Perkin argued that overseas and domestic investors confident of China's commitment to economic stability in Hong Kong are rushing to buy high-end properties in anticipation of short-term gains.
The Hong Kong government has since strongly supported a set of anti-speculation measures by the Real Estate Developers Association, and warned it will step in if there are signs that speculation is filtering down to the middle or low end of the property market.
But economists said property price volatility would eventually stimulate overall inflation, even though it has been restricted so far to the high end of the market.
"This will not be good for inflation expectations," Chan said. "In general, people will expect the higher prices in the luxury sector to affect medium and small flats."
Chan estimates an overall rise of 30 percent in property prices will translate into at least a 15 percent increase in rents this year, which account for 25 percent of the Hong Kong government's benchmark consumer price index.
Food prices, which account for 37 percent of the index, are expected to rise by at least 8 percent this year after holding steady last year.
Hong Kong will also suffer from its currency link to the U.S. dollar. If the United States raises short-term interest rates this year by one-quarter to one-half of a percentage point, as many expect, real rates in Hong Kong -- the difference between nominal rates and inflation -- will fall to about 1 percent, Chan said.
Such low rates will propel growing momentum in both private consumption and retail sales.
China, with its well-documented aversion to the socially destabilising effects of inflation, has done little to stoke further exuberance over Hong Kong's post-1997 economy beyond saying it backed Hong Kong's currency link.
"There seems little doubt Hong Kong's new sovereign wants to see the local economy prosper throughout the year of transition and in the early years of its resumption of sovereignty," Perkin wrote. "It (is) probably true that it does not want to see the local economy going on a speculative spree that will eventually run out of steam and cause a collapse."
Investing in Asian telecommunications stocks is full of hazards as the region grapples with a general lack of sophistication and wide discrepancies in demand and regulation, analysts say.
Views differ greatly on the potential of individual stocks and countries, but analysts generally agree that telecom regulation is the most important determinant to future performance.
"Understanding the regulators is essential as regulatory issues were the main determinant of Asian telecom stock performance last year," Jardine Fleming said in a recent report.
Asian telecom bulls say the global information revolution, combined with the region's rapid economic growth, have swamped the capacities of state-run operators, forcing a confrontation between regulators determined to meet demand and monopolistic state enterprises anxious to maintain market share.
"Asian telecom regulators, usually under-empowered, have promoted liberalisation, often taking on strong political and economic forces," Jardine Fleming said.
So far, regulators have responded by issuing licences -- a politics-fraught move that usually diminishes the prospects of the primary telecoms firm.
This is acceptable in low-penetration countries with untapped demand, analysts say, but more dicey in high-penetration markets, such as Hong Kong and Singapore.
"This is why deregulation in Hong Kong did not really make sense on the fixed-line side if the new licensees could not access the lucrative IDD sector, which they can," Jardine Fleming said.
DEREGULATION DAMPENS OUTLOOK ON HK, SINGAPORE TELECOMS
Continuing deregulation in Hong Kong and Singapore, two places with a high dependence on IDD traffic, has prompted a negative outlook on Singapore Telecom and Hongkong Telecom, it said.
In low-penetration countries such as Indonesia and the Philippines, regulators have issued concessions to build fixed lines, giving contractors the right to receive local revenues and perhaps a portion of those from domestic long distance.
Because the new local lines stimulate long-distance demand, this arrangement fails to attract the ire of primary telecoms which reap the benefit, analysts said.
This has worked well in Indonesia and the Philippines, where new local fixed lines are expected to boost earnings in both PT Telkom and Philippine Long Distance Telephone Co (PLDT) rather than eroding their market position.
The situation is very different in the cellular sector, where major market players are complaining that too many licences have been issued as they lose market share to strong second-tier players which are aggressively undercutting tariffs.
Because of this primary/secondary interplay, Jardine Fleming said it has turned negative on Advanced Info Services Plc and neutral on Piltel. But it remained positive on Total Access Communications Plc.
Malaysia's Technology Resources Industries Bhd has been battered down too hard, the brokerage believes, and it has been upgraded to a buy.
BROKERAGE BULLISH ON INDONESIA, PHILIPPINES
Deutsche Morgan Grenfell (DMG) is similarly optimistic on the outlook for PT Telkom and PLDT, but it adopts a much less optimistic overall view of Asia's telecom sector.
"The Asia-Pacific telecommunications industry is undergoing a period of rapid transition from a relatively underdeveloped and protected industry to one which is becoming increasingly saturated and highly competitive," DMG said in a recent report.
An overall increase in competitive pressures is not being made any easier by governments' liberal approach to the issue of licences and the lack of any industry consolidation, DMG said.
"In an environment of increasing saturation and rising competitive pressures, EPS (earnings per share) will continue to come under pressure," DMG said. "We believe that we are already witnessing signs of industry maturity."
DMG estimates that less than 10 percent of the population in the Philippines, Thailand and Indonesia can afford telecom services.
DMG is positive on Indonesia and South Korea, but for different reasons.
Indonesia's lower telephone density combined with a restrictive and non-competitive regulatory structure are attractive, it said. In South Korea, a large middle class more than compensated for the higher number of phones.
"Although competitive pressures are rising, the combination of low, effective teledensity rates, a wide middle class and exceptionally aggressive capex and depreciation policy should ensure that Korea Mobile Telecom Co will continue to deliver above-average EPS growth rates," DMG said.
EVEN TOUGHER TASKS AHEAD FOR REGULATORS
Analysts said regulators have done the easy part -- issuing new licences. Now it gets tricky as new licensees demand better terms on geography, interconnection and IDD rights. Cellular licensees are also demanding more spectrum.
"What will be interesting to watch is how quickly these number two companies demand that they compete on fair terms with the primary telecoms," Jardine Fleming said.
With the World Bank forecasting a 20-percent increase in Asian energy demand each year for the next decade, one could be forgiven for viewing the entire Asian power stock sector as a good bet.
Wrong.
Uncertainty in the form of rapid change looms over one of Asia's most important equity sectors, making short-term value hard to find, analysts say.
Just some of the wild cards include the privatisation of state utilities, a plethora of new, independent power producers (IPPs) and a diverse and government-controlled tariff structure.
"There is an escalation of the risk/reward ratio of power investments, given the massive changes the industry is undergoing," said BZW Asia Research analyst Thomas Chesser.
"A number of project-specific, speculative issues are turning once predictable, stable and defensive power investments into high-risk, high-reward plays."
STOCK SELECTION CRITICAL
Longer-term, many Asian power companies are bound to offer strong returns with estimated demand requiring 2,000 megawatts more capacity each month for a decade, implying annual investment of more than US$35 billion.
But all analysts agree stock selection will be critical to avoid a variety of short-term hazards.
In the past, Asian power stocks tended to track regional markets, but over the next few years up to 40 percent of all new generating assets will be derived from IPPs, creating much greater divergence in share price performance.
Valuations will also come under pressure from a flood of new equity. Within the next two years, the  Electric Authority of Thailand (EGAT) and  National Power Corp in the Philippines are both due for privatization, with another three privatisations in the next four years.
The privatisations will join a slew of new equity from the US$5.5 billion Bakun hydroelectric dam project, YTL Corp Bhd and  Port Dickson Power in Malaysia,  Beijing Datang Power Generation Co and Huaneng Power International in China and Korea Electric Power Corp (KEPCO) in South Korea. In total, a flood of about US$2.5 billion in new paper will hit Asian markets this year.
"While increasing the alternatives available to investors, it is probable that new supply will reduce premiums accorded to already-listed companies," Goldman Sachs analyst Hilary Judis wrote in a recent research report.
HIGH PREMIUM STOCKS SET TO FALL
Valuations are also expected to rationalise following Southern Electric's US$2.7 billion acquisition of Consolidated Electric Power Asia Ltd (CEPA) last October.
The deal's premium of 15-percent to net present value provides a new international benchmark that could speed up an evening-out of domestic stock valuations. Many stocks trading at high premiums can expect to fall sharply.
"What CEPA has done is call attention to market transactions. A lot of people will view it as a benchmark for value against domestic valuations," Chesser said.
"It's only been three or four months so we haven't seen the trickledown come through yet, but some of the dearer IPPs will see the premiums come down. This is not just intuition but based on a survey of fund managers," he added.
KEPCO GETS BUY RECOMMENDATION
While analysts all commend careful stock-picking as the only safe route through this maze, their recommendations vary widely -- with one notable exception: KEPCO enjoys a buy recommendation from virtually every Asian analyst.
As the sole government-owned and operated utility in South Korea, KEPCO enjoys a virtual monopoly on electricity generation and transmission in South Korea, accounting for 95 percent of all electricity generation last year.
The stock, with a 12-percent weighting on the Seoul stock market, fell in line with the broad sell-off in South Korean shares in the second half last year before making a breathtaking recovery this month.
Despite expectations of weak 1996 earnings from higher fuel prices and a punishing foreign exchange rate, KEPCO is now trading at about 27,000 won against a 12-month low of 23,800.
Analysts said the stock appears to have priced in expectations of a 28-percent decline in 1996 earnings and now is trading in anticipation of a much better year in 1997, aided by a tariff increase and improved fuel prices.
"Although any further depreciation in the won will likely not be helpful to KEPCO we expect the decline in oil prices to more than compensate," said Caroline Rogers at Merrill Lynch.
CHINA'S HNP FAVOURED, EXPANDING
China's Huaneng Power International (HNP) is also favoured by most analysts, but it does not enjoy KEPCO's universal popularity.
Merrill Lynch said HNP, with the highest valuation among the four Chinese power companies, is known for its strong relationships -- always important in Asia -- and a quality management led by Li Xiaopeng, the son of China's premier Li Peng. Li senior runs the State Council, overseeing capital expenditure and tariff increases.
HNP is expanding its existing four power plants to 6,200 megawatts over the next five years from 1,900 megawatts now, boosting annual earnings growth by a projected 24 percent.
Most analysts also like Hong Kong and China Gas for its stable earnings growth, China exposure and property investments. But Hong Kong Electric and China Light and Power received a mixed response thanks an uncertain regulatory environment, unstable earnings outlook and problems with overcapacity.
Manila Electric Co in the Philippines is also popular as a monopoly with good exposure to an accelerating economy. But some analysts warn the stock's valuation, formerly justified by strong profit growth and positioning, will have to change to reflect no more tariff increases until the year 2000.
And while some expect Meralco to benefit from the privatisation of National Power Corporation, which is run by many ex-Meralco personnel, others see increased investor choice eroding Meralco's share premium.
Analysts are neutral to negative on Malaysia's Tenaga Nasional Bihad, which faces a loss of its monopoly on transmission and distribution, uncertainty surrounding any tariff increases, and the possibility that the government will demand that the company provide a rebate to customers damaged by a recent blackout.
Hong Kong people seemed to forget politics and other worries as the tiny colony geared up to welcome the Year of the Ox, its last Lunar New Year celebrations under British rule.
With the clock ticking towards transition to Chinese sovereignty at midnight on June 30, Hong Kong's 6.3 million people took time out from hectic schedules for the Chinese equivalent of a western Christmas or American Thanksgiving.
Last-minute shoppers dashed through malls, record numbers of travellers flowed across the border to visit relatives in China and children threw empty red "lai see" money pockets at each other on Hong Kong harbour's Star Ferry.
"Kung Hei Fat Choi, may you be rich and make more money," said resident Ng Chak Kwong. "Everybody wants this to be a good year. Too many people worry about everything."
But the cheerful greeting cards, office towers ablaze with lights, strings of red firecrackers and little orange trees offered few clues to Hong Kong's real state of mind on New Year's eve.
This year's festivities were set against a backdrop of rising political tension after China's recent pledge to roll back some civil liberties laws following the handover, plans that sparked an outcry both at home and abroad.
The Democratic Party, the territory's largest party, collected 20,000 signatures opposing the plans while the international community lodged official protests with China.
Chinese Vice-Premier Qian Qichen said on Wednesday Hong Kong's return to the motherland would end "the disgrace and humiliation China has suffered from for more than 150 years".
Chief Executive-designate Tung Chee-hwa, the man who takes over from colonial Governor Chris Patten after the handover, last week defended Beijing's proposed changes as misunderstood, but few were convinced.
Patten, in a televised new year address, said he would leave Hong Kong with "a good deal of nostalgia, a good deal of feeling for one of the finest places in the world, one of the greatest cities in the world".
"I'm sure that Mr Tung -- when he becomes Chief Executive... will be committed to doing all he can to keep things that way," he said.
Most Hong Kong people seemed determined to ignore politics during the holiday. Four days of parades and fairs were planned, and spectacular fireworks were to light up the sky on Saturday.
According to Chinese astrologers, the coming year offers Hong Kong plenty of promise but obstacles as well.
Unlike Western astrology, where months of the year are grouped into separate star signs, Chinese astrology hinges on the year of birth.
That could mean bad news for Tung, who was born in 1937, the Year of the Ox.
According to the astrologer at the South China Morning Post newspaper, Tung faced a difficult year marked by envy and accident and he was advised to seek compromise.
"He is likely to be caught between Hong Kong people and the Chinese government and may be the object of envy by mainland officials," warned astrologer Sung Siu-kwong.
Patten, born under the sign of the Monkey in 1944, was warned about the emergence of a rival in mid-year and cautioned to draw a line between private and public involvements.
"He will need to overcome obstacles that can stand in the way of the glorious withdrawal," Sung said.
A festive calm settled over Hong Kong on Thursday as people prepared to welcome the Year of the Ox, the territory's last Lunar New Year celebration under British rule.
With the clock ticking towards transition to Chinese sovereignty at midnight on June 30, Hong Kong people took time out from hectic schedules for the Chinese equivalent of a Western Christmas or American Thanksgiving.
Last-minute shoppers dashed through malls, record numbers of travellers flowed across the border to visit relatives in China and children threw empty red "lai see" money pockets at each other on Hong Kong harbour's Star Ferry.
"Kung Hei Fat Choi, may you be rich and make more money," said Ng Chak Kwong. "Everybody wants this to be a good year. Too many people worry about everything."
But the cheerful greeting cards, office towers ablaze with lights, strings of red firecrackers and little orange trees offered few clues to Hong Kong's real state of mind on New Year's eve. This year's festivities were set against a backdrop of rising political tension after China's recent pledge to roll back some civil liberties laws following the handover, plans that sparked an outcry both at home and abroad.
The Democratic Party, the territory's largest party, collected 20,000 signatures opposing the plans while the international community lodged official protests with China.
Chief Executive-designate Tung Chee-hwa, the man who will take over from colonial Governor Chris Patten after the handover, last week defended the proposed legal changes as misunderstood, but few were convinced.
Some of the families gathering for traditional New Year banquets on Thursday night said they would watch a televised annual address by Patten, even though the British influence is already considered virtually irrelevant.
The last New Year's address by a British colonial governor could provide Patten with an ideal opportunity to lambast old foes in Beijing.
"What he says has no effect any more," said shopper Alice So. "What he says, what he did, what he's going to do, the Chinese government will not accept. It doesn't matter whether he's right or wrong."
Most Hong Kong people seemed determined to ignore politics during the holiday. Four days of parades and fairs were planned, and spectacular fireworks would light up the sky on Saturday.
According to Chinese astrologers, the coming year offered Hong Kong plenty of promise but obstacles as well.
Unlike Western astrology, where months of the year are grouped into separate star signs, Chinese astrology hinges on the year of birth.
That could mean bad news for Tung, who was born in 1937, the Year of the Ox.
According to the astrologer at the South China Morning Post newspaper, Tung faced a difficult year marked by envy and accident and is advised to seek compromise.
"He is likely to be caught between Hong Kong people and the Chinese government and may be the object of envy by mainland officials," warned astrologer Sung Siu-kwong.
Patten, born under the sign of the Monkey in 1944, was warned about the emergence of a rival in mid-year and cautioned to draw a line between private and public involvements.
"He will need to overcome obstacles that can stand in the way of the glorious withdrawal," Sung said.
The recent Asian tour by U.S. fund managers representing $234 billion in assets, including the hefty California Public Employees Retirement System (CalPERS), has whetted Hong Kong fund managers' appetites.
"CalPERS has this innate ability of raising everybody's blood pressure because they've got so much money to invest. Get one percent and you double your assets under management," said Stewart Aldcroft, sales director for Templeton.
But it appears Hong Kong fund managers might be waiting in vain for a slice of the CalPERS pie.
While expressing a desire to raise their Asian and international weightings, the United States pension funds clearly stated a preference for direct investment over listed equity.
"The amount of transparency that we would expect with the companies is not available at this point," CalPERS board president William Crist said of Chinese public companies.
His statement highlighted a significant problem for U.S. money managers seeking increased exposure to Asia.
Foreign access to Asian markets is usually restricted, partly because many countries fear the sort of economic disruption that widened current account deficits after the last wall of foreign money came marching into the region in 1993.
Hong Kong fund managers, pointing to research indicating superior Asian performance by funds managed from within the region rather than from outside, said one option that could meet everybody's needs is private equity funds.
The performance of these funds is private but believed to far exceed that of public mutual funds.
Marcus Thompson, deputy managing director of HSBC Private Equity Management, said his funds hold $560 million, virtually all of it contributed by U.S. pension funds and invested in small companies expected to list within 10 years.
"Over the long term you're likely to get a superior investment performance," Thompson said. "There's a discount for not being able to trade the stock."
Cesar Zalamea, managing director of AIG Investment Corp (Asia) Ltd, declined to reveal the performance of his funds except to describe it as "tremendous".
AIG is the biggest private equity group active in Asia, with $2.38 billion under management -- nearly all of it rumoured to be contributed by one or two very big U.S. pension clients.
Zalamea said AIG's policy is always to hire Western-educated nationals who know the culture and the players in the indigenous business community. Established in Shanghai in 1919, AIG also has long-term relationships with many Asian corporations.
"When these (Asian corporations) decide they want to expand and invite investors outside family and close friends, we are naturals to be invited because (they) already know us," Zalamea said. "CalPERS wouldn't have the kind of relationship."
But there are disadvantages to private equity funds, the most obvious being their closed-end and long-term nature.
"One of the key issues about investment is to have your money back when you're ready to have it back, not when those in whom you are investing want you to have it back," said Aldcroft, who candidly admits Templeton wants to manage CalPERS money.
Another fund manager warned that while many venture capital funds do very well, others do not.
"The risk is higher. You don't have an out. The trick is in knowing how to say no," he said. "If you haven't picked the right companies, how do you get out?"
Hong Kong fund managers and life insurers are smacking their lips in anticipation of a very promising pie -- Hong Kong's public pension plan.
Although much uncertainty still hangs over the proposed Mandatory Provident Fund (MPF), Hong Kong-registered pension assets could triple if MPF regulations are passed by July 1, the date China reassumes sovereignty over the British colony.
"By any measure, this is a very substantial market," said Terry Smith, chief executive at National Mutual Asia.
Life insurer National Mutual Asia, 69-percent owned by Australia's National Mutual Holdings, is just one insurance company with its eyes on a market traditionally dominated by a handful of large Hong Kong-based fund managers.
"If a particular company were to get 10 percent market share, it would involve the receipt of contributions of HK$3 billion (US$385 million) per annum," said Smith.
"To put that in perspective, NMA's current premium and contribution revenue is about HK$5 billion (US$641 million)."
Hong Kong pension assets are now valued at about HK$100 billion (US$12.82 billion), nearly all held in government and corporate funds such as those belonging to the Swire Group, the Jardine Group, Hongkong Electric, Hongkong Telecom and the Hong Kong Jockey Club.
If MPF regulations are approved, those assets will reach HK$300 billion (US$38.46 billion) within five years with annual contributions projected at HK$30 billion (US$3.85 billion), independent adviser Watson Wyatt Hong Kong Ltd said.
Until now, Hong Kong's Big Three fund managers -- HSBC Asset Management, Schroders Investment Management and Jardine Fleming Investment Management -- have dominated the pension scene.
HSBC has US$3.5 billion under management while Schroders, a unit of British investment bank Schroders Plc, manages US$2.5 billion. Jardine Fleming manages US$2.2 billion.
Smaller participants who hope to play a bigger role include Fidelity with US$1 billion, LGT Asset Management, a unit of Liechtenstein Global Trust AG  at US$500 million, and Barclays Global Investors and Invesco with about US$350 million each.
But insurance companies such as NMA and Hong Kong's insurance market leader, American International Assurance, are in a strong position to challenge these fund managers.
Ninety percent of Hong Kong companies employ fewer than 10 people, which will give the insurers' extensive sales and distribution networks the sort of advantage that could quickly build into a stranglehold on the new market.
"Most employers will see MPF as a real pain in the neck. It's a hassle where formerly they didn't have hassle," said Andy Budden, investment consultant with Watson Wyatt.
"What they will want to do is buy an off-the-shelf product rather than put something together themselves. The advantage will lie with the provider who can get on the street and sell."
The market will also be snapped up in the first few years, he said, which explains why these companies are working hard to become the first out of the starting gate.
"Once this initial tranche of business is snapped up, turnover and new business will be low," Budden said. "So you'll have an edge if you can get out quickly and market it."
Hong Kong's fund managers are sufficiently disconcerted that four of them -- Jardine Fleming, Schroders, LGT and Invesco -- are reported to be considering pooling administrative resources.
However, all this preparation could amount to a waste of time if the Legislative Council fails to enact subsidiary MPF legislation and regulations quickly.
Framework legislation has passed and the MPF office said it hopes to table the legislation by April. But some councillors are opposed to the principle of a public pension plan and have vowed to slow down the process.
Also, a number of regulations have roused debate, including a provision requiring the pensions to hold 30 percent of assets in Hong Kong-dollar denominated instruments.
If this provision holds, it will light a fire under Hong Kong's dormant debt market, which suffers from a government surplus and a negative real rate environment thanks to the Hong Kong dollar-U.S. currency link.
(HK$1=US$7.8)
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6470
Growing numbers of impoverished women from mainland China are flocking to Hong Kong to work as prostitutes following a deportation policy that is driving away Thai and Filipina women, police said on Monday.
Arrest data supplied by the Royal Hong Kong Police show that mainland Chinese now dominate the prostitution workforce in the sex trade centre of Mongkok, and their numbers are rising to meet demand following the departure of other nationalities.
"You can see the supply curve in the figures," said chief inspector Jonathon Fraser of the Mongkok vice squad in Kowloon.
"We're getting two-way permit holders being brought in from China. Some want to come in, others are duped into it," he told Reuters.
Two-way permits allow Chinese nationals to visit the British colony for strictly limited short periods of time.
Working as a prostitute is not illegal in Hong Kong -- unless the woman is present on a tourist visa. Related activities such as pimping and soliciting are offenses.
The nationality shift in the prostitution workforce is gaining momentum following 1994 policy changes that allowed police to arrest and imprison prostitutes on visitor's visas.
Before 1994, these women -- mainly Thai, Filpina and Malaysian -- were immediately deported but frequently returned to the territory. Fraser said the threat of a prison term is now a powerful disincentive for many of these women to return.
Chinese women are taking their place in the countdown to Hong Kong's return to China on July 1.
Police said they arrested 1,026 two-way permit holders working as prostitutes in Mongkok in 1996 compared with 967 in 1995, 415 in 1994 and 15 in 1993.
Meanwhile, the number of arrests of Filipinas, Thais and Malaysian women fell to 106 in 1996 from 273 in 1995 and 1,196 in both 1994 and 1993.
Many of the mainland Chinese women are supporting families back in China, said Kate Whitehead, a Hong Kong journalist who will have a book about prostitution in the territory published in April.
"They go into prostitution for the money...and the families are very proud of them. They come back with money and the families don't ask any questions," Whitehead said.
"Although there are many mainland women in the south doing this there is a great of difference between what they will do in their hometown and what they will do in Shenzhen or Hong Kong."
Many of the women are from northern China. Prized for their height, slender build, and high cheekbones, these women are making what is, for them, an unimaginable fortune by selling their bodies in Hong Kong.
Police said some women allowed to stay in Hong Kong for only a short period of time try to work as many customers as possible, charging about HK$400 (US$51) an hour.
They take home about half of that amount.
"Some are seeing 20 a day. Obviously, that's a good day and they can't do that every day, but on average they're doing about five a day," Fraser said.
Many of the women are brought in by syndicates, paying as much as HK$20,000 for a two-way permit or agreeing to see 100 customers without pay to earn their passage, Whitehead said.
Many make their way into Hong Kong from Shenzhen, just across the border. Those with papers come in by train while illegal entrants pay a fee to "snakeheads" operating speedboats to drop them off at remote villages in Hong Kong.
Fraser said it's virtually impossible for immigration officials to identify mainland Chinese prostitutes at the border if they are carrying legitimate papers.
($1=HK$7.8)
Pegged currencies are common in Asia, with its fondness for order and authoritarianism.
But to peg one's currency is always a drastic step with heavy consequences. While a fixed exchange rate might reassure foreign investors about currency stability, it can also prompt a slew of unruly side effects.
"What you ultimately sacrifice is your control over inflation," said Alan Butler-Henderson, regional strategist with ING Barings in Hong Kong.
Hong Kong, Thailand, Indonesia, Vietnam, Philippines, Singapore and China all peg their currencies directly or indirectly to the U.S. dollar, requiring all them to mimic U.S. monetary policy to a greater or lesser extent regardless of domestic conditions.
Most of these economies bear no relation at all to the slow-growth, low-inflation United States. Instead, they are experiencing high growth and a rapid increase in domestic consumption at the same time -- an ideal recipe for inflation.
The lack of traditional inflation-fighting tools is a serious loss for countries anxious to avoid any erosion of often hard-earned economic progress.
SERIOUS PENALTIES
There are other, serious penalties, too.
A lucrative interest rate arbitrage can cause real problems for small Asian countries with fixed exchange rates. Best described as borrow low, lend high, the most common arbitrage tends to attract precisely the sort of capital inflows most small, Asian countries dread: so-called "hot money."
Large financial institutions with access to the best international lending rates deposit borrowed funds into Asian banks offering much higher yields and, because of the fixed exchange rate, avoid currency loss when they switch out.
Higher rates offer bigger returns, which attract even larger flows of hot money that swell money supply dramatically. Attempts by central banks to curb money supply by raising rates can have the reverse effect, luring in more hot, volatile money.
Both Thailand and Indonesia are familiar with this danger.
One economist noted that Indonesia has offered one of the best arbitrage opportunities in Asia for as long as it has depreciated its currency by between three and five percent annually, but the returns were particularly spectacular last year.
Speculators and hedge funds borrowed large sums in Japanese yen at about 0.75 percent annually and switched them into Indonesian bank accounts yielding 15 percent -- or more when riots swept through Jakarta in the summer.
"In terms of cost of funds, when you take the currency depreciation of the yen and the mild depreciation of the rupiah into account, you're paying nothing," the economist said.
The problem became so acute last year that Indonesia's central bank was forced to widen repeatedly the trading band for the rupiah, taking the market by surprise.
"The point of widening the fluctuation is to impart greater uncertainty so that it's not a freebie," said Sun Bae Kim, senior economist at Goldman Sachs in Hong Kong.
Indonesia also ordered its commercial banks to stop lending on occasion, even though soaring rates and strong loan demand offered excellent returns.
THE THAI EXPERIENCE
Thailand, which pegs its beleaguered baht to a basket of currencies including the U.S. dollar, tried to turn this arbitrage to its advantage by setting up the Bangkok International Banking Facility (BIBF) in 1993.
The plan, much admired by Asian experts, back-fired when Moody's Investors Service downgraded Thailand's short-term debt rating, drawing attention to its foreign liabilities.
The negative attention helped to fuel rampant speculation about a devaluation of the baht, forcing massive intervention by Thailand's central bank to keep the unit above a 6-1/2-year low.
Under the BIBF, a number of foreign and domestic banks were allowed to borrow foreign currency overseas, usually in U.S. dollars, and then lend the money in Thailand.
The scheme was a huge success. Foreign investors, already benefiting from competitive rates, also qualified for preferential tax treatment and rushed to invest in Thailand.
"Without those tax incentives and the access to cheap loans - U.S. dollars are by definition cheaper than Thailand (baht) - those companies would not be attracted to Thailand," said Clive McDonnell, chief economist at Crosby Group.
BIBF flows were used primarily for long-term investment, but international accounting rules required that they be classifed as short-term. This generated a sudden explosion in Thailand's short-term external debt to 63.3 percent of private sector debt in 1995 compared with 20.5 percent in 1993 -- a situation that quickly came to Moody's attention.
Asian economists defended the scheme while acknowledging its risks. Salomon Brothers noted that Thailand's foreign exchange reserves of US$38 billion far exceed outstanding short-term loans of US$16.1 billion.
And Moody's rival, Standard and Poor's, pointed out that many BIBF loans are backed by foreign banks rather than domestic financial institutions.
"Foreign BIBFs are probably less vulnerable to shifts in investor confidence, because their parent banks are more likely to stand behind them should unaffiliated lenders withdraw their credit lines," Standard &amp; Poor's said. "Moreover, obligations of foreign-owned BIBFs are not a contingent liability of the Thai government, given their foreign ownership."
There is no question that the BIBF helped to lift foreign liabilities in Thailand's banking sector, but the underlying causes of the banks' asset quality problems were more commonly blamed on a weak property sector, economic recession, political turmoil and a gaping current account deficit.
Recent attacks on the baht were precipitated by concern about how to finance the current account following projections of a fourth-quarter fiscal deficit.
But analysts said the foreign liability created by the BIBF will probably provide further motivation for the central bank to defend the currency. And a sustained defence will require action on those asset quality problems.
"This means shutting down insolvent institutions and building the capital base of viable ones. The longer the delay in formulating such a plan, the greater will be the baht's susceptibility to speculative attacks," Goldman Sachs said.
Central bank independence is not usually a hot topic in Hong Kong but the territory has been debating the subject with vigour just 19 weeks before its return to China.
Remarks by chief executive-designate Tung Chee-hwa stirred up a subject that raises blood pressures around the world when he said changes were possible in the reporting structure at the Hong Kong Monetary Authority.
Tung, who takes over from Governor Chris Patten on July 1 when Britain cedes control of the colony to China, seemed to suggest that at some point, the head of the HKMA could be required to report directly to the chief executive rather than to the Financial Secretary.
"There is now already a structure for the future as to who the head of the Monetary Authority reports to," Tung said, when pressed by reporters on Wednesday.
"As to whether this is the right structure for the future, that's something we can really examine."
Hong Kong's reaction to the comments was largely negative even though most experts acknowledge the HKMA's powers are much more limited than those of central banks in developed nations, where political interference is viewed with high suspicion.
"It struck me that one might want an additional layer between the chief executive and the head of the central bank," said Eric Nickerson, head of currency at Bank of America.
Politics, not economics, is driving the debate, said one economist. The HKMA's primary function is not to set monetary policy but to manage the Hong Kong dollar, which is pegged at HK$7.80 to the U.S. currency.
"This is just a political game," he said. "The HKMA is a manager rather than a policy-maker."
The HKMA has never experienced political interference in monetary management, said HKMA chief executive Joseph Yam.
"If anybody were to come and tell me to do something about, for example, unemployment or inflation or growth in the economy, I would just say 'No,' this is not my responsibility," Yam said in a speech in Tokyo on Tuesday.
The HKMA was formed in 1993 by merging the government department responsible for managing Hong Kong's reserves with the Office of the Commissioner of Banking.
With this as its primary function, the influence of the HKMA on the domestic economy is limited.
"I don't see the need to change the existing system. It seems to be working very well," said Ken Chan, senior economist at Nikko Securities.
Chan also noted that Hong Kong enjoyed excellent relations with the People's Bank of China, the Chinese central bank, which has repeatedly stated its commitment to the Hong Kong dollar peg and Hong Kong's continued monetary independence.
The lack of any clear advantage of change has led to speculation that personalities are at stake.
By removing the HKMA from the Financial Secretariat, the government would seriously constrain the influence of the outspoken Financial Secretary, Donald Tsang.
Meanwhile, there are reports that Yam will be appointed one of Tung's principal officers in his new Secretariat.
A Hong Kong government spokesman denied that Tsang's relationship with Tung was tense, and said any changes to the reporting structure at the HKMA was something to be decided by the government of the new Special Administrative Region of Hong Kong following the transition.
Tung declined to elaborate on his remarks on Wednesday.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6470
Stock market gyrations on the rumoured ill-health of China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping were welcomed by many Asian fund managers on Wednesday.
Although many Asian markets have regained much of the ground lost on Tuesday when the rumours hit, the remaining discount suggests any announcement of Deng's death will now have limited effect, they said.
"This place is rife with rumour," said Christopher Day, managing director at Thornton Management (Asia) Ltd. "By the time an announcement comes, it will have been discounted."
Some immediate reaction is inevitable, and it may not be restricted to Asian markets, said Stewart Aldcroft, sales director at Templeton.
But that response will not last, particularly in Hong Kong.
"There will be some short-term selling that will reflect the sentiment of the occasion, but ultimately an ideal buying opportunity will have been presented," he said.
Tina So, associate director at Schroders Investment Management, said Hong Kong is still trading at a sizable discount to other Asian markets at 13.5-times 1997 earnings.
"When you invest in an equity market you are looking for participation in overall economic growth and profitability, and the undertone of the economy is very positive," she said.
Generally, fund managers said Hong Kong could correct to 12,500 but stage a fast recovery within hours. The Hang Seng index closed 3.38 points higher at 13,106.32 on Wednesday after plunging to 12,933.98 when the rumours hit on Tuesday.
In Taiwan, Shanghai and Shenzhen, the picture is a little different, partly because these markets have performed so strongly in recent months, but also because of their direct sensitivity to political factors in China, funds said.
After reaching a six-year high of 7,687.18 on Monday, the Taiwan market dropped sharply when the Tuesday rumours and comments by central bankers prompted a bout of profit-taking.
While local investors expect to see further strength, foreign investors restricted to owning a minority share of the market warned a Deng announcement could signal more weakness.
"Taiwan have been coming up quite nicely, it's a bit overbought, and Taiwan is traditionally very suspicious of political changes in China," said So.
Thornton's Day said shares on the Shanghai and Shenzhen exchanges are also likely to take a tumble.
"It's a more direct concern, and an excuse to take profits," he said. "They've both got good excuses because they've gone up so sharply."
But the rest of Asia will continue marching to its own drumbeat, often ignoring major news and international market action in favour of domestic news and sentiment, funds said.
Compared to much of Asia, China has done an excellent job of managing the political risk associated with the succession issue, said David Semple, regional strategist at Peregrine Asset Management in Hong Kong.
While China, along with many other nations, has no formal mechanism in place for succession, president Jiang Zemin's prominent and clear leadership position has mitigated much of the uncertainty associated with Deng's death, he said.
"The political power has already been transferred. It happened a long time ago. So it's not really going to affect the way we invest our funds -- other than perhaps providing a very short-term buying opportunity," Semple said.
While some fund managers suggested the rumours were placed by market players keen to create buying opportunities, others said the timing of an announcement now made sense.
"It's come at a significantly better time than maybe a few years ago, and possibly even 12 months ago when they were lobbing bombs across the Taiwan Strait," one fund manager said.
Deng was last seen in public three years ago.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6470
Hong Kong business groups on Thursday lauded Deng Xiaoping as a great leader but said the short-term impact of his passing would be limited.
"He was a great man. We are naturally saddened from a human point of view. But as regards business, I have to say it's business as usual," said Brigadier Christopher Hammerbeck, executive director of the British Chamber of Commerce.
The paramount leader won high praise from businessmen in Hong Kong for his economic reforms and for developing the "one country, two systems" policy which will prevail when sovereignty of Hong Kong reverts to China at midnight on June 30 under the terms of a 1984 Sino-British treaty.
"He was a great man of vision," said Ian Christie, director of the Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce.
"The 'one country, two systems' approach to the transfer of sovereignty, at that time, in 1984, showed incredible foresight and courage."
Given his contribution, it would have been better for all concerned if Deng had been able to witness the Hong Kong handover of July 1, said Mark Michelson, past chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce.
"He made it a lot easier for the transition to take place," Michelson said. "At the same time, there has been a leadership succession in place for some time now associated with the transition. So...the practical impact will not be overwhelming."
The collective leadership now in place, led by President Jiang Zemin, has also been associated with the Hong Kong handover, Michelson said.
"So in the short-term there should be no impact, but in China one can never be sure," he said.
Most business groups declined to speculate on the longer term implications of Deng's death.
Hong Kong's South China Morning Post newspaper fretted over a possible power struggle emerging in Beijing.
"Although Deng's death is unlikely to result in a major immediate policy shift over Hong Kong, changes in the corridors of power in Beijing will spill over into the territory," the Post said.
Hong Kong's government-funded Trade Development Council said Deng will not be forgotten for his contribution to the territory's ascent up the world trade league tables.
"If one were to take a look in 1979, the year China began economic reform, at that time Hong Kong was number 23 in the world league of trading entities. Today we are number eight," said executive director Michael Sze.
Deng is credited with the open door reforms which transformed China from an isolated economic backwater to emerging powerhouse.
"That just shows the tremendous progress we have made during the intervening years."
Hong Kong trade, now valued in excess of US$350 billion ($44.9 billion), is heavily dependent upon southern China where Hong Kong manufacturers own and operate 50,000 factories employing five million workers.
The gradual shift of Hong Kong's manufacturing base into the cheaper labour regions of southern China transformed the territory into a service-based economy geared to China's economic emergence.
As Hong Kong speeds towards its return to Chinese rule, questions are being asked about the fate of its largest expatriate community -- tens of thousands of Filipina maids, or amahs.
Hong Kong relies upon its army of Filipina "domestic helpers". There were 140,000 of them at last count among the territory's 6.2 million population, and many people are heavily dependent upon their gentle and kind child-care.
"The help is so cheap you may as well have a few sprogs (children) while you're here," said one British banker with three young children, two Filipina maids and a very pregnant wife.
The Filipinas' contribution to their home nation is even more important. Most of the women are supporting families, and their monthly remittances account for a sizeable proportion of that nation's gross domestic product each year.
The arrangement works well, but it could be under threat. Concern is growing that once Hong Kong reverts to Chinese rule, the Filipinas will be booted out in favour of mainland Chinese women keen to earn hard currency in wealthy Hong Kong.
Recent statements of support for the status quo by Chinese president Jiang Zemin and Tung Chee-hwa, Hong Kong's chief executive-designate, have failed to reassure those concerned for the well-being of these women, who face unemployment and an uncertain future in their home country.
"They have said the status quo will be maintained, but realistically there are going to be changes going into the handover," said Dennis Suico, chairman of the Philippine Association of Hong Kong.
"There will be a steady inflow of workers from the mainland. It may not be drastic, it may not happen overnight, but there is going to be change."
SUNDAY GATHERINGS
The dark-haired women -- many of them college graduates, teachers and nurses -- are known in Hong Kong as the sparrows of Statue Square for their lively Sunday gatherings in the downtown plaza of that name.
Huddled underneath the imposing Hongkong Bank building, spilling out from overpasses humming with traffic, perched on plastic sheets on the ground at the Star Ferry terminal, thousands of chattering Filipinas crowd into the Central district each Sunday, forcing police to cordon off roads and redirect traffic.
"We have to do this, we have to," said Maria, 30. "We work six days; on Sunday we have to enjoy ourselves."
Wedged tightly between friends on a ledge outside Central subway station, Maria said she came to Hong Kong in order to support her 10-year-old daughter and unemployed husband, who can no longer work after an accident.
"I send back 7,000 pesos (US$270) each month," she said.
The money, a small fortune in impoverished Philippines, comes at a price. Most Filipinas' lives are marked by loneliness and separation from the people they care most about, and their working conditions are often hard.
"My employers are so selfish," said another Filipina. "I have one day off every month, I have to get up at six o'clock and I cannot end until 11 o'clock. Please can you help me? Please help me leave here, to go to Canada or America."
MINIMUM STANDARDS
The Hong Kong government sets minimum standards for domestic helpers in a standard two-year contract, which requires free room and board, minimum pay of about US$500 per month and one week's holiday a year.
But the Filipinas said that many employers, particularly the Chinese, are extremely demanding within those guidelines. The government recently announced random checks on employers to prevent the worst abuses, such as bedrolls in corridors.
Competition is keen for jobs with Western families, who tend to pay above the minimum rate, give two days off each week rather than one and offer a food allowance so that the Filipinas can avoid a foreign diet.
But when asked what they find most difficult about Hong Kong life, most Filipinas cite the separation from family. Many see their husbands and children for just one week a year.
Their situation is unlikely to improve much. Suico said that after the handover on July 1, many Chinese families and businessmen are likely to prefer a Chinese-speaking maid for better communication.
A number of business groups also support easier labour movement between Hong Kong and the rest of China, but government officials are on the record as having expressed concern about how best to handle the immigration implications of the handover.
Suico said the Filipinas are probably in a good position with younger families where both parents work and want their children to grow up speaking both Cantonese and English.
"And if you add to that the considerable numbers of the expatriate community here in Hong Kong, the senior executives, I think there is an overwhelming preference for an English-speaking domestic helper at home," he said.
But the number of expatriates on luxury packages is dwindling and the demand for domestic helpers is on the decline.
Filipinas are starting to ask where they should go next.
WHERE TO GO NEXT?
There is a huge migrant workforce of four million Filipinos the world over, most of them in the Middle East, but the case of Sarah Balabagan has confirmed that region as a potentially dangerous place for female workers.
Balabagan, 15, was convicted of murder in the United Arab Emirates after she stabbed to death an 84-year-old employer trying to rape her. "The Middle East is not a good option for Filipinas," said Suico.
Instead, they are being encouraged to look for work in the affluent and emerging societies of Asia, such as Japan, Singapore, South Korea and Malaysia.
Blink and you missed it.
The much anticipated correction in Hong Kong stocks on Thursday on news of the death of China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping gave fund managers all of 10 minutes to do some much-anticipated bargain hunting.
"This was not my expectation," said Ambrose Chang, chief investment officer at Daiwa Capital Management in Hong Kong.
Traders and fund managers said a huge bout of short-covering was responsible for the quick recovery on Thursday.
"It was futures driven," said one fund manager. "The hedge funds came in and covered their positions and there were a lot of angry fund managers in London being woken up in the middle of the night by their brokers."
After dipping 92 points at the opening, the Hang Seng index surged 305.01 points or 2.33 percent to close at 13,411.33 while the February index future ended 405 points higher at 13,485.
"The futures tried to open lower but there was no follow-through selling. All of a sudden they (the hedge funds) knew they were in trouble," one head trader said.
Clearly, it was the foreign funds, not the local punters, who got caught out.
"This news was in the market the whole week with certain people," said the head trader at one local house. "I knew there was a massive short position in the market and after the first minute of trading, I wasn't at all surprised by what happened."
Now that the dust has settled, fund managers are offering routine explanations for their near-term forecasts for the Hang Seng, all of them variations on the theme of a range-trade between 13,000 and 13,800.
U.S. interest rates and upcoming corporate earnings are expected to dictate direction, but most market players are expecting consolidation at current levels.
There were few reports of so-called "top-slicing," or rotation of funds into other markets, although traders did report profit-taking in Singapore and Indonesia, both of which fell over the course of the week after recent strength.
Some funds said they had began cutting heavily overweight positions in Hong Kong when the Hang Seng hit 14,000 on January 16 and any further rotation is not justified given this week's strength.
Last week's action also proved the independence of Asian stocks, which were either unchanged or weaker on domestic factors when the Deng news hit.
"They're all completely sucked into their own things," one trader said.
Although individual factors helped push many indices lower through the region last week, traders and funds confirmed reports that institutional money was moving out of Asia and into Latin America.
"They can't find anything in Asia to buy," said one head trader. "In Singapore and Malaysia, the earnings growth isn't massive and elsewhere it's not great. (Investors) expect better value in Latin America."
One foreign fund manager said the flows were understandable given that Latin America is trading at about 12 percent earnings growth on a multiple of 11.5 times - 20 percent below the average Asian earnings multiple.
"And Southeast Asia is still going through this adjustment," he said.
"Global asset allocators still look at Asia as a region suffering from cost overruns, squeezed margins and, in some industries, a lack of pricing power."
An uneventful week of sideways trade is expected on most Asian markets following news that China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping had died on Wednesday.
Although many of the smaller Asian markets virtually ignored the news, Hong Kong and Taiwan surprised some investors by trading higher.
A strong week in Tokyo is not expected to last and regional traders said quality buying had yet to surface in Bangkok, this week's surprise performer.
The Stock Exchange of Thailand index has gained seven percent in the past eight trading days, recovering from the previous week's sharp slide on news of a debt rating review by Moody's Investors Service Inc.
Most of the other small Asian markets expect a week of sideways trade, although some could suffer from trader reports of fund flows out of Asia into Latin America.
"They can't find anything in Asia to buy," said one head trader. "In Singapore and Malaysia, the earnings growth isn't massive and elsewhere it's not great. (Investors) expect better value in Latin America."
- - - -
HONG KONG - Stocks are expected to refocus on fundamentals in the week ahead and could trade sideways for much of the time although hopes of healthy corporate earnings may provide a positive bias, analysts said.
The market had a rocky ride last week, quaking on concerns about the health of China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping before rallying after his death cleared the uncertainty.
The Hang Seng Index rose 331.59 points, or 2.53 percent, over the week to close at 13,444.85 on Friday. The rise included a 305.01-point surge on Thursday following Deng's death.
"On the fundamental side there is not much change," said Kelvin Tang, an analyst at ImPac Asset Management.
- - - -
TOKYO - The Japanese stock market's key index is likely to struggle to find a firm foothold at the 19,000 level in the coming week, after it ended above that threshold on Friday for the first time this year.
"The benchmark has reached a stage where it is getting close to retracing one-third of its worth from the January 10 low of 17,303 and the high of 22,666 marked on June 26," said Okasan Securities general manager Akihiro Naemura.
On Friday, the Nikkei average of 225 leading shares ended down 17.17 points or 0.09 percent at 19,034.54. In the course of the week, the barometer rose 312.54 points or 1.67 percent.
- - - -
BANGKOK - The Stock Exchange of Thailand (SET) Index is expected to post further gains in the week ahead as foreign and local investors follow through on a strong two-day rally, analysts said.
But buying is likely to be short-term and selective ahead of a central bank release of balance of payments data due on Thursday.
The Stock Exchange of Thailand (SET) index gained 4.8 percent from last Friday to 747.70 points on Thursday as speculative pressure on the currency eased.
Markets were closed on Friday for a Buddhist holiday.
- - - -
TAIPEI - Taiwan share prices are seen rising further in the week ahead on widespread expectations of continued economic recovery and on easing fears of political instability after the death of Chinese paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, brokers said.
The government statistics agency announced on Thursday that Taiwan's gross domestic product growth was 6.62 percent in the fourth quarter of 1996, higher than a forecast of 6.58 percent.
"Investors are confident that the index will continue to reflect the economy's sound fundamentals," said David Yu, vice-president for International Investment Trust Co.
The index slid 51.25 points or 0.66 percent to 7,739.94 against last week's close of 7,598.93.
- - - -
KUALA LUMPUR - Malaysian blue chips could trend higher in the week ahead on an influx of local and foreign buyers targeting lower-valued main board stocks, dealers said.
"I think it will be a good week," said Ralph Dixon, of TA Securities' international division.
Corporate earnings and economic data including December trade figures will take centre stage, dealers said.
Kuala Lumpur's benchmark Composite Index of 100 big-cap stocks closed 15.95 points or 1.28 percent higher at 1,262.86 on Friday.
- - - -
SEOUL - Consolidation combined with worries about rising interest rates will pressure the Korean market in the week ahead, brokers said.
"Many investors are worried about gradually rising interest rates and they believe there will be further rises," said Hwang Chang-joong of LG Securities.
Much worse-than-expected corporate results, due to be announced in the coming week, will also hurt the market.
The composite stock index fell 41.08 points or 5.7 percent to 681.24 on Saturday against last Saturday's 722.32.
- - - -
MANILA - Manila shares are expected to trade sideways with an upward bias next week on slow buying in selected blue chips and continued attention to small cap issues, traders said.
Friday's news of Standard &amp; Poor's upgrading of the Philippines' foreign debt rating from BB to BB-plus could perk up the market, said Helen Alvarez, research head of All Asia Securities.
But Raul Ruiz, vice-president at Sun Hung Kai Securities, said a political row over the ruling party's efforts to change the constitution to enable President Fidel Ramos to run for a second term could make foreign investors cautious.
The main index closed down 8.45 points at 3,301.98 on Friday, shedding 20.32 points to 3,322.30 week-on-week.
- - - -
JAKARTA - Indonesian shares are expected to be mixed with the index moving around the 695-700 points level in the coming week, brokers said.
Brokers said several secondaries and some medium-sized counters were likely to be active on news and speculation of corporate action such as stock splits, bonus share issues and 1996 earnings.
On Friday, the Jakarta composite index closed 2.17 points lower at 696.50 points, against last Friday's close of 704.48 points.
- - - -
SINGAPORE - The Straits Times Industrial (STI) Index will trade in a range of 2,150 and 2,300 points in the coming week, with a trend towards the higher end of the range, traders said.
Expectations of flat to weaker 1996 results announcements, notably by property and marine companies, would continue to weigh on some blue chips, they added.
Continued retail and punting interest would underpin small and recently listed stocks, dealers said.
The STI index ended 10.70 points or 0.47 percent lower at 2,241.28 on Friday against 2,252.46 on February 14.
- - - -
SYDNEY - Australian shares were seen mixed in the near term with the focus remaining on individual corporate results as the reporting season continues apace.
The All Ordinaries index closed at 2,475.3, barely changed from Thursday and down 0.3 percent over the week.
While major moves on Wall Street would still dictate the early tone, individual company performance was seen as the key.
"The market will look at the fundamentals and see which stocks have had the earnings to justify price movements and those that haven't may succumb to a bit of profit-taking," said Derek Bond, director at brokerage Burrell and Co.
- - - -
WELLINGTON - Corporate earnings are again set to take centre stage on the New Zealand share market in the week ahead, while brokers keep a close watch on Telecom's sliding share price.
It shed 25 cents to NZ$6.60 on Friday on fears of a weaker earnings outlook.
Next up on the reporting schedule are the Fletcher Challenge divisions, which should prove a mixed bag when they report on Wednesday.
The NZSE-40 Capital Index ended the week at 2,301.53, down 24.32 points. The index has lost 21.65 points (0.94 percent) from 2,323.18 a week ago.
- - - -
BOMBAY - Shares at Indian bourses are expected to trade in volatile territory ahead of the 1997 budget to be presented on February 28, dealers said.
"It's a crucial week. Market focus will be on budget expectations," a local dealer said.
The 30-share index of the Bombay Stock Exchange fell 54.91 points, or 1.57 percent, to end at 3,439.49 in the week ending Friday.
Now that China's Deng Xiaoping is dead, Hong Kong faces a future without the figurehead who helped to assure the territory's confidence and stability, among the two most important words in the investor's lexicon.
As the architect of the "One country, two systems" policy, Deng provided the framework that will guide Hong Kong's return to China on July 1 this year.
His open-door policy also transformed the territory's economy from an industrial and manufacturing hub into a service centre geared to China's emergence.
Deng's passing last week was an important milestone for the city-state he helped to shape.
The immediate impact of his death would be small, as the paramount leader's nuts-and-bolts involvement in Hong Kong affairs was limited.
But the longer term effect would be significant, particularly as Hong Kong prepared for its July 1 transition into a Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China, after more than 150 years of British colonial rule.
"To all intents and purposes, he was inactive but while he was there, his standing allowed large numbers of people to move and shake on the basis of his authority," said David Dodwell, author and director at Jardine Fleming Holdings.
"That is the biggest imponderable: to what extent could the people promoting economic reform become vulnerable."
ECONOMIC REFORM TO CONTINUE REGARDLESS
Few doubt that the economic reforms Deng initiated and upon which Hong Kong depends so heavily will proceed.
Too much change has already become entrenched, and China's growing number of jobless will require continued progress as the private sector, most of it built and supported by foreign investment, is the nation's only job creator, Dodwell said.
That is a positive factor for Hong Kong, which has been the primary investment gateway into China. In 1995, Hong Kong accounted for $80 billion of direct investment in China, or 60 percent of a total realised foreign direct investment of $133 billion.
Rising foreign investment also would imply increased demand for services, which would at least guarantee steady economic growth, albeit at slower rates than 20 years ago.
"We won't see double digit growth rates again," said George Leung, economist at Hongkong and Shanghai Bank.
"I would also not see growth slowing sharply, to say one or two percent, because Hong Kong still has the backing of China. If China grows from nine to 10 percent each year you can imagine the demand for services in Hong Kong."
THE POLITICAL PACE OF CHANGE
The pace of reform -- and of economic growth -- has always been a hot political issue in China, as has management of the industrial sector which is dominated by huge, labour intensive and debt-laden state enterprises.
"There seems to have been a certain policy inertia. What will the next step be?" asked Michael Martin, economist at the government-funded Hong Kong Trade Development Council.
All eyes will be on China's 15th National People's Congress in October for signs of renewed momentum in policy-making and the collective leadership's commitment to change.
"As that new domestic economic policy and particularly industrial policy emerges it will have implications for what Hong Kong's role will be for the next decade or so," Martin said.
Hong Kong can rest assured that the role Deng carved out for it 15 years ago will remain intact for the time being, Martin said. China's absence of basic financial infrastructure, a reliable legal system or even property rights seems to assure Hong Kong's near-term future as the nation's investment gateway.
But as China develops, the territory's role could diminish.
"Its role over time is likely to become more modest," said Dodwell. "Over time, the mainland Chinese economy and companies in the mainland in centres such as Shanghai will become more successful and the economic centres of gravity will shift."
HONG KONG KEEPS WARY WATCH ON SHANGHAI
Shanghai is viewed with suspicion by many in Hong Kong, who fear its rapid economic progress and close ties to the current collective leadership in Beijing.
"Shanghai has for many years now been given priority by the Chinese leadership as they tried to rebuild strength there but I don't honestly see that those commitments to help Shanghai to grow, will be in any way at the expense of Hong Kong," said Dodwell.
Hong Kong's best scenario for the future will depend on a China that succeeds, but not too well, Dodwell said. "If China really motors and gets really clever, it doesn't need Hong Kong any more."
But Martin said China is going to need more than one financial centre, one port or one major transportation hub.
"Rather than a situation where they are competing head to head, it will be more a situation of how the two can complement each other for the overall growth of China," he said.
HONG KONG MUST KEEP LOOKING OUT, NOT IN....
Martin stressed Hong Kong's international role, partly because the world's trade structure is shifting more quickly than in the past. Production facilities are more mobile, flexible and integrated and Hong Kong's international exposure and expertise will remain crucial to China's success, he said.
"The future of southern China depends on its ability to respond to those shifts and reorient activities into new product areas, or move up the technological ladder," he said.
But there are other, more subtle concerns, including a common fear that China will plunder Hong Kong's coffers.
China has pledged its support for Hong Kong's monetary independence, but economic tzar Zhu Rongji in the past has made frequent pleas to the wealthy coastal provinces in favour of China's poorer central areas.
The price of plundering Hong Kong would be high, Dodwell warned. International investors have committed $330 billion so far in China, two-thirds of which came through Hong Kong. Actual investment from Hong Kong is over $100 billion, much of it from overseas Chinese.
"In theory, it's always posible but it would be a one-off gift. Is China really going to cut off its nose to spite its face?" Dodwell asked. "If it came in and scooped up the pot, what demonstration does that give to the overseas economy, and particularly the overseas Chinese economy?"
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6470
Hong Kong Financial Secretary Donald Tsang painted a rosy picture of an expanding economy on Thursday, just two weeks before he presents the budget that will straddle the territory's handover to Chinese rule.
With economic growth forecast at 5.5 percent this year and the trade picture improving, Hong Kong's economy is well positioned ahead of the territory's transition from British to Chinese sovereignty on July 1, Tsang said.
"Hong Kong will start life as a Special Administrative Region (of China) in sound economic shape, with every prospect that we will remain the most attractive business location in this region," Tsang told a Hong Kong Investment Fund Association lunch.
Tsang is due to release the annual budget on March 12.
He revealed the government's economic forecasts but declined to disclose its fiscal reserves or comment on an expected fiscal surplus of up HK$20 billion (US$2.56 billion), substantially higher than a prior government forecast of HK$1.6 billion.
"It makes good sense to separate clearly our economic forecasts from the annual budget," he said.
"To maintain our position as a major centre for international business, entrepreneurs and investors need prompt access to the best information on our current performance and our future prospects," he said.
Tsang said improvements in foreign trade and rising domestic demand would continue to support Hong Kong's economy through 1997, following a turnaround in the middle of last year.
Consumption and investment were the primary drivers behind last year's recovery, aided by an unemployment rate that fell to 2.6 percent and inflation capped at 6.7 percent, he said.
Private consumption is expected to rise still further by 5.5 percent this year, he said.
The massive airport construction project and public housing programmes boosted investment levels in 1996, as did private sector activity in building and construction, he said.
"The feel-good factor returned in the middle of 1996," Tsang told reporters after his speech.
While investment rates are set to fall this year as the Chek Lap Kok airport project nears completion, Hong Kong's economy should continue to leap ahead, thanks to an improving trade picture that will benefit from steady or high growth rates in the United States, Europe and East Asia, he said.
"We expect the economy to perform significantly better than last year," Tsang said. "The improved performance will be generated by faster growth in both domestic demand and foreign trade. We also expect confidence levels to remain high in 1997."
Exports of goods are forecast to rise 8.5 percent this year against a decline of eight percent last year. Exports of services are expected to grow eight percent in 1997 against a rise of six percent last year.
Although domestic exports should remain static, re-exports should rise 10 percent this year compared with eight percent last year, Tsang said.
Although private consumption growth indicates greater confidence in the territory's future, Tsang warned that Hong Kong was experiencing an increase in price pressure that would push up the benchmark consumer price index (A) by seven percent in 1997 from an inflation rate of 6.7 percent in 1996.
"That is our forecast at this moment," he told reporters. "It will be revised in the middle of the year... I think that seven percent is a reasonable estimate."
-- Hong Kong News Room (852) 2843 6441
The longer-term interests of a US$1 billion stake in Russian equity markets dictated last week's decision to unwind a controversial fund that planned to invest in Russian gas monopoly Gazprom, Regent Pacific Group Ltd said on Monday.
"We've had to sacrifice the smaller interest in Gazprom to the much bigger interest we've got in Russia overall," Jim Mellon, Regent Pacific's managing director, told Reuters.
Hong Kong-based Regent Pacific decided to back away last week from a dispute with Gazprom over a US$200 million fund designed to invest in the domestic shares of the gas giant.
"We don't want to get into a lengthy legal battle and jeopardise our (other) Russian funds," Mellon said.
"Gazprom is the biggest company (in Russia) and we certainly don't want to go up against them," Mellon said.
Gazprom restricts foreign investment to nine percent of share capital, which it issues in the form of American Depositary Shares.
These ADRs trade at four times the value of the domestic shares, which Regent's fund hoped to purchase because it was incorporated in Russia -- even though all the fundholders were foreign institutions.
Mellon defended the scheme on Monday as "completely legal" but said Regent backed away from a dispute with Gazprom after it asked Regent not to buy the domestic shares.
"There was never any question of foreigners getting their direct hands on the shares," said Mellon.
"If you consult any lawyer they'll tell you our scheme is absolutely watertight, completely legal, but from a practical point of view it's all very well for Regent to go up against Hambros Bank but it would be very foolish of us to go up against Gazprom," he added.
Regent owns between three and four percent of Hambros and has been arguing forcefully that the bank is better broken up.
Mellon said that while Hambros might enjoy prestige as one of Britain's last remaining independent merchant banks, it cannot compare with Gazprom which numbers Russia's current prime minister and energy minister among its former executives.
Regent's Gazprom fund hoped to attract fundholders keen to arbitrage the ADRs and the domestic share prices.
"I suppose the worry that Gazprom had was that people might sell the ADRs or alternatively not buy the next issue of ADRs and buy our fund instead, which was the same issue but at a much lower price," said Mellon.
"Or alternatively, if you were a hedge fund, you might go short the ADRs and long our fund and seek to exploit the gap."
So far, only 1.5 percent of the foreign allotment of nine percent of share capital have been issued, Mellon said.
However, Mellon argued that the fund was Gazprom's idea in the first place and based on an arbitrage long-practiced by Russian brokers.
Timing was probably the root cause of the difficulty.
"Only once we got the money did they come out against it," Mellon said. "One suspects its definitely in their interest longer-term to have the local share price higher versus the offshore price. In the immediate term it's not in their interest because they wanted to raise more ADRs."
Gazprom's domestic shares were trading at about US$0.645 on Monday against US$0.53 last week. The London-traded ADRs, equivalent to 10 underlying shares, at US$17.35 against more than US$20.00 last week.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6470
Thailand's efforts to boost market confidence by toughening up rules for its finance sector won mixed reviews from foreign investors on Tuesday.
Some welcomed Thailand's willingness to admit -- finally -- to asset quality problems in its finance sector, but others said Monday's announcement came far too late.
"This is fire-fighting," said one fund manager, who declined to be identified. "They should have put the fire extinguishers and the sprinklers in beforehand. And now they've doused the flames, but the damage has already been done."
On Monday, Thailand's central bank ordered 10 finance companies to raise capital immediately and raise provisioning levels to American standards of 115 percent of doubtful assets for banks and 120 percent for finance companies.
The moves followed months of speculation about asset quality that helped to shave half the value off the stock market while leaving the baht open to talk of a devaluation.
Fund Manager Templeton called for aggressive management of the problem.
"I think the central bank and the authorities need to take a very tough line and they need to be pretty active in the way in which they're going to manage this problem. Because this problem needs management," said sales director Stewart Aldcroft.
One fund manager said he was surprised the list of companies required to raise capital immediately was restricted to only 10 names. At least another 10 are in similar straits, he said.
Analysts said on Monday that only four or five banks would have to raise provisions to meet the new requirements, but most of the country's 90 finance companies cannot even meet existing requirements of 100-percent provisioning.
Thailand's willingness to confront the problem won praise from some investors, but most were unimpressed by the Bank of Thailand's tardy approach to a critical problem.
"We were frightened they would try to ignore the problem or gloss over it," said another fund manager. "Now they have realised there is a problem and they're doing something about it, which is positive. But it's early days yet."
One broker blamed changes in central bank leadership for the criticism. Previously, the Bank of Thailand was respected for its non-interventionist but pre-emptive management style.
"The bank seems to have gone astray in terms of its traditional role as a central bank," he said.
Another fund manager said corruption, a major complaint about the previous government, was starting to resurface.
"One of the biggest problems in Thailand is corruption," he said. "The way in which political favouritism occurred in the past has become apparent in the current government."
Thailand can now expect to begin a lengthy process of consolidation in its financial sector, with most of the activity focused on finance companies.
Most finance companies are heavily exposed to margin lending in investment banking and highly-leveraged in consumer or project finance, said James Wilson, senior associate director at Deutsche Morgan Grenfell.
"One issue that didn't crop up that should have, is most of the funding for finance companies is in the form of promissory notes," he said. "When the risk goes up, so does their coupon and the cost of funding."
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6470
Asia will suffer only minor damage from an anticipated shake-out in Thailand's banking sector, analysts said on Wednesday.
"That's not a very healthy market and it's not a reflection on any of the others," said Carmen Welso, banking analyst with ING Barings in Hong Kong.
But some countries could take some precautionary steps to prevent the same thing happening within their borders, another analyst said.
The Thai government's public acknowledgement that its banks and finance companies are grappling with a huge liquidity problem caused by bad debts, many linked to a besieged property sector, prompted tough new provisioning rules on Monday.
The country's central bank, the Bank of Thailand, ordered banks and finance companies to raise provisions for sub-standard loans and asked 10 cash-strapped finance firms to boost capital.
Many analysts said on Wednesday they now expected to see a wave of consolidation sweep through Thailand's financial services sector.
For example, Thailand needed about five finance companies rather than the 90 that currently exist, one analyst said.
"People are going to look at Thailand and say 'we don't want that happening here'," said a banking analyst.
Indonesia and the Philippines could follow Malaysia's lead and restrict property lending rules to avoid Thailand's experience, he said.
"They'll try to control property bubbles, which is what Malaysia did a few years ago," he added.
Most analysts said it was too early to identify obvious candidates in Thailand for merger or takeover apart from the list of 10 finance firms ordered to raise capital immediately.
But foreign banks with stakes in some of the companies already affected by the shake-out would feel some immediate pain, she said.
One example was Development Bank of Singapore, which owns part of Thai Danu Bank.
Thai Danu announced a merger with Finance One Plc over the weekend. Finance One is Thailand's largest finance company.
Another analyst said that although it was too soon to identify obvious targets, some of Asia's biggest banks would soon start cherry-picking their way through the debris in Thailand, looking for possible takeover targets.
Citibank, HSBC Holdings Plc and ING Barings were considered likely buyers, although foreign restrictions could be a disincentive. Foreigners are restricted to holding only 25 percent of banks or finance companies, effectively preventing them from gaining control.
"I think they'll be under pressure to admit foreign banks to take control of bigger slices of Thai banks and especially Thai finance candidates," the analyst said.
But Thailand was in a relatively good position to confront these problems, with the economy forecast to grow about 6.5 percent this year, he said.
"Unlike Japan, they don't have economic contraction," he said. "My guess is if they shift their seat they can get out of it fairly quickly. They're not going to persist for four or five years like the banking problem in Japan."
-- Hong Kong bureau (852) 2843 6470
World bankers and economic chiefs held Hong Kong up as a financial showcase with a rosy future on Friday, but a clash of views between Britain and China over democracy augured a politically bumpy ride.
Speaker after speaker at a one-day International Monetary Fund (IMF) meeting stressed the importance of the economic policies that allowed Hong Kong to transform itself from an isolated island in the South China Sea into a teeming metropolis dedicated to wealth, prosperity and commerce.
"The policy framework in Hong Kong now and after the transition of sovereignty could hardly be better," IMF managing director Michel Camdessus said in his closing remarks.
And instead of a list of recommendations wrapping up the day's discussion of the difficulties hampering Asia's economic emergence, the day ended with a challenge from Hong Kong Monetary Authority chief Joseph Yam to return after the British-ruled territory returns to China on July 1.
Yam asked delegates to attend the World Bank/IMF annual meeting in September to see for themselves that the "one country, two systems" policy guiding Hong Kong's transition to China was actually working.
"You will be able to see for yourselves that the dynamism of Hong Kong has not and will not change," Yam said, adding that the IMF's decision to hold its 1997 annual meeting in Hong Kong was "a resounding vote of confidence" in its future.
The IMF meeting will be the first major gathering of world leaders in Hong Kong following China's takeover.
More than 50,000 delegates are expected at a venue still under construction. Encased in bamboo scaffolding, Hong Kong's new convention centre only recently gained a partial roof, testament to the territory's speedy construction methods.
The meeting is expected to provide China with a showcase for the handover, which was evident in less obvious ways at Friday's IMF gathering, too.
Departing colonial governor Chris Patten started the day with a sideswipe at Beijing, telling delegates that Hong Kong's economic success was due largely to its increasingly democratic government.
"The government has responded (positively) to that process and to the changes in aspirations which have accompanied it, by welcoming ever wider public participation in the process of government," Patten said.
Tung Chee-hwa, the territory's incoming chief executive, ended the day with a reminder of traditional Chinese values of cooperation.
"Within our community of Asian countries we must forge cooperation through dialogue and understanding," he said in closing remarks.
To help foster this mood of cooperation, Tung pledged to visit his Asian neighbours soon.
"As soon as possible, I hope to be able to visit our neighbours in Asia to extend my hand of friendship and cooperation."
Yam cemented the day's upbeat handover theme with a reminder that, in economic terms, the "one country, two systems" policy was little more than maintenance of the status quo.
"Under these arrangements there will be one country, two currencies, two monetary systems and two monetary authorities which are to be mutually independent," he said.
"These arrangements are admittedly new but definitely not as novel and complex as EMU (European Monetary Union) with one currency for many countries," he added.
But as a reminder that things are changing irrevocably after 150 years of British rule, many of Hong Kong's colonial administrators were on their way home after seeing their careers cut short by "localisation".
Many expatriates were sailing on two of the world's greatest cruise liners, the QE2 and the Oriana, a dramatic reminder that an era is ending and that Hong Kong itself will soon be sailing in uncharted waters.
Thailand's banking sector crisis brought repeated calls for an upgrade of Asia's immature financial infrastructure at an International Monetary Fund-Hong Kong Monetary Authority meeting on Friday.
"Asia needs a stronger, more dynamic financial infrastructure," IMF managing director Michel Camdessus told the conference on financial integration in Asia.
The region's banking system has not kept pace with its economic development, and the speedy pace of economic reform has created an urgent need for an overhaul, delegates said.
"In many countries, in Asia and elsewhere, prudential regulation and supervision have not kept pace with the new complexities of the banking business," Camdessus said.
"If left unaddressed, this gap could pose dangers for domestic and external stability. Indeed, all countries must be vigilant about the strength of their banking systems, so that the monetary authorities can tighten policy when needed, without fear of aggravating banking sector problems."
Asset quality problems forced Thailand to intervene earlier this week to demand better provisioning by its banks. Thailand was hampered in dealing with the situation by its monetary policy. Its currency, the baht, is pegged to a basket of currencies dominated by the dollar, but was under pressure from speculators who were encouraged by Thailand's poor economic picture and weak financial sector.
Lower rates would have eased liquidity -- but would also have lowered the cost of borrowing for currency speculators.
Higher interest rates to ward off the speculators would have increased the cost of borrowing for the cash-strapped banks.
While most speakers stopped short of calling for regional banking regulation and supervision to prevent the same situation occurring elsewhere -- an idea mooted by Australia recently -- some experts recommended frequent and regular gatherings of central bankers and finance ministers.
"Most countries need to take steps to strengthen the official supervisory oversight of financial institutions and markets," said Gerald Corrigan, managing director at Goldman Sachs and a former president of the New York and member of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Key to the debate are capital inflows, which have widened current account deficits across Asia with serious implications for external balances and interest rates.
Corrigan warned that while many Asian nations with wide current account deficits have taken comfort from large foreign exchange reserves, the capital inflows responsible for much of their foreign exchange can evaporate overnight.
"Deregulation has also led to a greater exposure of credit and foreign exchange risk, and increased the danger of banks being inadequately capitalised with consequent incentives to offer above-market interest rates and engage in less prudent lending," said Mahmood Pradhan, a senior economist with the IMF.
The situation is becoming more urgent as more and more nations in the region seek financing for the sort of huge infrastructure projects on which their future depends, he said.
"The challenge is for many of these countries to address their infrastructure needs, including environmental requirements, without putting undue strains on public finances or on external positions," Pradhan said.
Although many Asian nations have successfully raised capital through privatisations, the amount of capital raised through privatisation in Asia was relatively small compared with Latin America, he said.
Thailand's banking sector crisis brought repeated calls for an upgrade of Asia's immature financial infrastructure at an International Monetary Fund-Hong Kong Monetary Authority meeting on Friday.
"Asia needs a stronger, more dynamic financial infrastructure," IMF managing director Michel Camdessus told the conference on financial integration in Asia.
The region's banking system has not kept pace with its economic development, and the speedy pace of economic reform has created an urgent need for an overhaul, delegates said.
"In many countries, in Asia and elsewhere, prudential regulation and supervision have not kept pace with the new complexities of the banking business," Camdessus said.
"If left unaddressed, this gap could pose dangers for domestic and external stability. Indeed, all countries must be vigilant about the strength of their banking systems, so that the monetary authorities can tighten policy when needed, without fear of aggravating banking sector problems."
Asset quality problems forced Thailand to intervene earlier this week to demand better provisioning by its banks.
Thailand was hampered in dealing with the situation by its monetary policy. Its currency, the baht, is pegged to a basket of currencies dominated by the dollar, but was under pressure from speculators who were encouraged by Thailand's poor economic picture and weak financial sector.
Lower rates would have eased liquidity -- but would also have lowered the cost of borrowing for currency speculators.
Higher interest rates to ward off the speculators would have increased the cost of borrowing for the cash-strapped banks.
While most speakers stopped short of calling for regional banking regulation and supervision to prevent the same situation occurring elsewhere -- an idea mooted by Australia recently -- some experts recommended frequent and regular gatherings of central bankers and finance ministers.
"Most countries need to take steps to strengthen the official supervisory oversight of financial institutions and markets," said Gerald Corrigan, managing director at Goldman Sachs and a former president of the New York and member of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Key to the debate are capital inflows, which have widened current account deficits across Asia with serious implications for external balances and interest rates.
Corrigan warned that while many Asian nations with wide current account deficits have taken comfort from large foreign exchange reserves, the capital inflows responsible for much of their foreign exchange can evaporate overnight.
"Deregulation has also led to a greater exposure of credit and foreign exchange risk, and increased the danger of banks being inadequately capitalised with consequent incentives to offer above-market interest rates and engage in less prudent lending," said Mahmood Pradhan, a senior economist with the IMF.
The situation is becoming more urgent as more and more nations in the region seek financing for the sort of huge infrastructure projects on which their future depends, he said.
"The challenge is for many of these countries to address their infrastructure needs, including environmental requirements, without putting undue strains on public finances or on external positions," Pradhan said.
Although many Asian nations have successfully raised capital through privatisations, the amount of capital raised through privatisation in Asia was relatively small compared with Latin America, he said.
Foreign investors seeking access to China could consider the road industry, which needs more than US$6 billion in foreign money to complete four national highways by 2000, SBC Warburg said.
Low rates of investment are considered largely responsible for clogged highways in China, where 1,500 counties and 190,000 villages had no road access at the end of 1994.
Road building has not kept pace with the growth in civilian vehicles, which has risen a compound 13.4 percent each year between 1978 and 1995 -- roughly in line with the country's rapid economic expansion.
By comparison, the total length of highways over the same period has increased only by an average 1.6 percent a year.
"The main reason behind this slow development in China's highway network is the insufficient investment in the sector," SBC Warburg said recently.
Investment is a pressing problem with China's ambitious plan to build a network of 12 national trunk routes totalling 30,000 km by the 2010, with the first four highways to be completed by 2000.
Total construction cost is estimated at 540 billion yuan ($65 billion) over 10 years, most of which will come from domestic funding, the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank.
"However, it is estimated that as much as $6 billion will have to come from foreign investors," SBC Warburg said.
Foreign investors first started entering China's road industry during the Eighth Five Year Plan, and the resulting investment helped to accelerate the expansion of highways 12.6 percent to 1.15 million km between 1991 and 1995.
Among the better-known foreign-invested higways are Hopewell Holding's Guangzhou-Shenzhen Superhighway; New World Infrastructure's Guangzhou Northern Ring Road, which opened in 1994; Road King Infrastructure, which signed its first toll road joint venture in December 1993; Cheung Kong Infrastructure and CITIC Pacific.
Guangdong Investment and Guangzhou Investment are also active players.
Most projects are toll roads, which SBC Warburg warned can be difficult to set up and operate in China. Central and provincial approvals are required and collection can be fraught with "natural" hazards such as traffic accidents and robberies.
"It does not seem to us, however, that such irregularities are damaging the investment merits of Chinese toll roads, if the investor can work closely with the local authorities on containing the leakage at some pre-determined levels," the broker said.
There are clear signs that China is actively encouraging foreign investment in this sector.
Expressways, tunnels and bridges are open to 100 percent foreign ownership and there is no limit in foreign participation in Chinese joint ventures on first and second-class highways.
Experiments with various types of funding sources and investment structures are being encouraged.
And, as part of the central government's efforts to promote a more standardised build-operate-transfer structure for infrastructure projects, it is preparing to offer a bridge in Wuhan for international tender.
"We expect the market to be increasingly open to foreign participation, as additional funding sources help attract more investors and reduce financing costs," SBC Warburg concluded.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6470
Hong Kong's embarrassment of riches will take centre stage on Wednesday when Financial Secretary Donald Tsang finally reveals the exact size of the territory's surplus and reserves.
The magnitude of wealth lining the coffers of Hong Kong is one of the budget's last and most sensitive secrets following a series of official leaks during the past two weeks.
Speculation about the size of the surplus has also led to controversy about how Hong Kong chooses to spend its wealth in this year of great change.
Hong Kong ends life as a British colony on July 1, returning to China as a Special Administrative Region.
Despite an attempt by the government to inhibit budget controversy it seems certain that debate will erupt on Wednesday when the full size of Hong Kong's cash pile is revealed.
China already has been accused of applying the brakes to welfare spending, a key element of colonial governor Chris Patten's thorny relationship with Beijing.
Tsang on Friday denied any Beijing budget pressure.
"In formulating our expenditure programme we had not been overly influenced, we have not been affected, by whatever they called political pressure," he told a group of central bankers.
With a budget surplus projected by many experts at HK$20 billion (US$2.56 billion), Hong Kong can certainly afford to better meet the needs of its disadvantaged, said the Democratic Party, Hong Kong's largest and most vociferous political group.
"It appears social security growth will be insufficient for our elderly and disabled," Huang Chen-ya of the Democratic Party told Reuters.
Spending estimates, already revealed, disclosed only a 9.1 percent increase in welfare spending in the coming fiscal year compared to a 20.1-percent rise in 1996/97.
But others say a tax cut is more appropriate, and might even become inevitable as the government struggles to comply with demands for fiscal balance contained in the Basic Law, the mini-constitution that will govern Hong Kong after July 1.
Still others argue that Hong Kong requires a hefty war chest of reserves in the year it reverts to Chinese control.
"The point is, now, whether the present level of fiscal reserves is adequate or not to secure Hong Kong from attack, from speculators, or from any shock to the system," said George Leung, economic adviser to Hongkong Bank.
"I cannot say whether that is enough, but I think more is better. Right now, it's 1997 and we still need money to secure the Hong Kong situation. It is a little more sensitive now."
Leung warned that either a tax cut or aggressive social spending in Hong Kong, with its nascent inflationary pressure, would be more destabilising than no action at all.
But there is no doubt that Hong Kong confronts the handover in robust economic shape.
In one of a carefully orchestrated series of leaks following 12 months of budget talks with China, Tsang recently told an influential group of institutional fund managers that economic growth will rise a sturdy 5.5 percent in the coming year, while trade and consumption continue to improve.
Inflation will remain capped at seven percent, and land premiums are expected to rise to a record HK$60 billion (US$7.69 billion) -- the primary cause of the government's sudden increase in its budget surplus and fiscal reserves.
Given this wealth, some question China's readiness to adopt the hands-off approach to future budgets under the Basic Law.
China was allowed to participate in the transition budget, but now must allow Hong Kong to run its own financial affairs for 50 years -- a doubtful prospect, according to Huang.
"This budget certainly has already the fingerprints of intervention," he said. "Certainly, I think the central government can, when it pleases, participate, to put it mildly, in future budgets by giving advice, invited or otherwise."
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6470
Hong Kong's hefty cash reserves offer a comfortable cushion for children born in 1997, the year the British colony returns to Chinese sovereignty.
According to Wednesday's 1997/98 budget figures, thrifty Hong Kong will confront its future as part of China with HK$330 billion (US$42 billion) in total fiscal reserves.
That works out to more than US$6,500 for each man, woman and child in the territory.
By comparison, gross national debt in the United States of US$5.5 trillion translates into a debt of US$20,500 for every child born there this year.
But Financial Secretary Donald Tsang resisted the temptation to hand down a give-away budget.
Instead of widely-anticipated tax cuts, Tsang's budget speech for 1997/98 (April-March) stressed the need for continuity in 1997, and Hong Kong's ability to work with China to strike a balance.
"Fortunately, our healthy public finances and robust economic prospects have made the task of finding the right balance somewhat easier," Tsang said.
But critics were not satisfied by the government's failure to spend more on the needy, particularly the elderly, while reporting a budget surplus of HK$15.1 billion this year rising to HK$31.7 billion in 1997/98. "I think the size of the surplus is utterly obscene and I'm very, very mad just on that," said Emily Lau, an independent Democrat and outspoken critic of the government's social policy.
"We are probably the richest place on earth and to think we have several hundred thousand poeple living from hand to mouth.
"I've got nothing against the tax reduction on wine, that's fine. But I think we should also do something for the elderly."
Tsang cut duties on wine to 60 percent from 90 percent.
Experts warned that the gap between rich and poor in Hong Kong is bound to widen as impoverished Chinese immigrants flock to Hong Kong seeking streets paved with gold.
In 1995, Hong Kong increased the quota for mainland immigrants to 150 a day from 105, mainly for family reunions.
"Twenty years ago, Hong Kong could absorb impoverished migrants from the mainland in large numbers because it had an immense need for cheap labour," said David Dodwell, a director at Jardine Fleming Holdings.
"Today, that is no longer the case. Now our capacity to absorb those in the economy today is much less than it used to be. We don't have the unskilled jobs," he said.
Hong Kong's rapid transformation from international manufacturing and industrial hub into a services economy geared to China's economic expansion has caused the relocation of virtually its entire manufacturing base into southern China.
Tsang's highly conservative budget indicated growing awareness of the potential ramifications of mainland immigration, with a 150-percent boost to spending on benefits for newly-arrived mainland children.
"As for the children, we help them fit into our schools with special support services and remedial English programmes," he said. "In 1997/98 we will spend a total of around HK$168 million on these children -- an increase of over 150 percent in real terms of 1996/97."
($ = 7.74 HK dollars)
