China confirmed on Tuesday that veteran dissident Wang Xizhe had fled the country, accused him of crossing the border illegally and said Chinese authorities were pursuing those who helped him.
"Concerning the question of Wang Xizhe, this is a case of illegally and secretly crossing the border," Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang told a regular news briefing.
"The judicial authorities are currently pursuing the legal responsibilities of Wang Xizhe and the plotters," Shen said, apparently implying that Wang had help when he fled to Hong Kong last week.
Wang, 46, one of China's most vocal advocates of democracy for more than two decades, escaped to Hong Kong just days after a fellow activist in Beijing was condemned to a labour camp for three years.
"We hope that countries concerned will not have the slightest ambiguity in cracking down on illegal and secret immigration," Shen said.
Wang has been missing from his home in the southern Chinese province of Guangdong that abuts Hong Kong since fellow pro-democracy activist Liu Xiaobo was arrested in Beijing last Tuesday and ordered to serve three years in a labour camp.
He is reported to be seeking asylum in the United States but Shen said China had received no official confirmation that Wang had sought refuge there.
"We have not yet seen any action by the United States," Shen said, adding that Beijing would watch Wang's case closely.
"The governments of some countries, including the United States, should carry out what they have always stressed, namely their stand to crack down on illegal immigration," he said.
Wang and Liu penned a daring statement last month accusing the ruling Communist Party of reneging on a 1945 pledge to grant freedom of the press and to allow people to form political parties and stage demonstrations.
The two urged the impeachment of Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin for violating the constitution by saying the army should answer only to the party rather than to the state.
Wang would be the second Chinese dissident to flee to the United States via Hong Kong this year. Activist Liu Gang fled to Hong Kong last May and has since found asylum in the United States.
Wang was first jailed in 1974 on charges of sedition for putting up a wall poster advocating democracy in China. He was paroled in 1993 after serving 12 years of a 14-year sentence and stripped of his civil rights for five years.
The report of Wang's flight abroad comes amid a renewed crackdown on China's tiny, struggling democracy movement.
Liu Gang, who spent six years in prison as a leader of the 1989 student-led demonstrations for more democracy, fled to the United States last May after months of police harassment at his home in the northeastern province of Liaoning.
Detained dissident and former leader of the 1989 protests Wang Dan faces the capital charge in Beijing of plotting to subvert the government based on evidence such as writings critical of the state and accepting funds from abroad.
Wang Dan, detained since May 1995, has been charged with plotting to overthrow the government -- a crime that carries a maximum penalty of death and a minimum of 10 years in prison.
Wang Dan had defied persistent police surveillance and harassment to take part in a bold appeal in May 1995 to Beijing for the release of all those still in prison for their part in the 1989 student protests.
Chinese President Jiang Zemin on Thursday used the 60th anniversary of a communist military ordeal to try to strengthen his grip on the army by exhorting soldiers to toe the party line.
Western diplomats have said that whether Jiang will be able to fill the shoes of his mentor, paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, now 92 and in fragile health, depends to a large extent on his ability to win the military to his side.
"The Long March victory fully illustrates that the party's absolute leadership over the army is...the core and spirit of our army's fine tradition," Jiang said in reference to the communist army's epic, 9,650-km (6,000 mile) trek across the mountains of China in 1934-1936.
"Every comrade in the army must firmly note this basic principle and at any time and under any circumstances must not waver, even in the slightest," the Xinhua news agency quoted Jiang as saying in a speech to army leaders and veterans.
Officers and soldiers should heed the direction of communist rulers and strive to enforce the party line, Jiang advised his audience of mostly ageing People's Liberation Army (PLA) veterans.
The PLA owed its survival of the gruelling journey as well as its subsequent victory over the Nationalist forces in 1949 to the firm leadership of the Communist Party, Jiang said.
Jiang exhorted the army to be "forever be loyal to the party, loyal to socialism, loyal to the motherland and loyal to the people".
In a rare deviation from his usual dark, western-style suit and red tie, Jiang sent the army a visual signal by donning a military green Mao suit during his address to the military elders that was broadcast on state television.
Other party and army leaders used the occasion to voice their support for Jiang, who already holds the three most powerful jobs in China -- state president, Communist Party chief and head of the powerful Central Military Commission -- but has yet to accumulate full power as Deng's anointed successor.
Vice-chairman of the Central Military Commission Liu Huaqing urged the military to unite under the banner of Jiang as leader of the party.
"We must...uphold the party's basic theory and basic line and resolutely protect the collective authority of the third generation of leaders with Comrade Jiang Zemin as the core," Liu said.
Western analysts have said Jiang, who has no military experience and is not a veteran of the Long March that honed most of China's previous top leaders, still needs to shore up his position with the army after Deng's death.
Jiang, fearful that two decades of economic reform has undermined the communist's grip on power, has made repeated calls for officials to be politically correct and toe the party line.
Two prominent Chinese dissidents recently penned a bold statement calling for Jiang's impeachment for violating the constitution by saying the army should be under control of the party instead of the state.
One of the authors, Liu Xiaobo, was detained last week and sentenced to three years in a labour camp. Co-author Wang Xizhe has since fled to the United States.
China tried to backtrack on Thursday from a warning to Hong Kong people on limits to their freedom of expression after the territory reverts to Beijing rule in 1997, saying liberties would remain but within the law.
"Hong Kong people will have full freedom of expression, but all freedoms must be within the limits allowed by law," Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang told a news briefing.
His remarks followed an interview with Foreign Minister Qian Qichen by the Asian Wall Street Journal in which Qian hinted that Hong Kong would no longer be able to mark the anniversary of Beijing's June 4, 1989, crackdown on student-led protests.
Qian's interview stirred an outcry in Hong Kong, where China has pledged a high degree of political freedoms for 50 years after the handover on July 1, 1997, and not to change its current capitalist system.
"China has obviously inflicted a fair amount of political damage in Hong Kong, it is now trying to undo some of that damage," said one China analyst.
Shen said Hong Kong residents would have freedom of the press and freedom of speech but such liberties would have to operate within the boundaries of the law.
"Any activities held in Hong Kong must be in accordance with legal regulations," Shen said.
"Hong Kong should not interfere in mainland China's affairs by organising some political activities to attack the mainland's internal affairs," he said.
Shen said the territory, a British colony for a century and a half, would maintain its capitalist system after it returns to mainland control at midnight on June 30, 1997.
"After July 1, 1997, there will be no changes to our one nation, two systems policy, the Hong Kong people will rule Hong Kong," he said. "In our words, well water does not intrude into the river water."
Hong Kong newspaper reports that interpreted Qian's remarks as a ban on activities in the territory to commemorate the 1989 crackdown were wrong, Shen said.
"Hong Kong opinion has misinterpreted Qian's remarks," Shen said, adding that Beijing had not altered its pledge to maintain Hong Kong's current political and economic system unchanged under Chinese sovereignty.
A transcript of Qian's interview showed he was specifically asked to say what activities would not be allowed and whether the 1989 commemoration was among them. Qian replied that he was referring to just such activities.
Shen said people would be free to criticise Beijing but said they should be careful in commenting on Chinese leaders.
"If some media make personal attacks on other people or on our leaders, this touches on news ethics," Shen said without elaborating.
"Except for national defence and foreign affairs, the central government will not interfere (in) any activities of the Hong Kong special administrative region's government, and Hong Kong should not interfere in mainland internal affairs," Shen said.
Shen said dissidents in Hong Kong would be free to travel outside the territory but should respect local laws while in Hong Kong.
"Hong Kong dissidents in Hong Kong will have the freedoms to go and stay, but if they stay there, they must act in accordance with local laws," Shen said.
A prominent exiled Chinese human rights activist has said his contacts with detained dissident Wang Dan do not justify the capital charge against the former student leader, who is expected to go on trial soon.
Wang Juntao, who now lives in the United States, has prepared written testimony rejecting charges that Wang Dan conspired with him to subvert the government, according to a U.S.-based human rights group.
"Wang Juntao has already ... prepared testimonial materials and turned them over to Wang Dan's relatives," said a statement from Human Rights in China received in Beijing on Thursday.
Wang Dan played a key role in pro-democracy demonstrations crushed by the army in 1989.
The charges against him included "collaborating with Wang Juntao and acting as director of the 'China Research Centre' established by Wang Juntao in the United States with the aim of subverting the Chinese government", the statement said.
Court officials have confirmed that Wang Dan, detained since May 1995, has been charged with plotting to overthrow the government -- a crime that carries a maximum penalty of death and a minimum of 10 years in prison.
Wang Juntao, condemned by Beijing as one of the "black hands" behind the student-led movement, was freed from prison on medical parole in 1994 and allowed to leave China for the United States.
He said his research centre was dedicated to studying the problems of China's modernisation drive and that Wang Dan had played but a nominal role in it.
"Wang Dan...acted as an honorary director and never published opinions in connection with the research centre's work and never participated in any of its activities," the statement quoted Wang Juntao as saying.
Other evidence against Wang Dan included taking part in home studies offered by a U.S. university and accepting donations and economic aid from overseas groups.
U.S.-based Chinese democracy activist Cheng Zhen said a group she headed had assisted Chinese student activists in enrolling in home study classes at foreign universities by helping them pay tuition and book fees but had no other dealings with them, the statement said.
"Wang Dan was helped in this way by them in selecting a correspondence course with the history department of the University of California, Berkeley," it quoted Cheng as saying.
The statement quoted Wang Dan's mother as saying her son's health had deteriorated while in confinement.
Family members could not be reached for comment.
Wang Dan's trial was expected to be held behind closed doors soon, relatives said earlier, adding that the family had not yet been advised of a trial date.
Wang Dan had already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in the 1989 demonstrations in Beijing which were crushed by the army with heavy loss of life.
He had been active since his parole in 1993, defying police harassment to join in a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of all those still in prison for their part in the 1989 protests.
China said on Friday that sexual contact was the leading cause of AIDS and warned that venereal disease could be a springboard for an AIDS epidemic.
"China should take immediate steps to curb the epidemic of STDs (sexually transmitted diseases) because their incidence rate is rising in the country," the official Xinhua news agency quoted health experts as saying.
"Sexual contact is now the leading cause of HIV infection," the agency said. AIDS, or Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, is caused by infection with the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV).
The number of reported cases of eight major sexually transmitted diseases diseases, including AIDS, gonorrhea and syphilis, had risen to 362,000 last year and officials forecast that figure could rocket to more than 800,000 by 2000, it said.
"We should give first priority to STD control in the battle against AIDS, because STDs are a springboard for an HIV/AIDS epidemic," Xinhua quoted Minister of Public Health Chen Minzhang as telling a national conference on the disease in Beijing.
"In line with the increase of STDs, the occurrence of HIV infection will be more frequent," Xinhua quoted Ye Shunzhang, director of the National Venereal Disease Control Centre, as telling the conference, which closed on Thursday.
Official figures show China has 4,305 people infected with HIV, up from 3,341 at the end of 1995, but experts say up to 100,000 could be infected.
"China could see its number of HIV cases spinning out of control if prompt, preventive measures are not taken," Xinhua said.
China would open hundreds of screening stations as part of a plan to set up a national AIDS monitoring network to supply accurate and fast data on the spread of the disease, it said.
Health authorities would open between 300 and 400 HIV monitoring centres by 2000 and set up a national laboratory to lead the country's battle against the disease.
Prostitution and narcotics abuse have both boomed in recent years as freewheeling economic reforms weaken puritan Marxist values.
Visiting Colombian Foreign Minister Maria Emma Mejia said on Monday she hoped to boost cooperation with Beijing to help both nations crack down on a flourishing narcotics trade.
Colombian officials said they hoped to sign an agreement with China that would increase information exchanges and strengthen police training in the fight against drugs.
"The Chinese were very clear that they very much wanted to seek cooperation in the matter of drugs," said Mejia, who is accompanying Colombian President Ernesto Samper on a three-day visit to China.
"We want to exchange knowledge in the field of fighting heroin trafficking," Mejia told reporters, adding that the rise of the heroin trade in Colombia -- infamous for its cocaine cartels -- was a relatively new development.
"Colombia knows very little about narcotics trafficking in Asia, and we have to know more, and China has to know more about narco-trafficking in South America, otherwise it will be very difficult to have a multilateral policy," Mejia said.
She did not say when she expected the proposed accord to be signed.
Samper told a news briefing Beijing had expressed support for Colombia's anti-drug efforts, but did not elaborate.
Beijing had expressed an interest in pursuing a policy not only of cracking down on drug traffickers but of preventing and treating drug addiction, Mejia said.
China's official Xinhua news agency quoted Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen as urging major drug-consuming nations to bolster their efforts to reduce domestic drug use.
"Drug-consuming countries should also shoulder heavy responsibility because the great market demand for drugs would result in widespread drug production and trafficking," Qian was quoted as saying.
Colombia's top anti-drug policeman General Rosso Jose Serrano told the briefing he did not think Colombian and Chinese drug cartels were working together to distribute heroin throughout North America.
"The Chinese mafia is the most difficult to penetrate, but as far as we know, there is no connection between Colombian and Chinese (drug traffickers)," said Serrano, who is widely credited with smashing Colombia's notorious Cali cocaine cartel.
A report by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration last month said Colombia had edged out southeast Asia's Golden Triangle region as the top supplier of high-grade heroin to the United States.
The report said 62 percent of all heroin confiscated in the United States came from Colombia.
China faces a growing problem with drug trafficking, much of it through the southwestern province of Yunnan which borders on the Golden Triangle drug production region that includes parts of Burma, Thailand and Laos.
China frequently executes people convicted of narcotics crimes and sentences many drug users to strict rehabilitation programmes.
China's listed companies must work to increase transparency and improve asset valuation if the country's fledgling markets are to gain global prominence, a top U.S. securities official said in Beijing on Tuesday.
Arthur Levitt, chairman of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, said he stressed in meetings with Chinese officials the need for frank disclosure of company data as a crucial step in boosting investor confidence in Chinese firms.
"I mentioned in every meeting over and over and over again the importance of transparency," Levitt told reporters.
"That's something that we can't emphasise enough: transparency, transparency, transparency," said Levitt, who is on a seven-day visit to China.
Officials in Chinese listed firms often saw the need for transparency but many were reluctant to disclose company data out of fears that such frankness would profit the competition, Levitt said.
Chinese public firms needed to think of shareholders as owners of the company rather than as impediments to progress, he said.
Levitt said he had urged the Chinese to swallow the bitter medicine of improved disclosure, effective regulation and cracking down on corruption to bolster investor confidence in what many businessmen were eyeing as a promising market.
"Their markets, just like every other market in the world, will be no better than public confidence is in that market," Levitt said.
Levitt said one of Beijing's most pressing tasks would be to draft a securities law that would serve as a guidepost for companies as well as regulatory agencies.
"The thing that business abhors more than anything else is uncertainty, or a lack of clarity," Levitt said.
The lacklustre performance of Chinese companies that had listed on the New York Stock Exchange reflected a lack of investor confidence in Chinese accounting methods and asset valuation systems, he said.
"The process of evaluating assets in China is an uncertain process that concerns many investors," Levitt said.
Many Chinese officials had been deeply disappointed by the slack overseas performance of Chinese firms, prompting a two-year pause in the process of nurturing of Chinese financial markets, he said.
"The Chinese over the past 12 to 18 months have been inner-directed, looking at the system, looking at the process and asking themselves what went wrong," he said, adding that reform had to continue.
"I tried to encourage everyone I talked to to stay the course, that the stakes were too high to turn around," Levitt said.
"This is a road that, once started on, there really is no turning back."
China said on Wednesday it would empower Hong Kong's courts to put on trial off-duty Chinese soldiers after Beijing resumes control over the British colony in 1997.
The standing committee of the National People's Congress (parliament), which is in session in Beijing, was expected to pass a law spelling out how to handle criminal or civil cases involving troops to be garrisoned in Hong Kong, the official Xinhua news agency said.
"Crimes committed by off-duty personnel... will be handled by the courts of the Hong Kong SAR (Special Adminstrative Region)," the agency said.
Criminal cases involving on-duty soldiers would be handled by military courts, it said.
Civil rights offences committed by off-duty members of the Chinese garrison, which will be responsible for Hong Kong's security after the colony returns to Beijing's rule on July 1, 1997, would be dealt with by Hong Kong courts, it said.
Civil rights offences committed by soldiers while on duty would be referred to China's Supreme People's Court, the nation's highest judicial body, it said.
Chinese lawmakers had used British army practices in Hong Kong as a reference in drafting the measures, Xinhua quoted Fu Quanyou, general chief of staff of China's People's Liberation Army (PLA), as saying.
Defence operations of the PLA would not be subject to Hong Kong courts, Xinhua said but did not elaborate.
"Troops stationed in Hong Kong will notify the Hong Kong SAR government in advance of any military drills and exercises to be conducted that involve the public interest," it said.
The Hong Kong government said in a statement it was "not able to provide a detailed response to the garrison law just relying on the reports".
"We hope that we and the people of Hong Kong can have an early opportunity to study the draft law itself," it added.
Xinhua said Hong Kong would be required to provide facilities for the carrying out of defence duties and would have to consult the military when drafting policies that concern them.
Military personnel would be forbidden from participating in political or religious organisations in the territory, it said.
Beijing has eagerly sought to allay fears among Hong Kong's 6.3 million people over the posting of Chinese troops in the territory. State media has said soldiers destined for Hong Kong have been studying local songs and customs.
Many Hong Kong people view with trepidation the arrival of Chinese troops, remembering the PLA's bloody 1989 crackdown on student-led demonstrations for more democracy in Beijing.
"Sending the People's Liberation Army troops to Hong Kong on July 1, 1997, has become a matter of concern among Hong Kong residents," Xinhua said.
"Troops stationed in Hong Kong will not interfere in the SAR's local affairs," it pledged.
China has not revealed how large a force it will post in Hong Kong but says it will send no more than the 10,000 troops Britian stationed there at its peak level.
China said on Wednesday it would empower Hong Kong's courts to put on trial off-duty Chinese soldiers after Beijing resumes control over the British colony in 1997.
The standing committee of the National People's Congress (parliament), which is in session in Beijing, was expected to pass a law spelling out how to handle criminal or civil cases involving troops to be garrisoned in Hong Kong, the official Xinhua news agency said.
"Crimes committed by off-duty personnel... will be handled by the courts of the Hong Kong SAR (Special Adminstrative Region)," the agency said.
Criminal cases involving on-duty soldiers would be handled by military courts, it said.
Civil rights offences committed by off-duty members of the Chinese garrison, which will be responsible for Hong Kong's security after the colony returns to Beijing's rule on July 1, 1997, would be dealt with by Hong Kong courts, it said.
Civil rights offences committed by soldiers while on duty would be referred to China's Supreme People's Court, the nation's highest judicial body, it said.
Chinese lawmakers had used British army practices in Hong Kong as a reference in drafting the measures, Xinhua quoted Fu Quanyou, general chief of staff of China's People's Liberation Army (PLA), as saying.
Defence operations of the PLA would not be subject to Hong Kong courts, Xinhua said but did not elaborate.
"Troops stationed in Hong Kong will notify the Hong Kong SAR government in advance of any military drills and exercises to be conducted that involve the public interest," it said.
Hong Kong would be required to provide facilities for the carrying out of defence duties and would have to consult the military when drafting policies that concern them, it said.
Military personnel would be forbidden from participating in political or religious organisations in the territory, Xinhua said.
Beijing has eagerly sought to allay fears among Hong Kong's 6.3 million people over the posting of Chinese troops in the territory. State media has said soldiers destined for Hong Kong have been studying local songs and customs.
Many Hong Kong people view with trepidation the arrival of Chinese troops, remembering the PLA's bloody 1989 crackdown on student-led demonstrations for more democracy in Beijing.
"Sending the People's Liberation Army troops to Hong Kong on July 1, 1997, has become a matter of concern among Hong Kong residents," Xinhua said.
"Troops stationed in Hong Kong will not interfere in the SAR's local affairs," it pledged.
China has not revealed how large a force it will post in Hong Kong but says it will send no more than the 10,000 troops Britian stationed there at its peak level.
China has urged the devoutly Buddhist region of Tibet to embrace atheism to counter the influence of the exiled spiritual leader the Dalai Lama and to raise itself out of poverty.
Beijing also lashed out at the European Union for allowing a meeting between officials of the European Parliament and the Dalai Lama, whom Beijing accuses of covertly working for independence for his Himalayan homeland.
"We have expressed our intense dissatisfaction and serious protest to the European side," Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang told a regular news briefing on Thursday when asked to comment on the meeting.
To check the influence of the Dalai Lama, China called on officials in the restive region to preach atheism and instill socialist beliefs.
"To carry out atheistic education is a neccesary condition for...opposing the Dalai Lama's disastrous teachings aimed at causing chaos in Tibet and splitting the motherland," the Tibet Daily said in an edition seen in Beijing on Thursday.
"Many people have been fettered by religion and cannot break free of its bewitchment," the newspaper said in its October 14 edition.
Beijing vehemently denies accusations by western rights groups of widespread human rights abuses and religious persecution, pointing to rising living and health standards in the remote mountainous region.
The newspaper said traditional Buddhist beliefs, such as canons against killing animals, including pests, had hampered development of the backward and sparsely populated region.
"A lot of technology, because it violates religious tenets, is difficult to put into widespread use," it said.
The newspaper accused the Dalai Lama of seeking to split Tibet from China and of using his faith both as a weapon against the Tibetan people and as a shield to protect himself from criticism.
"In order to expose the Dalai's trick of keeping the people ignorant and to smash the Dalai's plot to split the motherland...we should implement atheist education," it said.
The Dalai Lama fled Tibet in 1959 after an abortive revolt against Chinese rule and won the Nobel Peace Prize 30 years later for his peaceful campaign for autonomy.
During his meeting with European Parliament officials in Strasbourg, France, on Wednesday, the Dalai Lama reiterated the call for autonomy for Tibet.
"The action of the European Union is open support and connivance with the splittist activities of the Dalai Lama," Shen said.
The Dalai Lama's comments to EU officials were restrained, dismissing any notion of economic sanctions against China over its rule in Tibet and advising that it would be wrong to try to isolate China.
The Dalai Lama frequently meets foreign leaders in a globetrotting campaign to win autonomy for his homeland. China has vehemently opposed such meetings.
A meeting between the Dalai Lama and Australian Prime Minister John Howard last month infuriated Beijing, which demanded that Canberra rectify its mistake or face possible trade retaliation.
China said on Thursday that Sino-U.S. trade ties have improved but warned that major problems, including Beijing's long-delayed entry into the World Trade Organisation (WTO), still needed to be resolved.
It also hinted at possible retaliation against a U.S. decision last month to slap punitive charges against Chinese textile quotas -- a move it described as "totally unacceptable".
"The Sino-U.S. economic relationship is recovering, but two major issues concerning Sino-U.S. economic links need to be settled," the official China Daily on Thursday quoted Foreign Trade Minister Wu Yi Wu as saying.
Those two issues were Beijing's failure to join the WTO and the lack of permanent Most Favoured Nation (MFN) trade status for Chinese goods in the U.S. market.
A recent series of high-level exchanges between Beijing and Washington had helped ease friction over copyright piracy, textile quotas, Taiwan and human rights, the newspaper quoted Wu as saying.
"The tension in the Sino-U.S. relationship has been alleviated," Wu said, adding that further progress would hinge on Washington's stance towards Beijing's entry into the WTO and its yearly review of MFN.
"The annual examination of China's MFN status is already a shadow over Chinese and U.S. enterprises and adds a factor of instability," Wu said.
Washington annually reviews China's MFN status, which confers on trading partners the lowest possible tariffs. Beijing has urged the United States to make such treatment permanent.
"We hope the Most Favoured Nation issue will be solved once and for all," Wu said.
China is one of the United States' largest trading partners.
U.S. companies sold about $12 billion worth of goods to China last year, while Americans bought some $46 billion worth Chinese products.
Wu also called on Washington to work harder with Beijing to hammer out conditions whereby China could secure a coveted seat in the WTO, saying such moves would benefit trade links.
China has insisted on entering the world trade body under the easier terms accorded to developing nations. But many developed nations, including the United States, have demanded tougher entry requirements because of the sheer size of China's economy.
"Smooth settlement of the two issues would prove to be a great impetus to Sino-U.S. trade and economic cooperation," Wu said.
He said China's total foreign trade would hit $280 billion this year and forecast that figure to balloon to $400 billion in 2000 and $800 billion in 2010. She did not say how much exports or imports were expected to be.
Last month the United States decided to set punitive charges against China's 1996 textile quotas in a move that Beijing says was made without full consultation.
"We would like the United States to change its decision," Wu said. "Otherwise, China will take measures in response."
China said on Thursday that Sino-U.S. trade ties have improved but warned that major problems, including Beijing's long-delayed entry into the World Trade Organisation (WTO), still needed to be resolved.
It also hinted at possible retaliation against a U.S. decision last month to slap punitive charges against Chinese textile quotas -- a move it described as "totally unacceptable".
"The Sino-U.S. economic relationship is recovering, but two major issues concerning Sino-U.S. economic links need to be settled," the official China Daily on Thursday quoted Foreign Trade Minister Wu Yi Wu as saying.
Those two issues were Beijing's failure to join the WTO and the lack of permanent Most Favoured Nation (MFN) trade status for Chinese goods in the U.S. market.
A recent series of high-level exchanges between Beijing and Washington had helped ease friction over copyright piracy, textile quotas, Taiwan and human rights, the newspaper quoted Wu as saying.
"The tension in the Sino-U.S. relationship has been alleviated," Wu said, adding that further progress would hinge on Washington's stance towards Beijing's entry into the WTO and its yearly review of MFN.
"The annual examination of China's MFN status is already a shadow over Chinese and U.S. enterprises and adds a factor of instability," Wu said.
Washington annually reviews China's MFN status, which confers on trading partners the lowest possible tariffs. Beijing has urged the United States to make such treatment permanent.
"We hope the Most Favoured Nation issue will be solved once and for all," Wu said.
China is one of the United States' largest trading partners.
U.S. companies sold about $12 billion worth of goods to China last year, while Americans bought some $46 billion worth Chinese products.
Wu also called on Washington to work harder with Beijing to hammer out conditions whereby China could secure a coveted seat in the WTO, saying such moves would benefit trade links.
China has insisted on entering the world trade body under the easier terms accorded to developing nations. But many developed nations, including the United States, have demanded tougher entry requirements because of the sheer size of China's economy.
"Smooth settlement of the two issues would prove to be a great impetus to Sino-U.S. trade and economic cooperation," Wu said.
He said China's total foreign trade would hit $280 billion this year and forecast that figure to balloon to $400 billion in 2000 and $800 billion in 2010. She did not say how much exports or imports were expected to be.
Last month the United States decided to set punitive charges against China's 1996 textile quotas in a move that Beijing says was made without full consultation.
"We would like the United States to change it's decision," Wu said. "Otherwise, China will take measures in response."
Leading Chinese activist Wang Dan will go on trial on Wednesday, charged with the capital crime of plotting to overthrow the government, a family member said.
The Beijing Number One Intermediate People's Court had told Wang's family that his trial would begin on Wednesday morning, his mother Wang Lingyun said by telephone on Friday.
Court officials could not be reached for comment.
Wang's mother, a 61-year old museum researcher who has no background in law, said she would be in court to help defend her son against some of the charges.
Wang's family earlier found a lawyer willing to defend the former student leader on most of the charges after being given just one day in which to do so.
"As for family members, only Wang Dan's father and his sister will be able to attend," she said, adding she hoped the court would judge her son based on the facts of the case.
"I'm hoping the trial outcome will go according to the facts and the law, and that Wang Dan will be found not guilty," she said. "We'll have to see at the end."
She said she was doubtful court officials would let her talk to her son before the trial.
"I don't think they'll make such arrangements," she said, adding that court officials had given her no further details about the trial.
Court officials have confirmed that Wang, who vanished into detention in May 1995, has been charged with plotting to overthrow the government -- a crime that carries a maximum penalty of death and a minimum of 10 years in prison.
The court has not given further details of the trial but one official has said that Wang could appeal to the Higher People's Court if convicted.
Wang's court appearance would likely be held out of the public eye, as was last year's trial of Wei Jingsheng, the father of China's democracy movement, a political activist said.
In December Wei was sentenced to 14 years in prison for subversion and funding democracy activists.
The court is widely expected to fill the limited number of courtroom seats at Wang's trial with carefully selected people to keep away foreign reporters and fellow dissidents.
Dissidents and foreign reporters were barred from Wei's trial but the cases of both Wei and Wang have drawn worldwide attention and are regularly raised by visiting western politicians.
Wang, 26, has already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square that were crushed by the army in June 1989 with heavy loss of life.
Wang Lingyun has said the dissident has been very calm and was mentally prepared for a harsh sentence, though she has said his health has deteriorated during his detention.
Wang Dan had been active after his parole in 1993, defying persistent police surveillance to join in a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of all those still in prison for their part in the 1989 protests.
China has in recent months cracked down on its tiny band of remaining dissidents who have not yet fled into exile or been imprisoned.
U.S. Vice-President Al Gore could visit China in early 1997 if he was re-elected next month, a senior U.S. official said in Beijing on Saturday.
"We have sent a proposal here and it's been reviewed and I don't think there's any real disagreement," U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs Eileen Claussen said when asked if Gore had any plans to visit China.
"The vice-president is very interested in trying to establish...a sustainable development forum here between (Chinese Premier) Li Peng and the vice-president," she told a news conference.
No specific date has been set for Gore's visit.
"We are now discussing terms of reference for that and there's every expectation that if those terms of reference are worked out, the vice-president will make a visit in the spring," she said.
Asked to elaborate on the terms of reference, Claussen said: "We just have to have sort of a set of operating rules and subjects we're going to talk about."
A visit by Gore could improve often stormy Sino-U.S. ties, which plunged to their lowest ebb in more than two decades after Washington enraged Beijing by allowing Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui to make a landmark, private visit in June 1995.
Beijing and Taipei have been diplomatic rivals since Mao Zedong's Red Army defeated and drove Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist troops into exile in Taiwan at the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949.
China regards Taiwan as a rebel province and has sought to push the island into diplomatic isolation.
U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher is due to visit Beijing in November and Chinese Defence Minister Chi Haotian plans to make a long-delayed trip to Washington before the end of the year.
China postponed Chi's visit to Washington in March, infuriated by a U.S. decision to order two aircraft carriers into seas near Taiwan as the island inched towards democracy -- holding its first direct presidential elections -- in the face of missile tests and live-fire war games.
Beijing and Washington have also wrangled over alleged sales of nuclear technology by China, human rights abuses in China and trade issues.
China has bitterly accused the United States of blocking its bid to gain admission to the World Trade Organisation.
Beijing and Washington narrowly avoided a trade war in June and February 1995 over widespread copyright piracy.
China on Thursday accused foreign journalists of biased reporting and urged them to learn from Edgar Snow, a U.S. reporter and author sympathetic to the Chinese communist cause.
Reporters from Western nations had misjudged China based on standards that did not apply to countries with different social and political systems, said a commentary in the official China Daily.
"It is common sense that news reporting...should serve the purpose of offering adequate information to the audience to help them form correct judgments on world affairs," the commentary said.
The commentary urged Western media to emulate Snow whose reports from China in the 1930s painted a sympathetic portrait of Mao Zedong and his struggling communist crusade.
The newspaper praised Snow for his accuracy, objectivity and impartiality in his coverage of China as it was swept up in the communist movement.
"In his reportage, Edgar Snow wrote exactly what he witnessed," it said. "What the Western media are doing is the opposite of what Edgar Snow did 60 years ago."
Most Western reporters were barred from China after the communists seized power in 1949 but Snow's personal contacts with Chairman Mao allowed him to roam much of the country unhindered.
His reports praised the Communist Party for its sweeping reforms and later denied rumours of widespread famine in the early 1960s.
Historians now estimate more than 30 million people died as a result of famines after Mao launched the Great Leap Forward, urging farmers to abandon their fields and join the rush to make steel in backyard furnaces.
The commentary blasted the Western media for spreading the theory that China was a threat to the world while ignoring what it said were Japan's rising military ambitions.
Foreign journalists are viewed by many Chinese as spies and most come under police surveillance during their stay in China. Many foreign reporters have been expelled since 1949.
Western journalism focused mostly on negative issues such as crime, disease and political turmoil, it said.
"It has been a general practice of the Western media to look everywhere for the seamy side of society," it said.
Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin last month sternly told the Chinese media to toe the party line and propaganda boss Ding Guangen last week called on the media to report more positive news.
"One may ask why there have been so many disappointing reports by Western journalists," the commentary said.
"One clue lies in the fact that those journalists do not know what is really going on in China," it said.
China, stronghold of table tennis and kung fu, is trying its hand at professional basketball with the start on Saturday of a new league using American coaches and players.
The China New Basketball Alliance was set up earlier this year by the country's State Sports Commission along with Spectrum, a Hong Kong-based sports promotion company. 
The new league aims to offer an alternative to the existing China Basketball Association, which is made up entirely of Chinese players.
"One league is the local, provincial teams and one is definitely a professional league with foreign players and different rules," said Spectrum chief operating officer Andy Jay.
The alliance will use National Basketball Association (NBA) rules and generate all revenue through ticket sales and television advertising.
Each of the eight teams has hired four players and a head coach from the United States, but only two American players from each team will be allowed on the court at any one time.
The Americans, recruited from colleges or the ranks of former NBA players, have been in China for weeks, training and learning to work with their new team mates.
"The only thing is the language barrier -- once I learn some Chinese I think we will have a lot more fun," Beijing Lions player Tyrone Doleman said.
The U.S. coaches use translators on the courts to help render their brusque and lingo-filled commands into Chinese.
"You got some of them that got no clue as to what's going on as far as what I'm telling them," said Beijing Lions coach Joe Weakley.
China's national team were eighth in the Atlanta Olypmics, their best-ever showing.
The 18-week season begins in Beijing on Saturday with a match between the Beijing Lions and Shanghai Nanyang.
U.S. Undersecretary of State Lynn Davis has arrived in Beijing for talks next week with Chinese officials on arms proliferation, a spokesman at the U.S. Embassy in Beijing said on Friday.
Davis would lay the groundwork for a visit by U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher later this month, his first to China since a 1994 trip that ended in disaster because of wrangling over human rights issues.
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Robert Einhorn flew into Beijing earlier this week for expert talks ahead of Davis' visit, nthe spokesman said.
"Expert talks are going on today and she (Davis) will have her main talks on the 4th and the 5th on security issues and on proliferation issues," the spokesman said.
"She'll be going back to the United States to report to the Secretary of State," the spokesman said, adding that arms control would be just one of many issues Christopher would bring up with his Chinese hosts.
"He (Christopher) has a lot of things on his agenda," the spokesman said.
Sino-U.S. ties have long been strained by disputes over human rights, Taiwan, copyright theft in China and Beijing's terms of entry to the World Trade Organisation.
Washington has expressed deep concern over the Beijing court sentencing of prominent Chinese pro-democracy activist Wang Dan on Wednesday to 11 years in prison for plotting to overthrow the government.
Officials in Washington have said Davis also would discuss how the two countries might implement a decade-old peaceful nuclear cooperation pact that could allow sales of U.S. nuclear power reactors to China.
The accord, signed in 1985, has not been put into effect because of U.S. suspicions that Beijing is peddling nuclear technology to unsafeguarded nuclear facilities abroad, most notably to Pakistan. Both China and Pakistan deny the charges.
China agreed last May not to provide aid such as ring magnets and other devices used in making nuclear arms to unsafeguarded nuclear facilities.
U.S. officials have insisted they have no evidence China has violated the May agreement and say a reported nuclear-related deal between Beijing and Islamabad was struck before the accord was drawn up.
Beijing has tried to lure foreign technology, some of it with potential military value, with promises of lucrative business contracts.
Davis would also renew U.S. concerns over Chinese sales of conventional arms to Iran, which Washington has blacklisted as a sponsor of terrorism.
Washington is investigating reports that Indonesia and China are close to a deal to sell Iran five French helicopters that could be armed with air-launched missiles.
U.S. Undersecretary of State Lynn Davis has begun talks with Chinese officials in Beijing on arms proliferation issues, a U.S. Embassy official said on Monday.
"She has arrived and started talks," the official said by telephone. Davis arrived in Beijing last Thursday and was due to hold talks on Monday and Tuesday.
"She is the undersecretary for arms control issues... She has a whole range of issues that she'll be bringing up with the Chinese," the official said when asked what Davis would discuss with her hosts.
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Robert Einhorn flew into Beijing last week for talks before Davis's visit.
John Holum, director of the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, also visited the Chinese capital recently.
Officials have said Davis would discuss how the two countries might implement a decade-old, peaceful nuclear cooperation accord that would let U.S. firms sell nuclear power reactors to China.
Beijing has tried to lure foreign technology, some of it with potential military value, with promises of lucrative business contracts.
China's official Xinhua news agency said on Monday that U.S. firms stood to win billions of dollars of nuclear energy contracts if the 1985 agreement were put into effect.
"Sino-U.S. cooperation in nuclear energy development has yet to enter a substantial stage," Xinhua quoted Li Donghui as saying.
"Negotiations on the agreement are still under way," added Li, the deputy-general director of the China National Nuclear Corp's international cooperation bureau.
The pact has not been implemented because of Washington's concern that Beijing has sold nuclear technology to unsafeguarded nuclear facilities in other nations, most notably to Pakistan.
Both China and Pakistan deny the charges.
China agreed last May not to provide aid such as ring magnets and other devices used in making nuclear weapons to unsafeguarded nuclear facilities.
U.S. officials say a reported nuclear-related deal between Beijing and Islamabad was struck before the May accord was drawn up and that they have no evidence China has violated the pact.
Davis would also renew U.S. concerns over Chinese sales of conventional arms to Iran, who Washington has blacklisted as a sponsor of terrorism, officials have said.
Washington is investigating reports that Indonesia and China are close to a deal to sell Iran five French helicopters that could be armed with air-launched missiles.
Davis's talks were expected to pave the way for a visit by U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher later this month, his first to China in two years.
Christopher's 1994 visit ended in bitter wrangling over human rights issues.
Sino-U.S. relations have been battered in recent months by disputes over human rights, China's rampant copyright abuse and Beijing's terms of entry into the World Trade Organisation.
The White House said last week it was deeply concerned over a Chinese court verdict sentencing prominent pro-democracy activist Wang Dan to 11 years in prison for plotting to overthrow the government.
China on Tuesday blasted U.S. penalties against its textiles ahead of a visit next week by U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher, but said the two sides had more in common than differences.
Beijing accused Washington of not having produced enough evidence to support textile sanctions and said it opposed strong-arm tactics to settle trade disputes.
"We are opposed to one side imposing its will on another in trade disputes," Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai told a regular news briefing.
"The United States has not fully consulted with China and has not provided clear supporting evidence," Cui said.
But Cui declined to comment on whether the dispute would overshadow a visit by Christopher to China next week. Christopher's last visit to China two years ago ended in wrangling over human rights issues.
"This is an important bilateral meeting," Cui said of Christopher's trip, scheduled for November 19-21.
Christopher's visit would help lay the groundwork for bilateral relations in the 21st century, Cui said, adding there was no reason for China and the United States not to develop a healthy and stable relationship.
"The state of relations between the two countries will...have major effects on the peace, stability and prosperity of the Asia-Pacific region and the world as a whole," Cui said.
"We will discover that the common interests of China and the United States are far greater than the differences," Cui said.
Beijing and Washington both say ties have warmed after a series of spats over Taiwan, human rights, arms proliferation and trade over the past year.
In the most recent clash, Beijing said on Sunday it would temporarily ban imports of selected U.S. textiles, farm goods, fruits and alcoholic drinks from December 10 in retaliation for U.S. sanctions taken against Chinese textiles.
Washington announced penalties against imports of Chinese textiles in September, accusing China of using shipments through third countries to avoid quotas agreed upon in a bilateral textile accord.
U.S. trade officials said on Monday that Chinese violations of the textile accord were well documented. The sanctions were expected to cost China about $19 million a year.
The spokesman sidestepped a question about whether the textile dispute would be part of discussions during Christopher's visit but said China hoped for a solution beneficial to both sides.
"We have always been devoted to developing bilateral trade on the basis of equality and mutual benefit," Cui said.
"We hope again that the United States will be able to adopt a stance helpful to the development of Sino-U.S. trade," Cui said.
China's Communist Party has taken its crusade to resurrect socialist values to Tibet, with a call for textbooks and publications to stress the historical links between the restive Himalayan region and its Chinese rulers.
Delegates to a recent Communist Party meeting urged Tibet to embrace "spiritual civilisation", or socialist values, to uproot the influence of the region's exiled spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama, the Tibet Daily said in an edition seen in Beijing on Saturday.
"Protecting the unity of the motherland and opposing the Dalai Lama's evil activities to split the motherland is a major task of building spiritual civilisation in our region," the November 6 edition of the official newspaper said.
"School textbooks, classrooms and various publications must strengthen (the) embodiment of the historical links between Tibet and the motherland," the newspaper said.
Beijing says Tibet has been a part of China for centuries but many Tibetans dispute this and have yearned for independence since Communist troops marched into the region in 1950.
"The mentality that Tibet is an inseparable part of the motherland must be firmly established throughout society," the Tibet Daily said.
The newspaper accused the Dalai Lama, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989 for his peaceful campaign for Tibetan autonomy, of disfiguring religion to paralyse his people and split the deeply-Buddhist region from the rest of China.
Tibet's most revered spiritual leader fled into exile in India in 1959 after a failed revolt against Chinese rule.
"Tibetan Buddhism has already been disfigured beyond recognition by the Dalai clique," the Tibet Daily said.
"The Dalai clique has employed every possible trick to use religion in vain attempts to split the motherland and paralyse the people," it said.
Greater efforts were needed to expose the "evil" acts of the Dalai Lama that were aimed at stirring up turmoil, it said.
Tibet has been rocked by repeated anti-Chinese protests that Beijing charges are stirred up by the Dalai Lama's supporters.
The newspaper warned that Tibetan culture and material life had been flooded by religious ideas and urged people to embrace socialist culture.
"Religion...cannot provide the impetus for development in Tibet and cannot provide any help to the Tibetan people in throwing off poverty and becoming prosperous," it said.
China has called for greater efforts to promote atheism in the deeply religious area, saying that religious beliefs are a hindrance to economic progress.
Beijing views international support for Tibet's holiest man as a Western plot to split China and contain its development.
China slammed as rude intereference in its internal affairs a meeting last month between the globe-trotting Buddhist monk and representatives of the European Parliament.
Beijing also threatened trade relatiation against Canberra after a meeting between the Dalai Lama and Australian Prime Minister John Howard in September.
A decade ago, Chinese publishers were still putting type in place by hand, painstakingly selecting one character at a time from thousands of inky stereotypes.
Then in 1986, Wang Xuan, a professor of computer science at Beijing University, created a software programme to represent Chinese fonts on a computer.
Today, nearly all of China's newspapers are printed using Wang's Electronic Publishing System, a product of the Founder Group Corp that he helped the university launch.
"Our Chinese word processing software was far ahead of foreign products, that's why we took the leading market position at a stroke," Wang told Reuters in an interview.
From Founder's modest origins as a college department offshoot employing 20 workers, the firm now has 36 subsidiaries employing more than 1,000 people. It also has a listing on the Hong Kong stock exchange.
Founder's net assets totalled HK$494.9 million at the end of 1995 and the company posted net profit of HK$109 million last year on sales turnover of HK$1.1 billion.
Wang, the 59-year-old chairman of what has perhaps become one of China's most successful computer companies, predicted the firm would continue its strong performance as the domestic market expands and it finds new opportunities abroad.
The company's net profit in the first six months of this year rose a year-on-year 7.0 percent to HK$55.8 million and turnover shot up 27 percent to HK$590 million.
"I can confidently say that we will see an increase in both turnover and profit in 1996," Wang said.
Founder is China's fourth biggest manufacturer of personal computers but Wang says he plans to focus his energies on the more interesting -- and lucrative -- software business.
"Selling personal computers is all about sales technique," Wang said. "I get very excited about high-tech stuff, much more than business."
Founder had snared 78 percent of China's publishing software market as of August, up from 70 percent at the end of 1995, Wang said.
The company also boasted clients among Chinese newspapers in Hong Kong, Taiwan, Malaysia and North America, he said.
Founder's office automation products were gaining popularity among Chinese banks, government agencies and advertising firms, he said.
Wang has visited numerous companies abroad and said he was confident Founder would crack the Japanese market in two years and be a strong player in the international market within five years.
As part of Wang's drive to boost Founder's role overseas, the firm signed a pact last May to develop publishing solutions based on products and technology of U.S.-based Apple Computer Inc
Wang listed Founder in Hong Kong in December 1995. Beijing University still holds 56 percent of the company.
Initially offered at HK$1.98 a share, Founder's stock shot up to a high of HK$4.0 a share earlier this year though it has since fallen back. It ended at HK$3.15 on Friday.
Wang's market success has earned the slender, bespectacled entrepreneur comparisons at home to Microsoft's Bill Gates, a likeness Wang is happy to embrace.
But Wang insists similarities to the American software guru are limited.
"The difference is huge. Bill Gates is 40, I am almost 60. I am past my creative peak," Wang said.
The entrepreneur notes other differences.
Like many Chinese his age, Wang lived through the tumultuous early years after the communist revolution in 1949.
That included the disastrous Great Leap Forward  -- launched by Chairman Mao Zedong in the late 1950s to spur rapid development. Instead, it set China back for years and triggered famine that killed as many as 30 million people.
Wang was persecuted for listening to English radio broadcasts during the Cultural Revolution, a decade of political turmoil that began in 1966 to infuse the young communist state with renewed ideological vigour.
While the Microsoft mogul has amassed a personal fortune of billions of dollars, Wang receives a salary of about 10,000 yuan a month and holds no shares in the firm he heads.
"I'm easily satisfied," he said.
($1 = 8.3 yuan) ($1 = HK$7.8)
This month's Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit could see conflicting views between regional powers eager to boost free trade and a Chinese delegation more interested in soft loans, diplomats said.
While Pacific heavyweights such as the United States, Japan and Canada aimed to lower trade barriers between the region's markets, China was hoping to squeeze easy credit out of richer APEC members at the summit in the Philippines, they said.
"There's a fundamental tension between China on the one hand and most other APEC states on the other," said a Western diplomat in Beijing.
"Should (APEC) be directed toward the trade-investment liberalisation framework or should it be directed toward economic and technical cooperation?" asked the diplomat.
Analysts say the Subic summit would also give Chinese president Jiang Zemin a key opportunity to put his personal seal on a recent upturn in cross-Pacific ties at the first Sino-U.S. presidential meeting since 1995.
While the forum would provide the Chinese delegation with a welcome venue for private talks with the United States -- and possibly rival Taiwan -- Beijing would be less keen on the summit's avowed free trade agenda, the diplomats said.
China feared throwing open its doors to foreign competitors could devastate China's struggling state sector, raising the spectre of social unrest, the Western diplomat said.
"There is a fundamental contradiction between the imperatives of China's domestic situation and the free trade agenda," he said.
Access to its potentially vast markets would be the juicy carrot China dangled in front of other APEC members in exchange for promises of soft loans and technical assistance, he said.
"China... is hinting that APEC members should make a 'down payment'... on economic and technical cooperation, i.e. fork out some money," he said.
Beijing could be looking for the creation of a special APEC fund to assist the region's developing countries, he said.
The economic summit would also provide China's Jiang with a rare chance to rub shoulders with other world leaders and to boost the recent warming in Sino-U.S. ties long battered by disputes over trade, human rights and arms proliferation.
"The Chinese like to talk about the 'APEC style'...you shelve sensitive agendas and sensitive questions and you talk about them behind closed doors," the diplomat said.
Beijing could also use the meeting to quietly resume talks with its island arch-foe Taiwan, he said.
"It's an ideal opportunity for them to get together in circumstances where they've got a fairly good chance of...keeping news of it hush-hush," he said.
Other analysts said there was little chance of backroom talks between Beijing and Taipei officials because China was unlikely to soften its stance towards the island, which it has viewed as a rebel province since the end of civil war in 1949.
"I don't expect any breakthrough in Taiwan-China relations at the APEC meeting because the two sides set their own conditions, and very different ones, for resuming talks," said Chiu Chao-ling, a research fellow at Taiwan's Academia Sinica.
While other APEC members send heads of state to attend the forum, Taiwan, at the insistence of Beijing, has been allowed to send only low-ranking officials to lead its delegation.
Taipei wanted to crack open its diplomatic isolation at this year's summit by sending President Lee Teng-hui or vice-president Lien Chan, but host Manila rejected the move.
"It looks like Taiwan puts too much focus on its APEC representative, but not on what it can do as an APEC member," said Taiwan's Chiu. "We should play a more active role instead of asking only who can go to the meeting."
North Korea expects a shortfall of two million tonnes of grain next year -- equal to 40 percent of the nation's needs and significantly worse than expected, a Red Cross official said on Monday.
Only a few months ago, aid workers had estimated the food shortage would be 1.5 million tonnes.
"Their shortages are serious...they (North Korean officials) have not been able to meet the daily food ration," said Ole Gronning, representative of the International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in North Korea's capital of Pyongyang.
"This is bad news, really bad news in a country that already doesn't have much now," Gronning said by telephone.
He said farmers whose crops had been wiped out by devastating floods in July had eaten about 400,000 tonnes of grain before it came to maturity, adding this would worsen the food shortage this winter.
North Korea has faced the spectre of famine since July after the floods destroyed about 373,000 tonnes of grain, compounding damage from widespread floods in 1995.
Official figures showed North Korea would need 5.5 million tonnes of grain next year, but this year's harvest had yielded just 3.5 million tonnes, Gronning said.
The federation was trying to raise $10.5 million for a new programme to buy grain to stave off hunger for some 140,000 North Koreans badly hit by the floods, he said.
"In some of the villages and the valleys we are now going into, they were working on repairing the damage from the 1995 floods and then they got hit once again," he said.
"They have lost everything, including houses, livestock and so on," he said.
The summer floods had submerged large tracts of arable land for more than 10 days. Some of that land was now covered in sand and mud and could not be farmed again.
"The second floods left people in a really bad situation," Gronning said. "People will be running out of food in the second half of December."
The federation would work with the North Korean Red Cross Society to distribute a daily ration of 450 grams (15.75 ounces) of grain and a helping of supplementary foods such as soybeans to each person, he said.
Aid workers would try to provide stricken residents with winter clothes and blankets to brace against winter temperatures that could drop as low as minus 20 degrees Celsius, he said.
"Without enough food and without proper heating, these people are really badly off," he said.
North Korea, despite its philosophy of self-reliance, cracked open the door to foreign aid last year in the face of looming food shortages.
Gronning said the federation had appealed to member societies in Europe, North America and Japan to donate money urgently needed to start buying grain and clothes.
"Hopefully, we will have the first pledges very, very soon so we can start purchasing," he said.
Chinese President Jiang Zemin will travel to Moscow in spring for a summit with Russian leader Boris Yeltsin, the official Xinhua news agency said on Tuesday.
The two sides are expected to sign agreements on arms reductions along the 4,300-km (2,580-mile) Sino-Russian border in the near future, Xinhua said.
Chinese Premier Li Peng is scheduled to visit Moscow next month, state television said.
The forthcoming trips by Jiang and Li to Moscow were announced during a three-day visit to China by Russian Foreign Minister Yevgeny Primakov.
Primakov met both Jiang and Li on Tuesday, the television said.
Jiang told Primakov that China's long-term policy towards Russia was "good neighbourly friendship, equality, trust, mutually beneficial cooperation and joint development", state television said.
"No matter what changes occur in the situation, this guiding principle will not change," Jiang said of a pledge by China and Russia in April to establish a strategic partnership.
Jiang and Yeltsin last met during the Russian president's tour of China in April in a visit that both sides hailed as instrumental in forging a new, strategic partnership.
"We have a common objective of making our border a bond of peace, stability, cooperation and prosperity," Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen said. He did not elaborate on the specifics of the arms reduction agreements or when they might be signed.
Border disputes between China and Russia have been longstanding, although the two states reached basic agreement on border demarcation in 1991.
During Yeltsin's visit, China and Russia -- along with the former Soviet states of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan -- signed a treaty calling for all parties to inform each other of the scope of their military exercises and agreeing not to attack each other.
The Russian foreign minister came to China from Japan, where he scored a major improvement in relations with Tokyo.
Japan released $500 million in long-delayed aid to Russia, while Moscow offered the joint development of a group of disputed islands in the biggest step forward in their ties since the end of the Cold War.
The Communist Party chief in Tibet has vowed to boost patriotic education in the Himalayan region to battle foreign forces hostile to China and the influence of the exiled spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama.
Patriotic education would be an important factor in battling hostile Western forces that sought to create chaos in Tibet, the Tibet Daily said in an edition seen in Beijing on Thursday.
"Unflaggingly carrying out patriotic education...and opposing the ideologicial infiltration of hostile Western forces and the Dalai Lama clique is an arduous and prominent task," the November 12 edition of the newspaper said, quoting party secretary Chen Kuiyuan.
Combatting the influence of Beijing's chief rival for Tibetan loyalties, the Dalai Lama, was a pressing task for the restive region, Chen said.
Chen accused Western media of spreading the Dalai Lama's plots to split Tibet from China.
"The struggle against 'westernisation' and 'splitting up' is present at every moment and will be present for a long time to come," he said.
Beijing suspects the West is playing the Tibet card to weaken, divide and contain China.
Ideological education was needed to fight religious thinking and separatist ideas that had penetrated Tibetan schools and threatened to gain control of the region's youth, Chen said.
"Teaching cadres, the masses and broad numbers of youth to passionately love the motherland and passionately love socialism is the primary task of ideological construction," Chen said.
Chen's speech appeared a day after the newspaper called for tighter controls on religion in Tibet and vowed to crack down on pro-independence monks and nuns.
The Dalai Lama, who fled his Himalayan homeland in 1959 after a failed uprising against communist rule, had draped himself in the cloak of religion to further his splittist aims, Chen said.
The Dalai Lama, widely revered in his homeland as a god-king, won the 1989 Nobel Peace Prize for his non-violent struggle for autonomy for Tibet.
Chen said temples would be the battlefields in the fight against the Dalai Lama. He did not elaborate.
Beijing has repeatedly cracked down on monks and nuns in the deeply devout Buddhist region and accused the clergy of playing a major role in an underground Tibetan campaign against communist rule.
Tibet has been rocked by anti-Chinese protests by monks and nuns since the 1980s. Communist troops marched into Tibet in 1950.
The London-based watchdog group Tibet Information Network reported earlier this week that a jailed Tibetan nun had had her sentence doubled to 18 years for defying Beijing's choice of the reincarnation of the region's second holiest monk.
The party boss also warned that superstitious beliefs had made a recent comeback in the region because the Dalai Lama had used religion to drug the people.
Ugly religious practices had appeared again in wedding and funeral ceremonies and other aspects of social life, Chen said.
Religion had even taken root among some government officials and threatened to hinder the economic development of the backward and remote region, Chen said.
"These negative ideas and actions block the spread of science and technology and hinder the development of productive forces," he said.
Jailed Chinese dissident Wang Dan is suffering from severe throat and back problems in a cold northeast China prison that does not have the facilities to treat him, his mother said on Friday.
Wang, who is serving an 11-year sentence for plotting to overthrow the government, was suffering from throat inflammation, back ailments and a prostate problem, his mother said after visiting the Jinzhou prison in Liaoning province.
"According to what one doctor said, just one look at his throat infection was enough to know it is very serious," his mother, Wang Lingyun, said by telephone.
The mother quoted Wang as saying prison authorities had called in outside medical specialists to examine him.
Doctors told the 27-year-old former student leader that the prison did not have the facilities to treat him and his condition could deteriorate with the onset of winter, she said.
"It appears they have no way to cure his sickness there," she said. "The place he's in is pretty cold and very dry and not very suitable for people with throat infections."
Wang Lingyun said the family would continue to petition the courts to review her son's case and that she was looking into the possibility of getting him released on medical parole.
"The law gives us this right, and if we have this right, we want to use it," she said of the petitions.
Such petitions are symbolic gestures and would not involve any court hearings.
"As for medical parole, I'm still looking up the relevant laws," she said.
A Chinese court last week took 10 minutes to reject Wang's appeal and upheld his prison sentence for subversion for publishing articles in foreign publications and receiving funds from hostile overseas organisations.
China earlier this month released leading dissident Chen Ziming from prison to allow him to receive medical treatment.
Wang Lingyun said her son, dressed in prison clothes, had appeared in good spirits and said he was being treated well.
"He said...they had put him in a small compound and he can go outside and move around whenever he wants," she said.
Wang Lingyun said prison authorities had handed over to her son a stack of books she had brought him.
"They gave him a bookshelf -- something they've never done before -- and a desk," she said. "You can say he's getting relatively special treatment."
Wang, a former history major at Beijing University, has already served four years in prison for his role in student demonstrations for democracy that were crushed by the army in June 1989 with heavy loss of life.
The jailing of Wang was the latest in a series of crushing blows to China's struggling democracy movement. Most dissidents have been forced into exile or are serving long sentences in prison or labour camps.
China's inefficient coal sector needs foreign funds and technology to modernise but must do more to create a better investment environment, industry officials and foreign businessmen said on Tuesday.
"There are opportunities for literally billions of dollars in coal investments here," said David Klingner, group executive of Australian mining group CRA Ltd.
Development of the sector's small and inefficient mines and antiquated power plants would be vital for China to meet ambitious production goals and sustain economic growth in the next century, Klingner told an energy conference in Beijing.
"The government is coming to realise that a way to ensure that the energy resources for future development are available is by getting foreign companies in with their expertise and capital capacity," Klingner said.
China relies on coal to meet about 75 percent of its energy needs and production accounted for about one-third of world output, Klingner said.
However, Beijing needed to create a sound investment environment to woo foreign cash and technology to the backward sector, said Rong Geng, director of the coal and oil department of China's State Development Bank.
"The coal industry... is characterised by long periods of construction, huge demands for funds, long repayment periods, low profits and certain risks," Rong said.
About 10 percent of funding for large and medium-scale coal projects came from overseas, Rong said, adding that his bank would try to raise more foreign capital for coal projects in China.
"We need to foster a sound investment environment for foreign investors so as to enhance their confidence," Rong told the conference.
Klingner said Beijing had made large strides in opening its doors to the once-sensitive power sector but foreign firms would require stronger legal guarantees before taking the plunge into the Chinese market.
"Foreign companies see the regulatory framework for mining investments, especially insofar as it relates to resources title, as critical to the success of any long-term commercial venture," he said.
Better risk assessment, long-term contracts and assurances of continued profits are also vital to entice foreign firms to China's coal sector, he said.
"The international financial community will want these issues settled prior to the funding of large-scale mining projects," he said.
China, with more than 80,000 small-scale mines, needed to form large-scale production to improve efficiency and cut down on waste and pollution, he said, adding that streamlining was now being balanced against the politically-charged concerns of mass unemployment.
Large-scale mining could also greatly reduce China's high rate of mining deaths and accidents, he said. About 10,000 workers are killed in China's mines every year.
China has said it would open at least 300 coal projects to foreign investors with priority to foreign investment in pit-head power plants, coal transport facilities and coal-bed methane. It has not said whether investors would be allowed to export output.
Xujiachong village in central China's Hubei province is nestled in a lush, narrow valley dotted with whitewashed concrete houses, small cabbage patches and freshwater fish ponds.
Ruddy-cheeked children peer out of ill-lit doorways while farmers steer belching tractors along dirt roads lined with orange trees, their verdant branches heavy with the bright, tart fruit.
Xujiachong is much like any other village in China, except that it is scheduled to be wiped off the map by the end of next year.
The village of 2,480 people is just one of hundreds of towns and hamlets that will be flooded by the silt-laden waters of the Yangtze river when the mighty waterway is diverted in November 1997 as part of the giant Three Gorges dam project.
"The total number of people to be relocated under the Three Gorges project, those in submerged areas, is now 840,000," said Wang Jiazhu, deputy general manager of the China Yangtze Three Gorges Project Development Co that is building the mammoth dam.
"We are estimating there could be a million or 1.2 million at most, taking into account the population increase during the 17 years of construction," Wang said.
In Yichang county, site of the future dam, more than 12,300 people have been resettled from the sprawling construction site that flanks the broad, snaking river, said Wang Jiangyi, deputy director of the Yichang Resettlement Bureau.
Evacuation of the giant reservoir area -- to cover more than 600 square km (230 square miles) -- began in 1994 and will involve moving about 100,000 people from Yichang county alone, Wang Jiangyi said.
LEAVING ANCESTRAL HOMELANDS
The fates of hundreds of thousands of households in Hubei and neighbouring Sichuan province were sealed in 1992 when Beijing ended seven decades of debate to give the green light to start work on the gargantuan dam that is to harness the power of the world's third longest river.
Beijing hopes the project, to be completed in the year 2009, will help to power China's economic charge in the 21st century and bring an end to disastrous flooding that has claimed the lives of more than 300,000 people in this century alone.
Officials say they have run into opposition from many local residents unwilling to abandon their ancestral homes and traditional lifestyles.
"There are residents who aren't willing to move," said Wang Kaidong, village chief of Xujiachong, which is just two km (1.2 miles) from the dam site.
"It is understandable that they don't want to leave the homes their families have occupied for generations," she said.
IDEOLOGICAL WEAPONS AND CASH CARROTS
Communist Party officials have tried to combat anti-relocation sentiment by preaching traditional communist values of self-sacrifice while holding out cash and material incentives.
"The magic weapon of our party is ideological work," said Wang Kaidong. "We talk face to face with residents about the resettlement policies and compensation standards."
Of the project's estimated 204 billion yuan ($24.6 billion) cost, about 40 billion yuan has been earmarked to finance the resettlement, said He Gong, a deputy general manager of the Three Gorges Development Co.
Government work teams have fanned out through the countryside offering compensation to residents based on the size and quality of their houses and farms that will be committed to the watery mass grave.
Total compensation for each family ranges from 30,000 to 80,000 yuan and those being resettled to rural areas are to receive parcels of land to build new houses on, Wang Jiangyi of the resettlement bureau said.
Blocks of apartment buildings have sprung up to house those moving into urban areas to be employed in factories or tertiary industries, Wang Jiangyi said.
Relocated families will also enjoy preferential charges for electricity, water and road use and will be allowed to make two moving trips free of charge, Wang Jiangyi said.
If ethical campaigns and cash rewards failed to convince the stubborn to pack up, authorities could still resort to the force of law, Wang said.
"In the resettlement process, if there is any case of... disrupting the public order that prevents the process from proceeding smoothly...it will be dealt with in accordance with punitive public security regulations," he said.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
To dam or not to dam the mighty Yangtze river has been a question that has teased China for much of this century.
Electrical engineer-turned-premier Li Peng finally took the decision to dam, and four years later officials charged with the giant project are confident neither funding shortfalls nor environmental activists will stand in their way.
Officials of the China Three Gorges Project Development Corp say the dam in the central province of Hubei faces a funding shortfall of one-sixth of its multi-billion dollar price tag.
But they vow to complete it even if foreign funding now being sought fails to materialise.
The price tag of the world's biggest water control project, harnessing the power of Asia's longest river, is expected to be at least 240 billion yuan ($29 billion), officials told reporters at a recent visit.
That however could rise as high as 300 billion yuan ($36 billion), depending on such variables as inflation and interest rates, they said.
Costs were estimated to be 90 billion yuan at 1993 levels while interest and inflation would add at least 150 billion yuan by the time the dam was completed in 2009 after 17 years of construction, said Three Gorges Corp vice-president Yuan Guolin.
"Our capital shortfall, as a proportion of the total funding needed, is about 20 percent," Yuan said.
The central government will directly pick up 50 percent of the projected minimum 240 billion yuan tab while loans from state banks would account for another 20 percent, said He Gong, deputy general manager for the Three Gorges Corp.
ABOUT 30 BILLION IN LOANS
Of this, the State Development Bank would provide about 30 billion yuan in loans while revenue allocated from the Gezhouba dam downstream on the Yangtze would bring in an additional 15-18 billion yuan, He said.
The project would start generating money itself when some of the dam's 26 turbines whir into life in 2003, financing about another 10 percent of the cost.
The dam will eventually fire out 84.7 million megawatt-hours of electricity a year, transmitting power to nearly every major city in China.
Asked how the company would make up a shortfall of at least 40 billion yuan, officials coupled rosy predictions about overseas bond issues and export credits with steely defiance against foreign jitters over the project.
"The overall trend is that we need to develop towards international channels," Yuan said. He hailed a deal with Canada for $30 million in export credits for the project's computer network.
The company was eyeing a long-delayed foreign bond issue in the near future and could look to a stock issue further down the road, said deputy general manager Wang Jiazhu.
"When we will issue bonds and stocks remains to be seen. When the time comes, we will make an announcement," Wang said.
EXIMBANK SHORT-SIGHTED, SAYS YUAN
Vice-president Yuan dismissed the U.S. Export-Import Bank's refusal to finance the dam because of environmental worries as short-sighted folly, saying the decision would only hurt U.S. firms and workers.
"We would welcome a change in attitude by the United States toward the Three Gorges," Yuan said. "It would not only be good for the project, it would bring numerous benefits to American companies."
The dam, which will create a 600-square km (230-square mile) reservoir, has drawn heavy fire from environmental and human rights groups abroad, who fear damage to the river ecology and fret over the resettlement of 1.2 million local residents.
Chief engineer Gan Weiyi vowed China would find the funding at home if cash failed to materialise from abroad.
"If you don't want to lend to me, I can overcome that," Gan said.
Faced with the job of moving 102.6 million cubic metres (3.6 trillion cubic feet) of soil and stone, the company has bought construction equipment from Caterpillar Inc of the United States, Japan's Komatsu Construction Co and other foreign firms.
"Our purchases of foreign equipment now total more than $100 million," vice-president Yuan said.
BIG PRIZE
The big prize will be landed in the middle of 1997.
It is then that China is to sign a 10 billion yuan contract with foreign suppliers for the 14 700-megawatt generators that will be part of the heart of the riparian behemoth.
Consortia involving Germany's Siemens, GE Canada, and Hitachi and Toshiba of Japan -- among others -- are expected to participate in the bidding, scheduled to open on December 18.
The numbers are on a giant scale. More than 27 million cubic metres (953 million cubic feet) of concrete will be poured into the dam, shiplocks and navigation channels. About 354,000 tonnes of rebar and nearly 281,000 tonnes of metal will be used.
To carry out the herculean task, China has mobilised tens of thousands of workers to build the project.
A steady stream of dumptrucks with tires twice as tall as a man rumble to and from the sprawling construction site. Mountains of sand, gravel and steel bars line the roads.
Proud officials voiced conviction that the decision taken after seven decades of vacillation was the correct one.
"We are confident we have the capability to finish the construction," He said.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
China on Thursday warned the United States to stop selling arms to Taiwan, saying the issue could ruin relations despite the friendly smiles shown on Defence Minister Chi Haotian's current U.S. visit.
Washington's arms sales to Beijing's island rival would destroy the warming Sino-U.S. relationship that was vital for maintaining regional and world peace, the official China Daily said in a commentary.
"To continue to sell weapons to Taiwan will upset Washington's apple cart and eventually ruin Sino-U.S. relations," the commentary said.
Although Chi Haotian's long-delayed visit to the United States could help renew bilateral ties, Washington's policy towards Taiwan would continue to be a sore point in relations between the two Pacific giants, the commentary said.
"A friendly smile cannot ignore or wipe away the underlying embarrassment that exists bewteen the two countries," it said.
"The ties can be broken if the U.S. continues to sell advanced weapons and military equipment to Taiwan."
Chi is on a two-week fence-mending visit that was postponed twice by wrangling over Taiwan.
Taiwan's procurement of U.S. weapons would only undermine peaceful reunification with mainland China by fanning sentiment for independence on the island, the commentary said.
"The sale of weapons to Taiwan will whip up whatever dreams of independence some people are harbouring on the island," it said, adding that Beijing would seek reunification at any cost.
"The Chinese government will not stand idly by and ignore any challenge to that goal," the commentary said, echoing a blunt speech Chi delivered to U.S. military officers on Tuesday.
Chi held talks with President Bill Clinton and Defence Secretary William Perry on Monday, pointedly refusing to renounce Beijing's right to retake Taiwan by force if necessary.
Beijing and Taipei split at the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949 when the Nationalist army fled into exile on the island off the mainland's southeastern coast.
Sino-U.S. relations were strained in March when Washington sent two aircraft carriers to waters near Taiwan in the wake of missile tests and military exercises held by Beijing to intimidate the island in the run-up to its first direct presidential elections.
Washington recognises communist Beijing as the sole legal representative of all China but maintains the right to arm and even defend the island that Beijing regards as a renegade province.
Taiwan's Defence Minister Chiang Chung-ling said on Wednesday he was not worried that the thaw in U.S.-China military ties would harm the island's ability to procure advanced weapons from the United States.
Two days before Chi arrived in the United States, the U.S. Army announced it had awarded a $63 million contract to a Boeing Co unit to produce 74 high-tech Avenger anti-aircraft missile systems for Taiwan.
Taiwan has also been allowed to buy Patriot anti-missile missile batteries from U.S. defence giant Raytheon Co.
The Avengers and Patriots are to enter service by 1999, boosting the island's defences against China's People's Liberation Army.
China's defence sector and state-owned heavy industries are the country's biggest loss-makers but reform of the lumbering state sector is proceeding at a snail's pace, analysts said on Friday.
More than 45 percent of China's 68,800 state industrial firms posted losses from January to September, a rise of 17.6 percent from the same period last year, according to the latest data from the State Statistical Bureau.
"Those most in need of help would be the military industries and traditional industries," said Zheng Haihang, a professor of industrial economics at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
Traditional industries included the coal and oil sectors as well as heavy industry, Zheng said by telephone.
"To put it simply, it's mostly these traditional industries, which have a very backward structure," Zheng said of the state sector's mounting losses.
Many of China's state-run enterprises are overstaffed and unable to compete in domestic or overseas markets. They also carry the heavy burden of providing cradle-to-grave welfare services for their employees.
The combined losses of state firms reached 65.12 billion yuan ($7.8 billion) during the first nine months of the year, a rise of 45.7 percent from a year ago, official figures show.
Compounding the problem is interest on unpaid debts -- a substantial burden even after two interest rate cuts this year.
"The debt burden of state-owned enterprises is very heavy, so of course this affects their profitability," Zheng said.
The January-September net profits of China's state industries fell to 11.28 billion yuan, down 75.8 percent from the same period last year, the statistics show.
Reform of defence industries -- many based in remote and backward inland regions and fitted with ageing technology -- had proceeded slowly, the economist said.
"Military industries are trying to transform into civilian industries, but the transition is extremely difficult -- there's no capital," he said.
Officials have said more than 200 state firms have been declared insolvent to date but Beijing has been wary of pushing ahead with bankruptcies.
Beijing fears that reform of state enterprises will lead to mass unemployment and eventually spark social unrest, said one Western analyst reached by telephone.
"That's one major reason why reform is going so slowly," said the analyst, who declined to be identified.
China's trade unions had set up a special fund this year to help workers in ailing state firms, the China Daily newspaper said on Friday.
"The relief fund...is designed to help employees from money-losing state-owned enterprises maintain decent living standards," the newspaper said.
Unions had raised 1.2 billion yuan so far this year to help about seven million impoverished workers in state enterprises and disaster-stricken areas, it said.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
China has sentenced two veteran democracy activists to hard labour for up to three years, a fellow dissident said on Saturday.
Authorities in Taiyuan in central China's Shanxi province sentenced Fu Guoyong to three years of re-education through labour, the dissident told Reuters by telephone.
Fellow activist Chen Ping, who had worked with Fu on pro-democracy tracts, had been sentenced to one year of labour reform, said the dissident who asked not to be identified.
"The reason was because they published articles abroad about democracy," said the dissident. "They just wrote some articles. There really was no reason for this."
Authorities had branded the essays counter-revolutionary, said a statement by the Information Centre of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China.
Taiyuan police detained Fu, 29, in late July for what they said were illegal political activities.
Chen, 45, had been arrested in Taiyuan in August and was sentenced together with Fu, the source said, adding he did not know when the sentences had been passed.
Police in Taiyuan contacted by telephone declined to comment on the cases. Family members were not available.
Fu moved to Taiyuan in late June, complaining of repeated harassment by police in Hangzhou city in the eastern province of Zhejiang, where he had been living with his wife.
Fu previously served two years in a labour camp for his role in the student-led demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square that were crushed by the military with heavy loss of life on June 4, 1989.
Police detained Fu for more than a month in December 1995 after he, along with dissidents Wang Donghai and Chen Longde, wrote a letter calling for the release of Wei Jingsheng, widely regarded as the father of China's modern democracy movement.
Fu also joined in an appeal with Wang and Chen Longde to China's parliament before the 1996 anniversary of the bloody June 4 crackdown, demanding the release of those jailed for their involvement in the movement.
Fu and Chen Ping's sentences come amid a widening crackdown on dissent by Beijing. Most dissidents are already serving lengthy sentences in prisons or labour camps or have been forced into exile.
China drew international condemnation when a Beijing court sentenced former student leader Wang Dan to 11 years in prison in October for conspiring to subvert the government.
Beijing dismisses criticism of its human rights record as interference in its internal affairs.
A Chinese court last week sentenced dissident Zhang Zong'ai to five years in prison for counter-revolutionary incitement.
Three pro-democracy activists are currently standing trial on charges of counter-revolutionary propaganda and incitement in Hefei, capital of the central province of Anhui.
In the southern boomtown of Shenzhen that borders Hong Kong, two labour activists are standing trial for conspiring to subvert the government.
Chinese President Jiang Zemin, in a new overture to rival Taiwan, on Tuesday called on Taiwanese from all walks of life to offer their views and suggestions on ways to reunify the mainland and the island.
"We welcome Taiwanese people of all circles to raise beneficial ideas and suggestions on peaceful reunification," Jiang said in a New Year's address broadcast on state television.
Jiang's proposal was seen by some Chinese analysts as a possible step away from paramount leader Deng Xiaoping's formula of "one country, two systems", long rejected by Taiwan's leadership.
Under the formula the two sides would reunify, with Taiwan enjoying autonomy and maintaining its own army.
"Jiang is trying to be flexible and open-minded on the Taiwan issue," said one China watcher who declined to be identified.
Jiang is eager to secure a place in modern China's history alongside Mao Zedong, who established the People's Republic, and Deng, who cemented the return of the British colony of Hong Kong to Chinese rule.
"This is the carrot following the stick that China wielded this year," the analyst said.
Ties plunged last March when Beijing conducted war games and missile tests in waters close to Taiwan in the run-up to the island's first direct presidential elections.
Jiang, who doubles as the Communist Party chief, told Taiwan's leadership to work to repair strained ties and said reunification was the common wish of all Chinese people.
Achieving reunification at the earliest possible date was in the interests of mainlanders and residents of Taiwan, he said.
"The Taiwanese authorities would be well advised to put the interests of the nation first and to stop all activities of splitting the motherland," Jiang added.
Beijing has viewed Taiwan as a rebel province since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949 and suspects the island is covertly seeking independence. Taipei says it wants reunification, but on different terms.
Jiang said China would continue to push for direct transport and trade links with Taiwan, which have been banned for almost five decades.
China warned Taiwan earlier on Tuesday that its tight controls on trade with the mainland were harming economic ties but said links could be helped by the return of Hong Kong to Beijing's rule next year.
"If the Taiwan authorities continue to pursue a policy of tight controls, circumstances will not be good for trade contacts," the official Xinhua news agency said.
This was "something that we do not want to see", the agency quoted Wang Hui, an official of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation, as saying.
But Wang said he believed the return of Hong Kong to Chinese rule on July 1, 1997, and the possible entry of Beijing into the World Trade Organisation (WTO) would "provide good opportunities for developing economic and trade exchanges" between China and Taiwan.
Indirect trade between Taiwan and China was worth $17.76 billion in the first 10 months of 1996, up 2.6 percent compared with the same period of last year, the island's Board of Foreign Trade said at the weekend.
China is singing the praises of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping in a primetime television series but the paean to the ageing patriarch is getting mixed reviews from the man in the street.
Beijing residents viewed the first few episodes of the 12-part documentary on the 92-year-old leader with a mixture of adulation, scepticism and indifference.
"I think it's great. I've seen all of the episodes so far and I'm going to watch the rest, too," said a 35-year-old journalist on Sunday.
"Deng should be honoured for China's economic development," he told Reuters. "The show is just great."
Deng, whose pragmatic policies helped transform China from a backward Stalinist state into an economic powerhouse, has not been seen in public in nearly two years. In his last appearance he looked frail and faltering.
Speculation abounds about his health, ranging from rumours he was admitted to hospital in recent days to reports he remains at home with little change in health but with fading lucidity.
But he has been lionised in the television series.
Analysts have said the documentary would help define Deng's legacy to the current party leadership and set the tone for a crucial Communist Party congress due later this year.
Saturday's episode dealt with the period just after the 1949 Communist revolution and strove to show how Deng began forming his market-oriented economic policies.
While the television series has so far avoided measuring Deng's more open policies against the disastrous radicalism of revolutionary leader Mao Zedong, the contrast was not lost on some viewers.
"Mao liberated the country but he made mistakes like the Cultural Revolution," said the journalist in a reference to the decade of ultra-leftism that Mao inspired in 1966.
Some viewers said the programme was carefully crafted by China's propaganda tsars and may not have given the whole story.
"Of course they have to censor a few things," said one 27-year-old musician who declined to be identified.
The series has not mentioned Deng's second wife who left him for another Communist official in 1932 when he fell from political grace for the first of three times in his long career.
But many people said they had not watched any of the episodes, while others who saw it were less than enthusiastic.
"I saw some of it but there were too many commercials," said a middle-aged woman who was selling peanuts and sunflower seeds at a roadside market.
A soldier who was sweeping snow from a Beijing street, asked for his thoughts on the man responsible for China's opening up to the outside world, said; "I don't know anything about that. And why do you ask?"
China has revived a call by Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin to wipe out poverty before the end of the century in a bid to placate its backward hinterland, analysts said.
The text of a speech Jiang made in September calling for more funds to fight poverty was splashed across front pages of major newspapers on Monday.
The coverage was aimed partly at bolstering the Communist Party's standing in impoverished but politically sensitive regions, one Beijing-based Western diplomat said.
"It shows that the party leadership has not forgotten the poor," said the diplomat, who asked not to be identified.
The reports were also timed to show concern ahead of the Lunar New Year, China's most important holiday, analysts said.
Chinese leaders traditionally make highly publicised trips to poor areas to hand out gifts before the holiday which this year begins on February 7.
"The poor can have a happy Lunar New Year, but after the holidays, life will still be difficult," one Chinese analyst said.
"The gap between the rich and poor is becoming wider and there's more bitterness."
China's eastern coastal provinces have boomed under nearly two decades of economic reform that have allowed some areas to get rich faster than others. Provinces in central and western China have lagged badly.
Beijing fears that the widening gap between rich and poor could spark social unrest and undermine its grip on power.
Analysts said that was a major concern ahead of a crucial Communist Party congress scheduled for later this year and expected to set the course of national policy over the medium term.
"The scale of poverty relief will be bigger this year," the Chinese analyst said.
More people were in need of aid after being laid off from loss-making or insolvent state enterprises, he said.
"They're playing up a 1996 speech to show the government is earnestly concerned about the problem and trying to do something about it," the analyst said.
In the speech, Jiang urged the nation to "gnaw the hard bone" of poverty by pouring more funds into eliminating the problem by the end of the century.
China says it reduced the number of people living in poverty by five million in 1995 but about 65 million people are still struggling to get by with incomes under the official poverty line of 530 yuan ($64) a year.
The central government currently spends 10.8 billion yuan a year on poverty relief and Beijing has pledged a further 1.5 billion yuan to build roads and water facilities in impoverished areas.
During an inspection tour of some of China's poorest regions last September, Jiang tried to resurrect communist revolutionary fervour to fight poverty.
He exhorted villagers and officials to resurrect the "glorious tradition" of the revolution that won the civil war for the communists in 1949.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
China said on Tuesday the health of its 92-year-old paramount leader Deng Xiaoping was relatively good and had not changed dramatically.
"For an old man, he is doing relatively well," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang told a news briefing when asked about Deng's health.
"There has been no big change," Shen said. He declined to comment further.
Deng, whose market-oriented policies helped transform China from a backward Stalinist state into one of the world's most dynamic economies, has not been seen in public since early 1994. In his last appearance he looked frail and faltering.
Speculation abounds about his health, ranging from rumours he was admitted to hospital in recent days to reports he remains at home though no longer mentally alert.
Deng has vowed to visit Hong Kong to witness the return of the British colony to Chinese rule at midnight on June 30 but a Beijing vice-mayor believed to be close to the Deng family said recently this would be difficult.
Deng oversaw the negotiations that led to an agreement for Britain to hand back the territory it has held for 150 years. He has said repeatedly he hoped to be able to witness the transfer of sovereignty.
He has spent his twilight years cloistered off from the public eye, creating opportunities for power-hungry, would-be heirs fighting for his title to use his name to strengthen their hand, analysts say.
China Central Television is broadcasting a 12-part documentary series about Deng's life that shows a vigourous leader portrayed against a background of golden clouds.
The man who launched China's economic reforms no longer holds public office but remains highly influential.
Deng's health has long been the subject of intense speculation both in China and elsewhere because his death is expected to trigger a power struggle among those eager to succeed him as the de facto emperor of the world's most populous nation.
Analysts have said the series was carefully crafted by those who would benefit most from polishing up Deng's image.
President Jiang Zemin is in line to succeed Deng as China's most powerful man but it is widely believed that Jiang still needs to shore up his position as the heir to Deng's political mantle.
Jiang, Deng's own anointed heir-apparent, will need to call on the clout of his sponsor to consolidate his position at a crucial party meeting later this year, analysts have said.
The television paean to Deng, who always openly shunned the personality cult surrounding Mao Zedong, has been seen as evidence of his waning control over the affairs of the government.
A lone Russian with a European record-breaking performance kept the Chinese women's swimming team from a clean sweep on the final day of the World Cup short-course series on Thursday.
The Chinese women struck gold by powering their way to eight victories in nine events, failing to capture only the 100 metres backstroke.
Nina Zhyvanevskaya of Russia took the crown in that event when she smashed the European record by a full 1.0 second with her time of 59.01 seconds.
In the other heats it was China all the way.
Wang Luna led Olympic gold medallist Claudia Poll throughout the 400 metres freestyle and not even a mid-contest surge by the powerful Costa Rican could propel her ahead of Wang, who clinched the win with a time of 4:05.45.
Rising star Chen Yan, who took home two golds in Wednesday's finals, emerged victorious in the 400 metres individual medley.
The 17-year-old also took silver in the 100 metres individual medley and bronze in the 100 metres backstroke.
Han Xie drew wild cheers from the crowd as she came within a hair's breadth of breaking the world record in the 50 metres breaststroke, clocking 31.00 seconds, just 0.02 second outside the record books.
The Chinese women's squad is seeking to re-establish world dominance after seven swimmers were banned in an embarrassing doping scandal at the 1994 Asian Games.
Lu Bin, who made her first appearance in an international event on Wednesday since she was suspended in the Asian Games scandal, placed a lowly sixth in the 100 metres backstroke.
Shan Ying glided to gold in the 100 metres freestyle, Qu Yun seized the title in the 200 metres butterfly and Mi Tong won the 200 metres breaststroke.
The women's gold haul was rounded out by Sun Guiling's victory in the 100 metres individual medley and Cai Huijue's 50 metres butterfly triumph.
China's men's team echoed their Wednesday night performance with a haul of three out of eight available golds.
Jiang Chengji outpaced Jamaican Sion Brinn in the 50 metres freestyle. Brinn won the 100 metres freestyle on Wednesday.
Australia's Adrian Radley captured gold with his time of 24.58 in the 50 metres backstroke while Marcel Wouda of the Netherlands notched up his third victory in Beijing with a win in the 200 metres individual medley.
Ian Wilson of Britain swam to a surprise victory in the 800 metres freestyle while German Jens Kruppa took the 100 metres breaststroke title.
The next leg of the eight-round World Cup series, which carries $150,000 in prize money, is on January 22-23 in Espoo, Finland.
China warned the United States on Thursday that slowly warming Sino-U.S. ties could be complicated if Washington decided to confront Beijing on the issue of human rights.
"If the human rights question is made into an issue to interfere in China's internal affairs, then this problem will become more and more complicated," Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang told a regular news briefing.
"The Chinese government cannot accept... using the human rights question to put pressure on the Chinese government or to interfere in China's internal affairs," Shen said.
Repeated clashes over human rights and issues ranging from Taiwan to copyright piracy sent Sino-U.S. relations into a tailspin in 1995 and 1996, and ties have only recently started to recover with a series of high-level official meetings.
Differences in U.S. and Chinese views towards human rights were normal and could be resolved through talks, Shen said.
"But if you are confrontational then the basis for dialogue will be lost," Shen said in response to a question about China's reaction to comments by U.S. Secretary of State-designate Madeleine Albright which slammed Beijing's human rights record.
Albright said at her Senate confirmation hearing in Washington on Wednesday that the United States could co-sponsor a resolution criticising China's human rights record and present it before the United Nations Human Rights Commission when it meets in Geneva early this year.
Last April, China succeeded in quashing a U.S.-backed draft resolution at the commission expressing concern over continuing reports of Chinese violations of fundamental freedoms.
The human rights situation in China had not improved much since the forwarding of last year's resolution, Albright said.
But she said Washington's focus towards Beijing would be on "Chinese integration, not isolation" and that she still supported the separation of human rights issues from trade.
In 1995, U.S. President Bill Clinton delinked annual renewal of China's Most Favoured Nation trade benefits from Beijing's human rights record, a move hailed by Beijing.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher visited Beijing last November but made little public mention of human rights, in contrast to his 1994 trip that ended in disaster because of wrangling over the issue.
Christopher pledged not to allow Sino-U.S. ties to be derailed by any single issue.
Clinton met his Chinese counterpart Jiang Zemin at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in the Philippines last December, when the two leaders agreed to an exchange of state visits in 1997.
Washington has criticised Beijing for its imprisonment of political dissidents and for its heavy-handed rule in Tibet but China defends its human rights record by pointing to rising living standards and booming economic growth.
China jailed several prominent dissidents in 1996 as part of its obsession with stability coupled with the easing of foreign pressure on its human rights record, activists have said.
The official Xinhua news agency said meanwhile that China and the United States had agreed to hold another round of talks this month aimed at hammering out a new textile pact.
The bilateral pact had been scheduled to expire on December 31 last year but was extended until January 31 amid progress on renewing the 1994 accord. The talks will begin in Beijing on January 27.
China posted a trade surplus of $12.24 billion in 1996 on Friday, lower than recent official projections but an about-face from predictions early in the year of a trade deficit.
Exports were spurred by the government's faster payment of export tax rebates and an expansion of credit to exporters as well as by soaring trade by foreign-invested enterprises.
Exports for the year totalled $151.07 billion, up by 1.5 percent compared with 1995, the official Xinhua news agency quoted customs figures as showing.
Imports were $138.83 billion, climbing by 5.1 percent, the customs figures showed.
The customs figures did not specify trade in December alone, but the surplus for the whole year of $12.24 billion indicated that exports slid in the last month of the year to give an estimated deficit for that month of $1.74 billion.
The surplus for the year fell short of the State Statistical Bureau's provisional estimate last month of a $16 billion surplus. It was down from the $16.7 billion surplus in 1995.
Many economists had forecast China would post a trade deficit for 1996, or at best achieve balanced trade, after it registered a deficit of $1.15 billion in the first quarter of the year.
The slow pace of government payment of export tax rebates to exporters in the first half of 1996 coupled with the relative strength of the yuan currency had been expected to sharply cut exports.
Imports had been forecast to soar after Beijing slashed import tariffs on more than 4,000 items to an average 23 percent last April.
However, imports grew more slowly than expected due to the elimination of many tariff exemptions in imports of capital goods for foreign-funded firms.
A government move to revive trade by sharply accelerating payments of export tax rebates in the second half of the year along with a strong export performance by foreign-funded firms fuelled the surplus.
The trade volume of overseas-funded businesses increased by 25 percent in 1996, to $137.1 billion, the customs figures showed. They gave no breakdown for exports. Economists have said most export gains were made by foreign-invested companies while China's state-run firms showed disappointing export records.
Foreign trade of state-owned businesses fell by 11 percent, to total $145.2 billion, the latest figures showed.
Japan was China's largest trading partner last year, with total trade hitting $60.1 billion. China exported $30.9 billion of goods to Japan, up slightly from $29.2 billion in 1995.
Trade with the United States rose 4.9 percent to nearly $43 billion, customs said, but gave no details of the imbalance.
U.S. figures show a ballooning surplus in favour of China, and this has become a thorn in Beijing's ties with Washington. Beijing has said it has a trade deficit with the United States.
Trade with the European Union edged up 1.6 percent to $39.7 billion.
China imported 22.62 million tonnes of crude oil, a rise of 32 percent from 1995 and steel imports rose 14 percent to 15.99 million tonnes, the figures showed. ($1 = 8.3 yuan)
A U.S. forensics team has arrived in China to recover the remains of crew members from a crashed World War Two bomber recently discovered in south-western China, U.S. officials said on Sunday.
The team from the U.S. Department of Defence would focus on recovering and identifying the remains of the doomed bomber's crew, a U.S. official told reporters at a briefing.
"Our purpose is to recover all human remains and make the fullest possible identification of the 10 crew members on that plane," said the official, who asked not to be identified.
Officials of south-western China's Guangxi region would hand over the remains of the 10 men, aged from 19 to 26, who died when the B-24 bomber slammed into a cliff near scenic Guilin on August 31, 1944 while returning from a bombing raid on Japanese ships around Taiwan, the official said.
Local villagers looking for wild mountain herbs had stumbled across the scattered remnants of the bomber in a remote ravine last October, he said.
U.S. officials first learned of the wreckage when Chinese President Jiang Zemin handed over a video and photographs of the crash site to U.S. President Bill Clinton when the two met in Manila last November at the summit of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.
Chinese Defence Minister Chi Haotian gave U.S. Secretary of Defence William Perry two dogtags recovered from the site during a meeting in Washington last month.
China's claim that the wreckage was found last October appeared to be true, the official said.
"There's no indication that it is anything other than what they said it was," the official said, adding that the Chinese government had given them full cooperation in arranging the repatriation of the remains.
Some analysts have said Beijing may have known of the wreck for some time but has made it public only at a time when it is eager to improve strained ties with Washington.
"The Chinese see this as a humanitarian issue," the official said.
U.S. forces lost contact with the bomber after it was forced to change course to Guilin because of a Japanese assault against its original base in Liuzhou, also in Guangxi region, he said.
The cause of the crash was still unknown and the forensic team would not seek to discover what brought the plane down on this trip, he said.
Video footage of the site seen by reporters showed five sets of dog tags, eight pistols, machineguns and other pieces of equipment recovered from the destroyed aircraft.
Chinese authorities had sealed off the crash site and the video and photographs suggested the wreckage had been untouched for more than 52 years, the official said.
"The recovery of small items, usually the first things to go, would indicate there has been no scavenging," he said.
The remains would be flown back to Hawaii next Friday for analysis and identification, he said, adding that it could take weeks to years to identify the remains.
U.S. officials had made contact with representatives of all 10 families including at least one son, he said.
A U.S. team trekked to a Himalayan site in remote Tibet in 1994 to recover remains from another U.S. aircraft that crashed in 1945, another U.S. official said.
From 500-1,000 U.S. airmen remained unaccounted for after disappearing during World War Two flights over China, where U.S. aviators for years supported attempts by the then Nationalist government to resist Japanese invaders.
A U.S. defence team found human remains and parts of an American bomber on Tuesday after making its way up a steep mountain slope in southwestern China to inspect a recently found World War Two crash site.
The officials clawed their way up the slippery, granite face of Maoer mountain in Guangxi province and pronounced the mission a success despite the injury in a fall of a U.S. reporter accompanying them.
"We consider this a very successful mission," said Alan Liotta, deputy director of the MIA/POW (Missing in Action/Prisoner of War) office under the Department of Defence.
Speaking to reporters in the town of Xingan after returning from the site late on Tuesday, he said findings confirmed information about the fatal crash that occurred on August 31, 1944.
The B-24 bomber with its 10-man crew never returned from a raid on Japanese ships around Taiwan.
"Any step that we can take to bring a case closer to resolution and to provide a family some answers ...indeed gives us some satisfaction," Liotta told reporters.
The six-man forensic team from the Department of Defence flew into the Guangxi region on Monday to try to recover remains and learn more about the crash.
Local residents, searching for wild herbs in the region's thick forest, discovered the crash site last October.
U.S. officials first learned of the find when Chinese President Jiang Zemin handed over a video and photographs of the crash site to President Bill Clinton when the two met in Manila last November at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.
Chinese Defence Minister Chi Haotian gave U.S. Secretary of Defence William Perry two dogtags recovered from the site during a meeting in Washington last month.
Chinese authorities will turn over some of the remains later on Wednesday and a formal ceremony is to be held in Beijing on Friday.
The human remains would be taken back to the United States for identification, Liotta said.
The U.S. team's elation at reaching what was left of the bomber was dulled by an injury to Voice of America journalist Stephanie Ho who was knocked unconscious briefly after she slipped 75 metres (yards) down a slope returning from the site.
Ho lost her footing as she made her way across the moss-covered face of the mountain. A doctor at the scene said her injury was not serious but she was taken by ambulance to a hospital in the city of Guilin.
"This was extremely treacherous terrain and a very difficult climb," said Liotta.
Journalists who made the trek to the site saw a pile of charred and twisted metal wedged into a narrow crevass on the mountain side. Higher up the slope was a chunk of the plane's fuselage along with part of an engine, also wedged into rock.
"We had a total destruction of the aircraft," Liotta said.
Two farmers hunting for wild herbs found the crash site and alerted officials. They will receive 50,000 yuan ($6,000) each as a reward from the state, local authorities said.
U.S. officials said they had made contact with all 10 families of the crewmen aboard the plane.
They also said the site appeared to have been untouched for more than half a century.
"It's no wonder it took 50 years to discover the site," said David Rankin, a forensic anthropologist with the Defence Department's Central Identification Laboratory in Hawaii.
"We are truly talking about an extremely remote, isolated area."
China on Wednesday handed over to U.S. military officers the remains of U.S. airmen who died 52 years ago when their bomber crashed into a remote southwestern Chinese mountain during World War Two.
"No matter where we must go or how much time it takes, America does not forget its warriors and we will endeavour to bring each and every one home," said Alan Liotta, deputy director of the MIA/POW (Missing In Action/Prisoner of War) office under the Department of Defence.
A senior Chinese military officer handed over two wooden chests containing remains and a third filled with personal effects to uniformed U.S. officers in a brief ceremony in the southwestern Guangxi region.
Four U.S. soldiers in full military uniform took the boxes, exchanged salutes with the Chinese officer and placed a folded U.S. flag on each of the three boxes. A formal ceremony is to be held in Beijing on Friday.
"Fifty years ago these brave young men scattered their blood over this beautiful region," said Liang Ziwei, director of foreign affairs in the town of Xingan.
A six-man forensic team from the U.S. Department of Defence clawed its way up the steep, slippery face of Maoer mountain on Tuesday to inspect the crash site and found human remains and parts of an American bomber.
The officials said findings confirmed information about the fatal crash that occurred on August 31, 1944. The human remains would be taken back to the United States for identification.
Local residents searching for wild herbs discovered the crash site last October. The B-24 bomber with its 10-man crew never returned from a raid on Japanese ships around Taiwan.
"I like the idea... that even if it is 52 years later that we discovered the remains that we make the effort to bring them back and show the honour and respect they deserve," U.S. Lieutenant Colonel Paul Phillips said after the ceremony.
People's Liberation Army Colonel Fu Jianping voiced China's gratitude for U.S. help in fighting Japan in World War Two.
"As a military man, I have a great respect for their spirit, especially the airmen who met with disaster here," he told Reuters.
U.S. officials first learned of the find when Chinese President Jiang Zemin handed over a video and photographs of the crash site to President Bill Clinton when the two met in Manila last November at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.
Jiang revealed the find at a time when Sino-U.S. ties, which plunged early last year, were recovering significantly.
"This demonstrates a spirit of cooperation and a longing for future peace and renewed relationships," U.S. Major Mark Keene said after the ceremony.
Chinese Defence Minister Chi Haotian gave U.S. Secretary of Defence William Perry two dogtags recovered from the site during a meeting in Washington last month.
Journalists who made the trek to the site saw a pile of charred and twisted metal wedged into a narrow crevasse on the mountain side. Higher up the slope was a chunk of the plane's fuselage along with part of an engine, also wedged into rock.
U.S. officials said they had made contact with all 10 families of the crewmen aboard the plane. They said the site appeared to have been untouched for more than half a century.
A U.S. military honour guard on Friday formally took back the remains of U.S. airmen killed in World War Two and sent them on their final journey home.
Chinese officials handed over to U.S. Ambassador James Sasser three black cases containing the remains of the B-24 bomber's crew, who died when their plane hit a steep mountain slope in China's southwestern Guangxi region 52 years ago.
Under a crisp blue winter sky, uniformed men and women from the U.S. Army, Marine Corps and Navy placed the remains in three body-length aluminium cases and covered each with an American flag in a ceremony at Beijing's Capital Airport.
"This ceremony is dedicated to the American servicemen who made contributions and sacrificed their lives to resist fascist aggression," said Mei Ping, director of the North American and Oceanian Affairs Office of China's Foreign Ministry.
"The remains of these airmen will now be repatriated to their homeland where they can finally rest in peace," Mei said at the ceremony.
The oblong cases were loaded onto a U.S. C-141 Starlifter transport aircraft that was to fly the remains to the Department of Defence's Central Identification Laboratory in Hawaii for identification.
The remains represented more than one person but it was still unknown how many individuals they belonged to, said Alan Liotta of the MIA/POW (Missing in Action/Prisoner of War) Office under the Department of Defence.
Chinese and U.S. officials and soldiers saluted the dead airmen as a military dirge drifted across the airport tarmac.
U.S. officials said the mission to recover the remains was part of an ongoing effort by the U.S. and Chinese governments to provide a full accounting of American soldiers lost in regional conflicts.
"After 50 years, we have every reason, between the United States and China, to live in peace and work for peace, security and prosperity of mankind," Mei told reporters.
U.S. officials first learned of the find when Chinese President Jiang Zemin handed over a video and photographs of the crash site to President Bill Clinton when the two met in Manila last November at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.
Jiang revealed the find at a time when both Washington and Beijing say ties are improving after plunging early last year.
Two local farmers discovered the wreckage of the aircraft last October after becoming lost while looking for wild herbs.
The B-24 bomber with its 10-man crew never returned to its base in Guangxi after completing a raid on Japanese ships around Taiwan on August 31, 1944.
A six-man forensic team from the Department of Defence that clawed its way up the steep, slippery face of Mao'er mountain on Tuesday to inspect the crash site found more human remains and parts of the bomber.
U.S. officials said they had made contact with all 10 families of the crewmen aboard the plane. They said the site appeared to have been untouched for more than half a century.
China said on Monday it would support Hong Kong's efforts to expand foreign trade relations after the territory returns to Beijing's control in mid-1997 provided such ties did not undermine China's sovereignty.
"We stand ready to support Hong Kong in its efforts to expand foreign economic and trade relations... provided the state's sovereignty and interests are not undermined," the Xinhua news agency quoted An Min, vice-minister of foreign trade, as saying.
Hong Kong would pursue a free trade policy to allow the free flow of commodities and capital after China resumes control of the British colony at midnight on June 30, An said.
"We will fully support a high degree of freedom and openness in Hong Kong's status as an ideal arena for concentration and flow of international capital," he said.
Hong Kong would be allowed to formulate its own economic and trade regulations as long as such policies conformed with the Basic Law, the territory's 1990 mini-constitution promulgated by Beijing, An said.
"All the existing laws will remain in force, except those provisions that contradict the Basic Law or those requiring amendments by the Hong Kong SAR (Special Administrative Region) legislature," An said.
A separate report in the China Taxation News said Hong Kong businessmen would retain preferential tax status for investments on the Chinese mainland.
"After 1997, China's tax laws will not apply to the Special Administrative Region and Hong Kong compatriots will be able to continue to receive the preferential treatment given to foreign investors," the newspaper said.
China gives foreign investors lower tax rates than Chinese companies and treats businessmen from Hong Kong as foreigners.
Foreign businessmen, however, are made to pay a whole range of fees that are not required from local businessmen. They also must hire employees through special government agencies, boosting their operating costs.
The newspaper did not say whether these fees would still apply to Hong Kong businesses after the transfer of power.
Chinese firms would not enjoy any priveleges when investing in Hong Kong after the handover, An said, adding that mainland companies would be treated as overseas investors.
"Chinese enterprises shall follow internationally prevailing economic and trade rules and local 'rules of the game'," An said.
"The principles we are pursuing are fair competition, vigorous development, operation guided by law and enriching Hong Kong," he said.
China hit a raw nerve in Hong Kong on Monday when it announced proposals to abolish a series of laws on democratic elections and civil liberties when it resumes sovereignty.
Beijing has tried to reassure Hong Kong's people they will enjoy considerable autonomy in running their affairs and maintain their free-wheeling capitalist way of life under the doctrine "one country, two systems".
China has said it will dismantle the territory's elected legislature and has appointed a provisional one to take its place on July 1.
China has launched its first survey of its hundreds of millions of rural residents to gauge the impact of nearly two decades of economic reforms on the country's agricultural sector, officials said on Monday.
Since January 1, an army of six million officials and interviewers has been mobilised to canvass an estimated 230 million households in towns and villages throughout China's countryside, Shao Jianmin, deputy leader of the Beijing Rural Survey Team, said in an interview.
The survey is intended to gather more detailed data on rural areas, which have been radically transformed by the sweeping market-oriented agricultural and economic reforms launched by paramount leader Deng Xiaoping in the late 1970s, he said.
In Nankou township to the north of Beijing, a band of women interviewers visited the homes of local residents on Monday to ask about the size of their families, educational levels, what crops they grew and the occupations of family members.
Deng's reforms have encouraged private enterprise and rural industry, creating huge changes in the countryside, officials said.
"We don't know how people in the agricultural sector are making money," said interviewer Xie Fang.
Official statistics show 75 percent of China's 1.2 billion people are farmers but officials say this figure is misleading because it includes many former farmers who have since become migrant labourers or rural factory hands.
China's farmers have increasingly abandoned their ploughs to take up more lucrative jobs in small-scale township industries or to seek their fortunes in cities.
"After this survey the country will have an overall understanding of how many households are engaged in farming, how many are in township enterprises and how many have gone into business for themselves," Xie said.
"This is the first national rural census to be held since Liberation (the 1949 communist takeover)," Shao said.
"We will be going to every single household," he said.
The survey would take about one month to complete, he said, adding that the findings would be published at the end of this year and throughout next year.
The survey would cover the numbers and types of farming and non-farming rural firms as well as details of land use.
It would also gather data on infrastructure in villages, towns and counties, Shao said.
"The census will better serve national macro-economic policy and provide more accurate statistics for rural management," he said.
China must feed one-fifth of the world's people on just seven percent of its arable land but Beijing says a lack of accurate data about cropland has hindered efforts to stop the misuse and erosion of land and boost grain production.
The survey may clear up confusion over how much arable land China has. Last December, officials said the amount had been miscalculated, and they raised the estimated total to 147 million hectares (363 million acres) compared with 133.4 million (328 million acres) just six months earlier.
China has forecast a record grain output of 480 million tonnes last year, up from 1995's 466 million tonnes, a record at the time.
Survey authorities have launched a propaganda blitz to urge farmers to cooperate for the good of the nation, Shao said.
"They started broadcasts about it in December 1996," said Shen Jiucai, a 59-year-old gatekeeper and part-time farmer in Nankou. "This will be of great use and spur on agricultural development."
China said on Tuesday it had drawn a pledge from Guatemala not to support Taiwan's bid to enter the United Nations, winning a round in its campaign to isolate the island on the world stage.
Guatemala had promised to abide by a U.N. resolution stating there was only one China and that Beijing was the sole legal representative of China, Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang told a regular news briefing.
"They pledged to respect the provisions of Resolution 2758 of the General Assembly and to use it as a guide to relevant actions in the United Nations," Shen said.
"According to this resolution, Guatemala cannot support Taiwan's actions to regain entry to the United Nations," Shen told reporters.
With China voting in favour, the U.N. Security Council on Monday approved the dispatch of 155 U.N. military observers to monitor peace accords in Guatemala that ended three decades of civil war in the Central American nation.
China had vetoed a similar resolution on January 10 because of Guatemala's ties to Taiwan, which Beijing views as a rebel province not entitled to diplomatic relations.
The 14 other Security Council members all supported sending the peacekeepers to Guatemala but a negative vote by China, one of five permanent council members with veto power, killed the three-month mission.
China and Guatemala had held several rounds of negotiations at the United Nations to seek a solution to the impasse, Shen said.
"Guatemala indicated it realised the gravity and sensitivity of the Taiwan issue and showed a willingness to take a positive approach," Shen said.
"This has borne great fruit for us," Shen said in a reference to Beijing's diplomatic coup in eroding some of the support Taiwan can muster for its U.N. bid from among its few remaining diplomatic allies.
Guatemala is among some 30 nations, mostly from Africa and Central America, that officially recognise Taipei instead of Beijing. Taiwan has doled out generous amounts of aid to these countries.
Taiwan's allies have co-sponsored an annual, unsuccessful resolution aimed at regaining U.N. membership for the island, which lost its seat in the world body to the People's Republic of China in 1971. Taiwan's campaign sends Beijing into a fury.
Taiwan and China have been arch rivals since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949.
Taiwan says it is committed to eventual reunification but Beijing accuses Taipei of secretly working for independence and has moved to block the island's drive to gain more international recognition.
Guatemalan officials say they have not broken off diplomatic relations with Taiwan, although China had never requested they do so.
Diplomats said Beijing had also demanded a public apology from Guatemala for inviting Taiwan's foreign minister to the December 29 peace signing ceremonies. Guatemala has refused.
The U.N. mission will send 155 military observers to Guatemala for three months to monitor U.N.-brokered peace accords aimed at cutting the numbers of government troops and disarming guerrillas.
The peace process was to have begun later this week and be monitored by the military observers, who will now take weeks longer to arrive.
China's top graft-buster on Monday lauded the country's success in battling corruption in 1996 but urged greater efforts this year to fight abuses of power by government officials.
Vigilant residents and rules requiring officials to report their incomes had helped uncover hundreds of thousands of graft cases in 1996, Xinhua news agency quoted Wei Jianxing, chairman of the Communist Party's Central Disciplinary Inspection Committee, as saying.
Authorities had also cracked several cases involving major officials such as Tie Ying, a member of the standing committee of the Beijing Municipal People's Congress, Wei told a meeting of the committee in Beijing that opened on Monday.
Several officials were dismissed during the investigation of those cases, Wei said but gave no further details.
More work was needed to fight corruption in 1997, Wei said.
"While affirming the achievements of 1996 we must address the serious situation and problems facing the anti-corruption drive," Wei said.
President and Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin launched a crackdown on corruption in 1995, saying that graft was a virus that threatened to topple the party.
Wei said China should place priority on fighting random and illegal fees on public roads, students in primary and middle schools and on farmers.
"The leaders and cadres of some localities and departments still do not have sufficient understanding of the seriousness and importance of the anti-corruption struggle," he said.
The party should step up internal scrutiny and encourage supervision of officials by the public, he said.
Residents made more than 1.45 million telephone calls to anti-graft hotlines in January-November last year, 16.8 percent more than the same period in 1995, he said.
The calls had resulted in more than 135,000 cases, including 5,643 involving officials at the county level or above, he said. The total number of cases in the period had risen 10.9 percent from the same time in 1995.
Disciplinary authorities had punished more than 116,000 people, up 14.3 percent from the year before. Of those, 3,695 were from the county level or above while 321 were provincial level officials, he said.
Investigators had found more than 21,000 cars used by party or government officials that exceeded standards set for officials, he said.
More than 72,000 officials had admitted using their positions to obtain better housing, with 74 percent handing over a total of 94 million yuan ($11.3 million) to pay for the housing, he said.
Some 85,000 officials, 95 percent of whom ranked above the county level, had handed over cash and gifts worth more than 51 million yuan ($6.1 million), he said.
Government agencies and state-owned enterprises had reduced entertainment expenses by 1.6 billion yuan ($193 million) after being forced to make full accountings of such items, he said.
"The use of public funds to engage in the unhealthy trend of 'eat, drink and be merry' has been contained somewhat," he said.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
China warned Taiwan on Wednesday not to seek independence from the communist mainland, hinting the island would meet disaster if Taipei insisted on splitting from the motherland.
Taipei had failed to answer a 1995 call by Chinese President Jiang Zemin for reconciliation and had instead actively sought to split Taiwan from mainland China, the official Xinhua news agency said.
"We urge the Taiwan authorities to rein themselves in at the precipice so that they can see clearly that the status of Taiwan being part of China cannot be changed and that the trend of Taiwan's reunion with the motherland cannot be resisted," the agency said in a commentary.
Beijing, which views Taiwan as a rebel province, refuses to rule out the use of force to recover the island if Taipei declares independence.
However, the tough commentary by China's state news agency held out the possibility of a resumption of quasi-official talks if Taiwan's authorities showed they sincerely wanted the eventual unification they say is their goal.
The commentary was issued to mark the second anniversary of a conciliatory speech by Jiang, who urged an end to hostilities between the bitter political rivals and the opening of direct trade links.
Taiwan officials had shrugged off Jiang's olive branch and were actively working to divide China and further block economic and trade links, Xinhua said.
"The Taiwan authorities advocate 'splitting the country and ruling under separate regimes' and 'two equal political entities', which are in fact aimed at tearing apart China's sovereignty and territory," the agency said.
It said people gifted with insight and who had at heart the fundamental interests of Taiwan's people should unite and remove obstacles preventing talks.
"The Taiwan authorities, under pressure both from within and without, have to respond to the important speech of President Jiang Zemin and at least gesture to make strategic readjustments regarding some questions in the cross-straits relations," Xinhua said. It did not specify what adjustments were needed.
Taiwan has barred direct trade and transport links with the mainland since the two were separated at the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949. Taipei has clung to its ban as a last bargaining chip in talks on reunification with Beijing.
China's resumption of sovereignty over Hong Kong this year is expected to give Beijing more leverage in any talks.
"With the return of Hong Kong and that of Macau in 1999, the solution of the Taiwan question and the motherland's reunification will become more prominent issues for all Chinese people," Xinhua said.
Analysts have said Jiang is eager to bring Taiwan into the mainland's communist fold to etch his name in history alongside the late Chairman Mao Zedong and current paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, who negotiated the return of Hong Kong from Britain.
China would continue to promote economic exchanges between the two sides while keeping a vigilant watch over any movement toward independence for Taiwan, the Xinhua commentary said.
"The fight against separatism and Taiwan independence has illustrated the Chinese people's strong determination and ability...to strike hard against separatist activities and Taiwan-independence forces in Taiwan," the agency said.
China defended on Wednesday a proposal to roll back civil liberties in Hong Kong after the British colony reverts to Chinese rule this year, saying all rights and freedoms had limits.
Recent British reforms to Hong Kong's civil liberties laws had violated the Basic Law, the future mini-constitution of Hong Kong promulgated by Beijing, said Zhou Bingxin, an official with the Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office under the State Council, China's cabinet.
"Hong Kong's original laws are in line with international human rights conventions and there is no need to unilaterally draft more laws," Zhou told a news conference.
Zhou's comments came amid criticism from Britain and the United States over a plan by the China-appointed body in charge of the handover to roll back laws protecting some civil rights in the colony.
A panel of the Preparatory Committee earlier this month listed 25 laws and articles, some the product of recent reforms and others the trappings of the colonial era, for repeal or amendment when Beijing resumes control of the territory.
The 1990 Basic Law and a 1984 Sino-British handover treaty promises Hong Kong's 6.3 million people a high degree of autonomy and permits them to retain their freewheeling capitalist system.
Zhou said the right to hold mass public gatherings and demonstrations in Hong Kong would be guaranteed by law after the handover on midnight on June 30 but said all countries had legal restrictions on such activities.
"No rights or freedoms are absolute, all of them have limits," Zhou said.
"For example, everyone has the freedom of speech, but must respect the rights and life of others and guarantee the safety of the state and public order," Zhou said.
"Limiting some rights and freedoms of the minority is to guarantee more rights and freedoms for the majority," Zhou said.
Britain last week voiced concern to China over the proposed changes as legally unsound and has protested against plans to scrap Hong Kong's elected legislature and replace it with a provisional body when it takes over.
U.S. President Bill Clinton said on Tuesday that Hong Kong's value to China might fall if liberties in the colony were lost after it returned to Beijing's rule.
Zhou dismissed international concerns over Hong Kong's post-handover liberties, saying he was optimistic about the colony's future.
"The Basic Law...explicitly states that Hong Kong residents enjoy the freedoms of speech, the press, publication and the freedoms of forming organisations, assembly and demonstration," Zhou said.
The 60-member provisional legislature held its first formal meeting last week in Shenzhen, across the border from Hong Kong, to avoid legal challenges to its legitimacy in the territory, where opponents have branded it as illegal.
Britain has challenged China to allow the world court in The Hague to rule on whether the existence of the provisional legislature violates the treaty governing the handover.
Beijing on Tuesday dismissed as irresponsible a proposal by U.S. Foreign Relations Committee Chairman Jesse Helms to bar members of Hong Kong's provisional legislature from visiting the United States.
China issued an anti-corruption communique to the Communist Party on Thursday, warning members of the party that swept to power in 1949 on a platform of integrity not to exploit official power for personal profit.
The communique, issued by the ruling party's Central Commission for Discipline Inspection, also warned officials and the 57 million party members not to hold political views that differ from the party line.
Beijing had scored great successes in battling graft in 1996 but further efforts were needed to combat official corruption this year, said the communique, published by the People's Daily, mouthpiece of the ruling party. "We must see with a clear head that the phenomenon of corruption still exists and in some places is spreading rapidly," the communique said.
"Some unhealthy tendencies still have not been effectively contained and officials in some places and departments still do not have a sufficient understanding of the seriousness of the anti-corruption drive," it said. The communique followed a speech on Wednesday by President Jiang Zemin, who has staked much of his political credibility on fighting graft and who said the anti-corruption battle was a struggle upon which the fate of the nation and party depended.
It reminded government officials that they were forbidden from exploiting their political clout to secure loans, goods or business contracts for their spouses or children.
Beijing would also punish officials in loss-making state-owned firms who used company funds for personal use or who caused huge business losses through mismanagement, it said.
Disciplinary watchdogs would maintain a vigilant eye for officials who failed to toe the party line and be good communists, it said.
"Officials at every level...must strictly observe political discipline and maintain agreement with the central government in politics, ideology and action," it said.
"Party members, leaders and officials must...be honest in performing their duties, be staunch in their faith in communism and diligently uphold communist values," it said.
Those who violated political discipline would be strictly punished, it said without elaborating.
Corruption, virtually unknown in China under the strict Stalinist rule of the late party Chairman Mao Zedong, who led the communists to power in 1949, has boomed during nearly two decades of market-oriented economic reform.
Disciplinary authorities punished more than 116,000 officials for exploiting their positions for personal gain in 1996, up 14.3 percent from the year before, discipline committee chairman Wei Jianxing said this week.
More than 72,000 officials had owned up to using their power to obtain better housing, with 74 percent handing over a total of 94 million yuan ($11.3 million) to pay for the housing.
Analysts say Jiang, who in 1989 was plucked from his post as Shanghai party secretary to become anointed successor to paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, is anxious to win popular loyalty with his high-profile anti-graft campaign.
While the president and party chief has won some credit from the netting of corrupt senior officials such as former Beijing party chief and Politburo member Chen Xitong, many Chinese say results of the corruption crackdown have been patchy at best.
