The London Stock Exchange launched its new integrated trading and information computer system, Sequence 6, on Tuesday, the last stage in a three-year programme to take the London stock market into the next century.
The new system completes the introduction of electronic trading begun at the time of the Big Bang' shake up of the London market in 1986.
It also paves the way for the shift to electronic trading in Britain's largest shares on the transition from quote-driven trading for FTSE 100 stocks next summer.
"We are delighted that Sequence 6 has been implemented successfully, on time and under budget. The launch has gone very well today and the users appear to be very happy," said a spokeswoman for the Exchange.
However some market-makers in London said they experienced problems in posting prices on Tuesday, citing difficulties with the Reuters system.
A Reuters spokesman said the company's link to Sequence 6 was operating as planned but that there was an unrelated temporary operational problem with feeds from several European exchanges including London which affected prices in the morning.
The completion of the Sequence programme at a cost of 81 million pounds marks the culmination of an modernisation process by the Exchange and Andersen Consulting which will provide the flexibility to adapt to the future needs of the market place.
It will help ensure that London retains its competitive edge, and reduce ongoing costs for both the Exchange and its participants, the Exchange said.
Sequence 6 will provide the basis for new electronic trading in FTSE 100 shares once the structure of a new order-driven regime is agreed and implemented in 1997.
That will signal the end of the current, quote-driven system where prices are set exclusively by dealers authorised to act as "market-makers" and deals struck over the telephone.
It will also enable electronic as well as telephone-based trading in the Alternative Investment Market (AIM) and the Seats -- Stock Exchange Alternative Trading Service -- market for less liquid stocks.
During extensive market testing over five weekends this summer, the new trading platform succesfully coped with up to five times the average levels of daily activity in the London market, the Exchange said.
The Exchange entered into the outsourcing agreement with Andersen in April 1992 and today's launch marks the final phase of a four-stage delivery process.
The successful completion of the project, on time and nearly five million pounds ahead of budget, will come as a relief to the Exchange after its ill-fated and costly attempt at building a paperless share settlement system - TAURUS - was abandoned four years ago.
The collapse of the project resulted in the resignation of then chief executive Peter Rawlins and subsequent involvement of the Bank of England in supervising the development of Crest, a replacement for the Exchange's antiquated Talisman system.
It may also mark a turnaround in its fortunes after a year which began with the sacking of its chief executive, Michael Lawrence, amid disagreement over how to counter competition from overseas bourses.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8712
Britain's B.A.T Industries said on Monday it was keeping an open mind about opportunities to restructure its operations after news reports that the group is continuing its search for a partner for its financial services businesses.
Tobacco and financial services company B.A.T, however, refused to comment directly on reports that talks with another company -- said to be insurance group Commercial Union Plc -- had foundered. Commercial Union was similarly tight-lipped, declining to confirm or deny the rumours.
Bolstered by the deal talk, B.A.T shares pushed 17p higher to 468-1/2p on Monday, but a spokesman for the company said its position had not changed.
"We were widely reported as having ruled out a demerger at the third quarter (results) and now we're reported to be ruling it in. The true position is that we have an open mind."
Pressure on B.A.T, whose operations include Eagle Star, Allied Dunbar and U.S. insurance unit Farmers, to enhance shareholder value after a disappointing share price performance over the past year is seen as behind the move.
The exposure of B.A.T's tobacco business to litigation in the United States has proved a particular drag on the share, reviving talk about a possible separation of the financial services business.
Add to this the potential for cost-cutting and the perceived need for B.A.T to bolster management in its financial services arm and the attractions of a merger are clear.
Britain's biggest insurer Royal &amp; Sun Alliance is currently reaping the rewards of just such a move with the group forecasting annual savings of 175 million pounds ($287.5 million) by 1998 after the merger of Royal and Sun back in July.
A lack of any distinct competitive advantage and a number of strategic questionmarks at B.A.T's Eagle Star and Allied Dunbar operations are compounding the desire to find a partner and to follow Royal Sun in the achieving critical mass in the highly competitive domestic market, industry analysts said.
"The idea of a demerger has been doing the rounds for ages and B.A.T must be looking at the options. There is value trying to get out but I don't think a deal is imminent and I don't think it would be easy," said one analyst.
Rates are under pressure, the market is in a downturn and pressures from new entrants are severe but the prospect of some sort of a deal before too long in the sector has boosted share prices in recent months, traders said.
The industry itself is no stranger to such moves with the drive to create economies of scale and cut costs in fragmented markets producing a number of big insurance deals in the last 12 months -- in the U.S., France and the UK.
"There probably will be more agreed mergers but the big debate is whether they're worthwhile or not; the jury's still out on that," said one analyst who preferred not to be named.
"There's no doubt that you can achieve reductions in costs pretty rapidly. The question is are they sustainable. In the UK, U.S. and German markets over the past 10 years, for example, there hasn't been much correlation between efficiency, profitability and size in the insurance industry."
Hostile bids in the industry are likely to remain a rarity, however, with regulatory barriers, especially in the U.S., and a reluctance on the part of companies to take the hit from the required goodwill write-off.
"Most of the recent merger activity in the industry has been between companies that are large in their own domestic market but perceive themselves to have weaknesses that can be solved by cost-cutting, rationalisation and getting a bit more market share in their key areas," said one of the analysts.
-- London newsroom +44 171 542 7721  
($1=.6087 Pound)
Britain's Guardian Royal Exchange said on Tuesday that 350 jobs are to go in a restructuring of the insurance group's area and branch network.
The job losses follow the 48 million pound ($79.2 million) acquisition of Legal &amp; General's commercial insurance operations in July and are the latest in a series of industry moves to cut costs.
Guardian said the restructuring is intended to enhance the level of service and to benefit from the opportunities for economies of scale flowing from the Legal &amp; General acquisition.
But the job losses were attacked on Tuesday as "arbitrary" by the Banking, Insurance and Finance Union (BIFU) who accused Guardian of trying to please industry analysts and the stock market.
The Guardian announcement comes at the end of an unsettling year for insurance company employees with consolidation within the industry leading to sharp cutbacks in staff levels as businesses look to reduce their cost base.
After the merger of Royal Insurance and Sun Alliance in May, it was announced that 5,000 jobs would be cut across the group, the majority in the UK where both had head offices. The merger of United Friendly and Refuge Group in August will lead to the shedding of 1,800 staff over the next two to three years.
The drive for cost savings, economies of scale and critical mass in an increasingly competitive market are widely expected to fuel further consolidation in the industry.
Britain's B.A.T industries is rumoured to be looking for a partner for its financial services arm which includes Eagle Star and Allied Dunbar after press reports that talks with Commercial Union have foundered.
Commercial Union has also been linked with General Accident and Guardian Royal Exchange while Legal &amp; General and Norwich Union have both been the subjects of bid speculation.
"Markets are remaining very competitive and companies are looking for ways to gain an edge," said one industry analyst. "Companies do take the opportunity to tackle their cost base with consolidation."
The insurance industry which is estimated to employ around 200,000 staff directly shed around 40,000 staff between 1991 and 1995.
Including brokers and the self-employed the industry provides work for around 350,000, one third of whose jobs could be at risk over the next couple of years according to BIFU.
Alongside the announcement of the closure of offices in Belfast, Birmingham, Bristol, Glasgow, Leeds, Manchester and Plymouth where there are currently both Guardian and former Legal &amp; General offices, Guardian said offices in five other locations would also shut. These include Bedford, Ealing, west London, Farnham, Surrey, Liverpool and Maidstone, Kent.
The restructuring is expected to be completed by mid-1997. -- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7721 ($ = 0.605 British Pound)
British telecoms regulator OFTEL said on Wednesday it proposed to reduce the regulatory demands which were imposed on telephone group Mercury Communications in the early 1980s.
OFTEL said Mercury, part of the Cable &amp; Wireless Group, would have a simplified licence covering both domestic and international operations and that a number of obligations would be removed to reflect Mercury's non-dominant position, particularly in the domestic market.
Mercury, the second largest telecom company in Britain, has 11.5 percent of the UK's domestic telecommunications market compared with BT's 80 percent share.
Mercury welcomed the changes saying they provided more flexibility on pricing.
"We are delighted. Under the new regime we can be more flexible in our prices. It increases our ability to be more competitive," a Mercury official told Reuters.
OFTEL also said that rapidly developing competition in the international market may allow it to withdraw further still from detailed regulation and it would be keeping the proposals under review, with a view to lifting them in whole or in part as soon as competition was sufficient to allow it to do so.
The proposals include replacing Mercury's existing service obligation for inland services by standard obligations for non-dominant operators and draft licence proposals from the Department of Trade. International service obligations will remain unchanged.
OFTEL is also backing new conditions to ensure fair trading and effective competition in international markets.
In addition, it proposes to replace Mercury's obligation to publish its prices with more flexible conditions. These will be modelled on the price publication requirements in the draft International Facilities Licence, on which the Department of Trade and Industry is currently holding consultations.
The Mercury official described the measures as "another milestone" saying it would help close the gap with its much bigger rival British Telecommunications Plc (BT) as far as marketing of services were concerned.
"This reflects our relative market position and gives us the flexibility to offer our customers truly bespoke solutions, designed to meet their specific business needs. At the end of the day it's the customers who will be the winners," he said.
Analysts said the Oftel move was expected and would probably not lead to substantially more customers: "They can price services for different customers, but it is not a big deal," said James Golob at Deutsche Morgan Grenfell.
The Securities and Investments Board (SIB), responsible for overseeing financial regulation in Britain, has clamped down on the use of stockmarket derivatives to profit from inside information.
SIB said on Thursday that firms should ensure they do not use derivatives to buy or sell stakes for themselves or customers where inside information would have prevented them from doing so in the open market.
Front-line regulators such as the Securities and Futures Authority are to have day-to-day responsibility for enforcing the guidance, designed to ban the improper use of inside information in the derivatives market.
Derivatives such as futures or options, are financial instruments derived from the value of an underlying asset such as a stock or a bond.
The 1993 Criminal Justice Act which made insider dealing a criminal offence only covers individuals, but firms are expected to observe the spirit, as well as the letter, of the new advice, said SIB.
It also said that firms should not rely on arguments about equality of information' -- that the information is widely known -- to justify such stakes, even where this defence could be relied on in relation to the criminal law.
Neither should they rely on the defence, called bid facilitation', if taking a stake provides only a cash benefit rather than a step towards completing a takeover bid for a client.
The SIB said its advice was based partly on the standards set in the criminal law on insider dealing, and that authorised firms are required under SIB principles to meet a higher standard in some areas than may be imposed on individuals by the criminal law.
The SIB published a consultative paper on the issue in June.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7721
Shares in British insurer Commercial Union (CU) jumped on Friday amid renewed speculation the insurance group may become the next victim in the industry's push to consolidate.
Rumours that a merger were in the offing were given a new lease of life after buying of CU shares late on Thursday. The shares rose on Friday, jumping in late trading to close 19-1/2p at 663-1/2p, ignoring worries about interest rates which sent stock prices across the rest of the London market tumbling.
Tobacco and financial sevices giant BAT Industries has been at the centre of the most recent rumours with reports last weekend that discussions between the two had foundered.
Both companies have maintained their silence on whether discussions have actually taken place but earlier this week BAT said it was keeping an open mind about the opportunities for finding a partner for its financial services arm.
The search for cost savings and economies of scale are behind the latest drive to consolidate in Britain's increasingly competitive and fragmented insurance industry.
New entrants selling insurance over the telephone such as Direct Line have added to competition while the selling of insurance products through banks, building societies and shops is also expected to gather momentum.
Royal Insurance and Sun Alliance combined operations back in July to create Britain's biggest insurer and estimates it will be able to cut costs by 175 million pounds ($289.6 million) annually by 1998, shedding some 5,000 employees in the process.
Like the retail banking industry, insurance companies tend not to be dependent on key individuals and mergers are not fundamentally difficult to achieve, said analysts.
One estimated that cost savings in a tie-up between Commercial Union and BAT Industries could probably add another 20 percent to combined operating profits.
While analysts conceded that reports the company has been discussing a deal with others in the industry may be true, they were quick to point out that such discussions have been commonplace in recent years.
"Anyone who wanted to talk to CU would at least be listened to -- they've got shareholders to consider. But these things are not new. These companies have been talking to each other for as long as I can remember on a regular basis," said one analyst.
"But I think CU feels quite capable of controlling its own destiny and I'm not convinced that they would think another insurance company had much to offer."
The question of which management would come out on top in any merger is another tricky issue and was said to have been behind the breakdown in talks with BAT.
Interest from abroad has also been rumoured with German insurance group Allianz said to have been contemplating a move for CU. General Accident and Guardian Royal Exchange have also been linked with CU.
A full-scale takeover is a more remote possibility with the necessary premium on the current share price likely to offset many of the cost savings.
But even a merger would bring with it a multitude of problems and would put questionmarks over relationships built up with banks and financial institutions in its continental European businesses.
"There's pressure on both the non-life and life industries to get together and cut costs and CU is as much a part of that as anybody else. I'm sure that most companies have talked or thought about talking to other companies. Whether anything comes of it or not is a completely different matter," said an analyst.
Takeover talk also extended to the insurance broking market late Friday as rumours circulated of a predator stalking Sedgwick Group Plc whose shares closed 5p higher at 125-1/2p.
($1=.6043 Pound)
The second large merger between insurance brokers in the space of a week highlights the dilemma many in the industry face over how to counter overcapacity and increasing competition, analysts said on Monday.
The latest move, a 300 million pound ($500 million) merger between Britain's Lloyd Thompson Group and JIB Group comes hard on the heels of last week's $1.23 billion acquisition of New York's Alexander &amp; Alexander Services (A&amp;A) by U.S. broking giant Aon Corp.
Different in scale, the two deals are also very different in motivation but both point to a clear trend in the sector -- consolidation.
Vast overcapacity in broking has left the industry struggling in recent years.
The Aon/A&amp;A deal was driven by a desire to attack costs, increasingly seen as one of the few ways forward for an industry beset by falling rates and declining revenues.
But the merger of Lloyd Thompson and JIB to create Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group is different. It has not been prompted by a search for cost savings but by an effort to release the benefits from the two companies' "complementary" businesses.
Cost savings will be restricted largely to the companies' London operations and the opportunities to build upon each others existing businesses, particularly in Asia Pacific, will be the main drive in future growth, according to Lloyd Thompson chief executive Ken Carter.
However, elsewhere in the sector the need to find ways of offsetting the pressure on rates by stripping out costs, like Aon, has raised the prospect of further deals to come.
Rumours that Aon or Marsh &amp; McLennan were about to launch a takeover bid for British-based broker Sedgwick swept the insurance markets on Friday.
Such rumours are fuelled by the the hand-in-glove nature of the business, say analysts.
"The brokers are constantly in discussions about mergers; they chat all the time. And one is always surprised by seeing the industry bash on, trying to purge overcapacity through consolidation," said one analyst.
One of the main problems with any merger between brokerages is defection of staff. Another is the diminishing number of would-be predators.
While Aon refused to comment on Friday's Sedgwick rumours, a spokeswoman for the company did point out the need to "digest" its most recent prurchases.
The newly merged Jardine Lloyd Thompson will be positioned between global brokers such as Britain's Sedgwick and Willis Corroon and smaller niche brokers such as Lowndes Lambert and C.E. Heath. It is also likely to leave them in something of a dilemma.
As the number of more obvious deals are done, the pressure on those remaining to come up with a means of remaining competitive is likely to rise. Mergers or acquisitions may, however, become less attractive as the more logical tie-ups in the sector are done, leaving those left with fewer options.
"Brokers are all cutting costs but if rates continue to fall, they'll all be cutting back to keep up with the revenue stream coming down. There has to be a huge shock to the industry which will take out a few of the players. Until that happens brokerage isn't going anywhere," said one analyst.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7721 ($ = 0.602 British Pounds)
Two of Britain's leading insurance brokers Lloyd Thompson Group and JIB Group said on Monday they are to merge in a deal worth 300 million pounds ($496.4 million)
Lloyd Thompson chief executive Ken Carter said the main attraction of the deal was the complementary nature of the two companies' operations and the merger will create an international firm focused on profitable, growth businesses.
"The driver is not cost savings, it's entirely the business enhancements we can get out of the two groups coming together. The cost savings will be there but they would come out in the merger of any two companies," he said.
Carter will become chief executive of the new group which is to be renamed Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group Plc.
The deal comes at a time of increasing problems for brokers as insurance rates fall and revenues decline. Increasing competitive pressures are forcing many to contemplate deals to find a way of cutting costs and achieve economies of scale.
Only last week U.S. broking giant Aon Corp announced it was buying New York's Alexander &amp; Alexander services for $1.23 billion.
"Insurance brokers are going through very difficult times and any activity that will enhance margins has to be beneficial," said one analyst. "It's becoming quite evident that size is more and more important." Under the terms of the Lloyd's Thompson offer, JIB shareholders will receive four new Lloyd Thompson shares for every five JIB shares held. The companies said that deal was expected to be "significantly earnings enhancing" in 1998.
The merger has received the backing of Jardine Matheson Holdings which has a 60 percent stake in JIB. On completion of the merger it will have a 34 percent interest which it said, it intended to hold "for the long term".
The stock market reacted positively to the news. JIB shares rose 20-1/2p to 129-1/2p and Lloyd Thompson 1-1/2p to 174p.
The companies said they believed that the merger would bring significant strategic advantages allowing the development of new products, enhancing JIB's international operations and creating a leading international reinsurance business.
The deal would also deliver cost savings, in particular in the two London market operations' information technology and head office expenditure.
Lloyd Thompson, is currently involved predominantly in the London wholesale and reinsurance broking business. In contrast, JIB, operates in 30 countries worldwide and brings with it an international presence with the "very significant jewel in the crown" of its high quality Asia Pacific business, said Carter.
The newly merged group will be positioned between global brokers such as Britain's Sedgwick and Willis Corroon and smaller niche brokers such as Lowndes Lambert and C.E. Heath.
"We see Jardine fulfilling an essential demand from clients by being a strong international broker focussed on handling business wherever it is in the world outside the U.S. rather than looking to get a flag in every city in the world," said Carter.
Following the merger John Barton, currently chief executive of JIB will become chairman of the new group which is to be headquartered in London.
The company is to pay a special dividend of 6.0 pence per Lloyd Thompson share, subject to the merger with JIB proceeding. ($1=.6043 Pound)
United Nations' plans to delay Iraq's re-entry to world oil markets lifted oil shares in Europe on Monday as a sharp rise in oil prices fed through to the stock markets, traders said.
Iraqi military activity in the Kurdish north, prompted the U.N. to put on hold a planned humanitarian Iraqi oil-for-food exchange, stopping the first sales of Iraqi oil since the Gulf War six years ago.
The increased tension in the Middle East and delays to Iraqi supplies lifted crude prices and, said analysts, was likely to raise market estimates for the third and probably fourth quarter.
October futures for benchmark Brent crude opened 70 cents a barrel higher on London's international Petroleum Exchange.
Shares in Enterprise Oil climbed 10-1/2p to 520p, while Lasmo rose three to 196-1/2. British Petroleum was up 5-1/2p at 628p and Shell Transport 6-1/2p at 939p. In Amsterdam, Royal Dutch rose 2.70 guilders to 250.70.
The Iraqi humanitarian oil sales had been expected to hit markets in the next few weeks but after the latest developments traders were questioning when and if those supplies would come back on stream.
That could mean an upward revision of as much as $1.50 on Brent crude oil prices for the next few months with the possibility of the Iraqi sales ban lasting into 1997.
"I'd rather wait and see how likely or how long delays to Iraqi sales are going to be before I get too panicky," said one leading oil analyst.
"Almost certainly there is going to be a strong fourth quarter now as well as the third. People are going to have upgrade numbers for this year but for next year it's a bit early to say."
The resultant boost to earnings forecasts are likely to provide support to share prices across the sector with most analysts having expected an oil price fall in the fourth quarter as the humanitarian sales came through.
Consensus forecasts had been around $17.70 per barrel for the fourth quarter compared with an average of just under $20 in the third, analysts said.
"We were forecasting $19.50 for the third. We'll have to raise that in the light of this news and also our fourth quarter which was $17.50 by between $1 and $1.50 per barrel," said Lehman Bros' Wendy Anderson.
"The purest plays are the exploration and production companies - Enterprise, Lasmo and Saga. You pick a pure play if you believe the delay will last into 1997," said Anderson.
Integrated majors Norsk Hydro, BP, Elf, Total and Royal Dutch/Shell also provided fairly good exposure, she said.
Total shares rose 4.2 francs at 376.7 in Paris and Elf gained 7.6 francs to 376.4. Norsk Hydro added two Norwegian crowns to 296.50.
But while the Iraqi situation will underpin stocks in the near term, it is long-term trends that will determine significant outperformance in the sector.
The real issue was at what point -- if at all -- people decided that forecasts for oil prices through 1997, 1998 and 1999 should be higher, said Nick Antill of BZW.
"At this stage I don't see anything that would make one want to do that. In investment terms, the sector is only really going to start motoring if people start bumping up the long-term trend rather than just this year's estimate," he said.
Britain's Ladbroke Group Plc Monday concluded a long-awaited global alliance with Hilton Hotels Corp., reuniting the Hilton brand worldwide for the first time in 32 years.
Despite the tie-up, which covers 400 hotels in 49 countries, the two companies denied there was a hidden agenda to progress toward a full merger of the two groups.
"We're taking a first step in bringing the hotels business much closer. We're putting the relationship back together and who knows what may come of it," said Ladbroke Chief Executive Peter George.
The companies said the deal covering sales and marketing, frequent customer programmes and development would fuel top-line growth and dispel the confusion that has surrounded the two groups in recent years.
Hilton has operated separately within and outside the U.S. market since 1964, when Hilton International was spun off from HHC.
"From our customers' point of view this will look as if it's one company for the first time in 32 years. For many years we've confused our guests ... They'll now no longer see a difference between a London Hilton and a Hilton in New York," said Stephen Bollenbach, chief executive of HHC.
"These two companies will have such a close alliance and so many points of contact with each other that I believe you will get all the benefits of one legal entity whether or not you become one legal entity."
The reunification would also help both groups capitalise on industry growth and make them more resilient in cyclical downturns, George said.
Announcing the signing of the agreements for the hotel deal, which was first unveiled last summmer, the companies also said a worldwide loyalty programme -- Hilton HHonors Worldwide -- would start Feb. 1.
That would be the single most important marketing link between the two, George said, adding that there was scope for further cooperation in other areas such as gaming.
"There is a gaming provision as well whereby we're looking at doing some gaming projects together," said George.
"It's not a deal that involves a great deal of cost savings but the primary benefit is the top line -- it'll be driving revenues. It can be valued in the tens of millions of dollars to each company."
As expected, the agreements provide for taking cross shareholdings of up to 20 percent. Hilton said it intended to acquire a 5 percent stake in Ladbroke in due course.
Mutual participation in future hotel development will focus primarily on management contracts and franchises, but the companies said it was no longer proposed that each make minority investments in the other's hotel real estate.
Britain's Ladbroke Group Plc on Monday concluded a long-awaited global alliance with Hilton Hotels Corp (HHC) of the U.S., reuniting the Hilton brand worldwide for the first time in 32 years.
Despite the tie-up, which covers 400 hotels in 49 countries, the two companies denied there was a hidden agenda to progress to a full merger of the two groups.
"We're taking a first step in bringing the hotels business much closer. We're putting the relationship back together and who knows what may come of it," said Ladbroke chief executive Peter George.
Shares in Ladbroke initially firmed on the earlier-than-expected conclusion of the agreement, adding 2-1/2 pence to 236 pence in morning trading.
The companies said that the deal covering sales and marketing, loyalty programmes and development would fuel top-line growth and dispel the confusion that has surrounded the two groups in recent years.
Hilton has operated separately within and outside the U.S. since 1964 when Hilton International was spun off from HHC.
"From our customers' point of view this will look as if it's one company for the first time in 32 years. For many years we've confused our guests...They'll now no longer see a difference between a London Hilton and a Hilton in New York," said Stephen Bollenbach, chief executive of HHC.
"These two companies will have such a close alliance and so many points of contact with each other that I believe you will get all the benefits of one legal entity whether or not you become one legal entity."
The reunification would also help both groups capitalise on industry growth and make them more resilient in cyclical downturns, said George.
Announcing the signing of the agreements for the hotel deal, which was first unveiled last summmer, the companies also said a worldwide loyalty programme -- Hilton HHonors Worldwide -- would start on February 1.
That would be the single most important marketing link up between the two, George said, but there was scope for further cooperation in other areas such as gaming.
"There is a gaming provision as well whereby we're looking at doing some gaming projects together," said George.
"It's not a deal that involves a great deal of cost savings but the primary benefit is the top line -- it'll be driving revenues. It can be valued in the tens of millions of dollars to each company."
As expected the agreements provide for taking cross shareholdings of up to 20 percent. Hilton said it intended to acquire a five percent stake in Ladbroke in due course.
Mutual participation in future hotel development will focus primarily on management contracts and franchises, but the companies said it was no longer proposed that each make minority investments in the other's hotel real estate.
The deal is to be Ladbroke's number one priority in the near term but, said George, the company was still looking to develop the business by increasing the number of hotels around the world, and was always on the look out for additions to the existing business.
British life assurance group Scottish Amicable on Thursday announced plans to shed its 170-year old mutual status in preparation for a 1.0 billion pounds ($1.68 billion) flotation on the London stock market in three to five years' time.
The group, based in Stirling, Scotland, said it is to use capital raised by the two-stage proposals to take advantage of opportunities for growth and increase its share of the life and pensions market.
Policyholders are to receive an initial special bonus totalling 75 million pounds after demutualising on May 1 this year, based on the length of time policies have been held.
At the top end of the scale, an individual with a 25-year policy maturing this April will receive 1,503 pounds.
On flotation another, larger payout - expected to amount to at least 200 million pounds but possibly "substantially higher" - will be made.
The move to seek a flotation is the second by a British life group, following plans announced last year by Norwich Union.
Scottish Amicable had been rumoured to be a takeover candidate but chairman Sandy Stewart said the group intended to hold on to its independence.
"Our plans do not include being gobbled up by anybody," Stewart told a news briefing.
Industry analysts said today's move would make any takeover "The policyholders are likely to get more by hanging on in there and having an interest in the future than a straight sale now," said one.
Scottish amicable said it believed the market was entering a growth phase and that it was well positioned to take advantage of an upturn but needed capital and a more flexible structure to take advantage of the opportunities.
The period before flotation is intended to allow it to develop the business and necessary profit-focused corporate culture.
Managing Director Roy Nicolson said that there remained value to be realised in the group and that an immediate flotation would have failed to reflect the true value of the business and sold policyholders short.
Industry analysts described the proposals as a good compromise between raising some capital in the near term but not selling out too cheap.
Under the proposals, the business, staff and operations of the group are to be transferred to a new company, Scottish Amicable Life, a 100 percent owned subsidiary of the newly formed Scottish Amicable Holdings.
Nicolson, is to become group chief executive of a new holding company Scottish Amicable Holdings. Paul Bradshaw, deputy managing director, will become chief executive of Scottish Amicable Life.
The first stage of the group's plans involves a deal with reinsurance giant Swiss Re and its affiliate Securitas Capital to provide an injection of cash of 395 million poounds.
Scottish Amicable's existing with-profit fund will receive an immediate cash contribution of 350 million pounds while Securitas Capital will invest up to 45 million pounds in return for approximately 20 percent of a new business fund being set up to transact all new business leading up to flotation.
The plans have to be approved by three-quarters of policyholders who vote and a special general meeting is expected to be held in March.
($1=.5958 Pound)
British life assurer Scottish Amicable said on Thursday it planned to shed its 170-year-old mutual status in favour of a stock market flotation aimed at taking advantage of opportunities for profit growth.
The Stirling-based group outlined plans to float on the London Stock Exchange in three to five years' time and said it would pay policy-holders an initial special bonus of 75 million pounds ($125 million) after demutualising on May 1.
Scottish Amicable said pay-outs would be based on the length of time policies had been held by members.
The fist payment would be followed by benefits worth more than 200 million pounds as a result of flotation, which will give the group access to long-term capital, it added.
The group said it expected to have a market capitalisation of around 1.0 billion pounds on flotation.
Scottish Amicable said significant opportunities existed for profitable growth in its businesses. But it said in a statement that to take full advantage "requires access to external capital in both the short and long term."
There has been intense speculation that Scottish Amicable, founded in 1826, would be the subject of a takeover bid but chairman Sandy Stewart said the group intended to hold on to its independence.
"Our plans do not include being gobbled up by anybody," he told a news briefing.
The group said the process would be in two stages. Under the plan, the business, staff and operations of the group would be transferred to a new company, Scottish Amicable Life, a 100 percent subsidiary of newly formed Scottish Amicable Holdings.
The first stage involves a deal with reinsurance giant Swiss Re and its affiliate Securitas Capital "to provide substantial financial backing initially totalling 395 million pounds".
Under this agreement Scottish Amicable's existing with-profit fund will receive an immediate cash contribution of 350 million pounds "from the reinsurance by Swiss Re of certain categories of existing policy".
Securitas Capital has committed to invest up to 45 million pounds in return for approximately 20 percent of a new business fund being set up to transact all new business from the date on which the scheme becomes effective.
Swiss Re has also agreed to provide further reinsurance "expected to reach a level of 150 million pounds over the next five years in respect of future new business".
Scottish Amicable said Roy Nicolson, currently managing director of the group, would become group chief executive of Scottish Amicable Holdings, while Paul Bradshaw, deputy managing director, will become chief executive of Scottish Amicable Life.
Policyholders must first approve the plans at a special general meeting expected to be held in March. The group said detailed discussions had already been held with Britain's Department of Trade and Industry. ($1=.5958 Pound)
The drive to cut costs and offset falling margins in insurance broking continued apace on Thursday as Lowndes Lambert Group Holdings Plc and Fenchurch Plc confirmed that they are to merge.
The two London-based brokers announced last week they were in talks and said the complementary nature of their businesses would offer significant benefits to clients, employees and shareholders.
The merger comes against a background of industry over-capacity and intense competition which has put increasing pressure on margins and led to an acceleration in consolidation as companies search for economies of scale.
The companies said they believed the deal would create a stronger, more broadly based and competitive group better positioned to win new business and revenues.
Another attraction of the deal is the scope it offers for cutting costs through the merger of head offices, the companies' branch networks and the rationalisation of support and administrative functions.
Such moves will produce cost saving of at least five million pounds in the 12 months to March 1998 and together with the improved prospects for revenue growth will significantly enhance earnings and dividend propects, the company said.
Fenchurch shareholders are to be offered 628 shares in the new company, to be called Lambert Fenchurch Group, for every 1,000 shares they hold, valuing Fenchurch at around 27.6 million pounds ($46.18 million).
Last year's results for the two groups highlight the difficulties faced in the industry with Lowndes' reporting a nine percent fall in pre-tax profits to 13.9 million pounds.
Fenchurch's profits dropped 27 percent to 5.9 million pounds, prompting it to more than halve its final dividend.
The deal comes just weeks after Lloyd Thompson Group Plc and JIB Group Plc announced they are to merge in a deal worth just under 300 million pounds.
The companies believe today's move will reinforce operations in areas where both are strong such as the the UK retail, marine cargo, international non-marine and reinsurance markets.
Lowndes position in marine, fine art and entertainment will also be complimented by Fenchurch's position in North American non-marine and aviation and the broad spread of operations would offer improved growth potential, they said.
Future growth is to be pursued through a combination of organic growth and acquisition.
Lowndes chief executive David Margrett is to become chief executive of the new group with Lowndes chairman Sir Robert Clark becomning non-executive chairman.
The costs of the merger are expected to amount to around 11 million pounds.
($1=.5976 Pound)
Fund manager Nicola Horlick's row with her ex-employer Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM) continued to be played out in public on Wednesday as she admitted that she had been in talks with a rival banking group until several days before she was suspended.
But Horlick stressed that the talks with Dutch firm ABN AMRO were of an "informal and preliminary nature" and at no time had she provided confidential information about the business or colleagues.
"The talks terminated several days before I was suspended," said Horlick. "My aim was always to keep the clients and the team together for the benefit of all."
The benefit of all included MGAM whom, she said, she had never intended to leave.
Horlick, one of London's most prominent fund managers, resigned last week after being suspended amid allegations she planned to defect to ABN AMRO and was soliciting MGAM colleagues to go with her.
The suspension came just days after she had been promoted to be managing director of MGAM and since then her fight to be reinstated or compensated for the loss of her job has rarely been out of the headlines.
Once again the lure of the cameras proved difficult to resist on Wednesday and in a television interview, Horlick repeated her determination to clear her name.
"When you're faced with the fact that people are saying that you've done something wrong and you know you haven't you have to fight for yourself. It's one individual versus a very large bank," she said. "All I have is my reputation and I must defend myself."
The 35 year-old mother-of-five's battle with MGAM has raised eyebrows in the traditionally discreet and conservative banking industry but she maintained she saw no alternative to the action she had taken.
Horlick was catapulted onto the front pages last Friday when she turned up on MGAM's doorstep with a posse of journalists to confront her former employyers after her resignation.
Later to the surprise of everbody -- including her own lawyers -- she flew to Frankfurt to put her case to officials at MGAM's parent company Deutsche Bank.
ABN AMRO has denied trying to poach Horlick and her team and today said they had nothing to add to earlier statements.
Horlick has been in talks with her lawyers for the past few days and is considering taking legal action against her former employer for constructive dismissal.
MGAM is holding fast to its line that it will not reinstate Horlick nor offer compensation since she took the decision to resign her position.
Scottish Amicable's plans to float on the stock market were under threat on Friday after Abbey National launched a surprise bid for the mutually-owned life assurance company.
The offer from the retail banking group values ScotAm at up to 1.4 billion pounds ($2.25 billion) and includes an immediate minimum payout of 400 million pounds to policyholders in cash or Abbey shares.
ScotAm was quick to denounce the bid as both "vague" and "inadequate" and said it intended to press ahead with its two stage plans to drop its mutual status and float the group over the next three to five years.
Those proposals, due to be detailed in a circular within the next two weeks, have themselves been criticised for not being generous enough to policyholders while offering the prospect of a windfall to management if growth targets are met.
Under the plans the 1.1 million policyholders will receive up to 1,500 pounds while 12 ScotAm directors stand to share around 14 million pounds.
The offer from the Abbey raises the possibility of a bidding war for ScotAm, which has made no secret of past approaches.
ScotAm chairman Sandy Stewart said that indications of interest from other parties had already been received.
"As you would expect there have been quite a number of telephone calls (from other interested parties) but there have been no firm approaches," Stewart told Reuters.
"I suspect some of them are competitors of Abbey National".
Stewart said Abbey National's offer had not been dismissed out of hand and that the interests of policyholders were uppermost in the management's mind.
"If we have on the table a firm offer which is quite clearly likely to be more beneficial to policyholders then we have to consider it. If we decide that is the case then we will put it to policyholders," Stewart said.
"At this stage the bid doesn't meet our requirements. It's vague and on the basis of what it (Abbey National) has said it appears to be inadequate."
Analysts agreed the two businesses would fit well together and that the Abbey, with its good cash generation ability, would have no problem financing the deal.
BZW analyst Hugh Pye upgraded its recommendation on Abbey National shares on the potential offered by the deal, which he said would improve the quality of the group's earnings and return on equity.
By early afternoon the shares were trading 6-1/2 pence higher on the day at 775-1/2 pence.
Despite the rejection by Scottish Amicable, the Abbey, Britain's fifth largest bank, said it was still hoping to persuade ScotAm, which has 14 billion pounds under management, to accept the offer and put it to its policyholders.
"We believe this offer will by very attractive to Scottish Amicable policyholders, providing them with immediate value and the long-term security of being part of one of the UK's strongest financial groups," Abbey chief executive Peter Birch said in a statement.
No discussions have been held between the two groups and ScotAm said it had no intention of talking to the Abbey ahead of the release of details on its demutualisation. ($1=.6237 Pound)
Mutually-owned life assurance company Scottish Amicable on Friday rebuffed a takeover bid worth up to 1.4 billion pounds ($2.3 billion) from British retail banking group Abbey National Plc.
Scottish Amicable said it would pursue its own plan, announced earlier this month, to shed its mutual status and seek a stock market flotation in three to five years time.
"We believe this offer will by very attractive to Scottish Amicable policyholders, providing them with immediate value and the long-term security of being part of one of the UK's strongest financial groups," Abbey National chief executive Peter Birch said in a statement.
The Abbey offer, which surprised the market and sent its shares up 6.5 pence to 775.5, includes a minimum of 400 million pounds to policyholders in cash or Abbey shares and an immediate investment into the funds of 1.1 million with-profit policyholders of between 700 million to one billion pounds.
Despite the rejection by Scottish Amicable, the Abbey, Britain's fifth largest bank, said it was still hoping to persuade the life assurer, which has 14 billion pounds under management, to accept the offer and put it to its policy holders.
"We feel that we can offer something much more attractive to the Scottish Amicable policy holders," Abbey deputy chief executive Charles Toner told Reuters. "That's why we really want to talk to Scottish Amicable and we hope still to persuade them to put this more attractive deal to their policy holders."
Toner said that the ScotAm board had not yet had time to stand back and examine the proposals properly.
"They've been working on their scheme for some time and they probably can't consider anything else in their minds," he added. "In truth, they don't seem to want to discuss it at the moment but we hope that they will. It's early days, there's plenty of time for them to draw breath and talk to us."
The second element of the offer would see Abbey National invest between 700 million and one billion pounds into the with-profits fund, where the policyholder is entitled to a share of the profits from the growth of the fund.
Scottish Amicable said the approach from Abbey was vague and it was unclear how it was valuing the group. The insurer, based in Stirling, Scotland, said it intends to publish in 10 days time detailed proposals about a twin-phased transformation, involving losing its mutual status on May 1 and a 1.0 billion pound flotation in three to five years time.
"The start of a growth phase is the wrong time in the cycle for policyholders to put their businesss on the market," said Sandy Stewart, chairman of Scottish Amicable.
Later, a spokesman for Scottish Amicable's advisers said there was a "grave danger of policy holders being misled by the vague terms of Abbey National's pronouncements. They have misunderstood Scottish Amicable's proposals."
The spokesman said the benefits to policy holders of the flotation proposal had been conservatively stated and the actual value would be considerably higher.
Abbey's Toner said the Scottish Amicable business would be an excellent fit for its Scottish Mutual business which it bought in 1992. It has 8.0 billion pounds under management and sells its products through the independent financial adviser (IFA) network.
"We started quite cautiously with Scottish Mutual but now it's growing very strongly under our management but as the whole life sector continues to consolidate, we do think it would be good, with the right partner, to link Scottish Mutual with something else," he added.
Analysts agreed that the businesses would be a good fit and John Leonard of Salomon Brothers said the Abbey would have no problem financing the bid with its good cash generation ability. ($1=.6172 Pound)
Abbey National on Monday called for Scottish Amicable to put on hold proposals to drop its mutual status and allow policyholders time to consider last week's offer for the life assurance group.
But ScotAm were quick to reject the demand together with renewed requests by Abbey for access to its books.
ScotAm said it had no intention of altering its plans and would proceed according to its own timetable and not one dictated by Abbey.
"They're asking for privileged access to information before policyholders," said a ScotAm spokesman.
"The policyholders have to get that information, see the detail of what we're offering and at that time Abbey can make a proper judgement of its offer."
The details of ScotAm's demutualisation and flotation plans are due to be published at the beginning of next week.
Until then an impasse looks likely with ScotAm refusing to discuss Abbey's approach and Abbey prevented from seeing more detailed financial information it says it needs.
It argues that policyholders should have the opportunity to compare ScotAm's plans with alternative offers based on the same information.
"Ours is a firm offer based on published information and it is a minimum offer. If we had the information they have, we'd be on the same level playing field," said an Abbey spokesman.
"The policyholders should be given the chance to vote on the best deal on the table. If Scottish know there's a firm offer from us - and there may be other interested parties - they should consider all of these and put them to policyholders at one go."
Many industry observers expect the move by Abbey which already owns Glasgow-based Scottish Mutual, to prompt an auction for ScotAm with interest anticipated from both Britain and overseas.
Insurance group Prudential has said it was "watching the situation with interest" and has made no secret that it is on the lookout for an acquisition in the life assuarnce sector.
Britain's Halifax building society, high street banking group National Westminster, Fortis, the Dutch-Belgian financial services company, and Dutch firm ING Groep have all declined to comment on reports they might throw their hats in the ring.
No talks have been held with any other parties and according to the ScotAm, none are planned ahead of the publication of its proposals. For the time being at least, the company remains dismissive of Abbey's approach.
It has repeatedly attacked what it describes as the "vagueness" of Abbey's offer - a minimum of 400 million pounds ($641 million) and between 700 million and one billion pounds for the embedded value of the with-profits fund.
But the company was keen to stress that the interests of policyholders remained the most important consideration and if a suitable offer emerged it would be put to policyholders.
"The kite being flown by Abbey has all the superficial attractions of an upfront cash offer to policyholders without any assurance of the long term welfare of policies," ScotAm chairman Sandy Stewart told Reuters.
"Abbey has said more to the press than it has put in writing to the board and that should alert policyholders that it's time for very careful reflection."
While ScotAm may be irked at what it sees as the way Abbey has conducted its bid through the press, Abbey contend it is the only way it can get its message across to policyholders. ($1=.6237 Pound)
Scottish Amicable said on Tuesday it will be giving policyholders information about Abbey National's bid for the company when it details its own proposals to shed its mutual status and float on the stock market.
A spokesman for the life assurer, which has been fighting a public campaign against Abbey's offer said: "It's obviously only right that we tell policyholders that they made an approach for us...we don't want to hide anything from them."
It is unclear how much detail will be put before policyholders by ScotAm which has repeatedly rebuffed Abbey demands that the timetable for its demutualisation proposals be stopped to allow policyholders to consider the offer.
ScotAm has also turned down Abbey requests for access to its books or meetings to discuss the bid which values ScotAm at up to 1.4 billion pounds ($2.25 billion).
It includes an immediate 400 million pound minimum payout to policyholders in cash or Abbey shares.
Abbey, Britain's fifth largest bank, has complained that policyholders should have the opportunity to compare the ScotAm proposals with alternative offers based on the same information.
The public campaign between the two companies was stepped up on Tuesday with a full-page advertisement in the form of an open letter to policyholders, promising to give them all the information required to make a choice on the firm's future.
"At the precise moment when calm and considered reflection is of the utmost importance, the accent appears to be wholly on how much can be extracted by way of cash payments in the very short term, rather than on policyholders' long term best interests," said the letter which appeared in the Financial Times, the Daily Mail and Daily Telegraph newspapers.
It went on to promise that policyholders would be informed if a "definitive and demonstrably better offer" was made before any vote on the proposals was taken.
The ScotAm board's fiduciary duty is to policyholders who own the company and there has been speculation that it may be holding off from embracing Abbey in the hope of encouraging other bidders to come forward.
The bid is expected to spark an auction for ScotAm but other interested parties may decide to stay on the sidelines ahead of the publication of ScotAm's float plans within the next week.
"The board obviously has a duty to do the best by policyholders - they should be exploring all the avenues they can. By refusing to cooperate with Abbey they're making things harder for themselves," said one fund manager.
Martin Lees, life insurance specialist at ratings agency Standard &amp; Poors tipped Dutch insurance group Aegon and Australian Mutual Provident (AMP) as front-runners to enter the race for ScotAm.
AMP had already stated its interest in more British acquisitions and a company that used independent financial advisors as its main means of distribution would be a good fit, said Lees.
Aegon's previous acquisition of Scottish Equitable had demonstrated its ability to provide extra capital to allow aggressive development, he said.
Other companies reported to be interested include the Prudential, the Halifax building society, Dutch group ING Groep and Belgian-Dutch financial services firm Fortis.
All have declined to comment on the reports. ($1=.6237 Pound)
The head of one of Lloyd's of London's largest corporate investors said on Wednesday he expected the number of traditional Names at Lloyd's of London to continue to fall to a core of between 4,000 and 5,000.
John Stace, chief executive of Angerstein Underwriting Investment Trust, told Reuters it was likely that the number of members' agencies looking after Names' interests would drop to just four or five.
Angerstein owns Stace Barr, one of the biggest remaining members agents, representing 933 Names.  
Stace said the aim was for Stace Barr to remain one of the top surviving members' agencies with around 1,000 Names.
Angerstein's operations director James Illingworth said Lloyd's 12,000 plus remaining Names would be faced with resigning membership, converting to some sort of limited liability or remaining as unlimited liability backers.
Around half are expected to resign in the coming years or convert to limited liability schemes.
Despite a number of schemes being set up to allow conversion to limited liability, these had so far been small and unsuited to mass conversion.  
"Scottish limited liability Partnership has not been that succesful. I don't think it is the answer to mass conversion," said Illingworth.
Angerstein has an interest in finding a solution to the conversion problem and like many others was working on it, but it was too early to say how long this would take, he said, adding that any scheme must be relatively simple.
An announcement is also likely by the end of April on the question of solvency ratios for individual names, Stace said.
At present, names must put up liquid assets of 20 to 30 percent of their underwriting limit, while Names in pooled underwriting arrangements, known as MAPAs, must put up 25 percent.
Most corporate investors do not enjoy such a high level of gearing and pressure is mounting for a change in the rules applying to Names.
"Four-to-one MAPAs solvency will change," Stace said, adding that his personal opinion was that three-to-one for Names was probably appropriate.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7721
Britain's largest insurance group Prudential Corp has become early favourite to win the auction for Scottish Amicable after its 1.9 billion pound ($3.0 billion) bid for the mutually owned life assurance group.
Industry analysts said the offer, which uses excess capital in the Pru's 50 billion pound life fund, will make it difficult for rivals to compete and may have delivered a knockout blow to Abbey National's hopes of buying ScotAm.
Pru shareholders are also likely to be pleased with the finacial engineering which has gone into the offer. Only 250 million pounds is coming from shareholders funds and Prudential shares added 12 pence to 566 pence on Thursday as the market digested the details of the deal.
The Pru's offer contains elements of both the Abbey bid and ScotAm's own flotation proposals but it is in its structuring that the deal may have stolen a march and narrowed the field of potentials bidders.
The 400 million pound bonus in cash and shares matches Abbey's payout but the Pru says it will add another 150 million pounds to policies as soon as practicable and pay a minimum additional 250 million pounds when policies mature.
It also says it will pay 1.1 billion pounds into ScotAm's life fund - a loan from its own life fund, allowing investments in equities to be increased, which historically have provided the best returns.
The Pru will close ScotAm's life fund to new business, the existing free assets which it estimates to be at least 400 million pounds, will no longer be required to write new business and so can be paid out to ScotAm policyholders.
"The deal returns all the working capital to policyholders which under the Abbey deal would have been retained in the fund to write the new business. For others to replicate that is difficult," said one industry analyst.
Other potential bidders such as the Halifax building society, National Westminster Bank, Belgian-Dutch financial services company Fortis, Dutch firms ING Groep and Aegon may now be having second thoughts about throwing their hats in the ring.
Only a couple of the stronger life companies mentioned as potential acquirors could come up with a similar structure.
Australian Mutual Provident which also has substantial excess capital in its life fund could in theory do so.
"I would struggle to name another one," said an analyst.
But Abbey, whose 1.4 billion pound offer last week sparked the bidding war is likely to find it very difficult to compete.
It lacks the capital strength in its life funds to readily replicate the Pru deal and would probably have to turn to external capital to raise its bid substantially, said analysts.
"Abbey could match the Pru's offer. Whether it would be sensible is another issue. It's hard to match and satisfy its own shareholders that its in its best interests." said one
The Pru may also hold the advantage it terms of the benefits accruing from a ScotAm acquisition.
There would be less overlap in the businesses than Abbey which already owns Scottish Mutual and it would lift the Pru's exposure to the independent financial adviser market (IFA).
Abbey has yet to detail its offer but said yesterday after the Pru's approach that once it had access to full financial information it was sure its final offer would be extremely attractive to ScotAm's policyholders, management and staff.
Industry analsysts, however, were sceptical that Abbey after setting the ball rolling in the battle for control of ScotAm, it could manage to compete with the Pru's financial muscle.
International insurance broker Willis Corroon, reported a rise in 1996 profits on Thursday but gave a gloomy assessment of the problems of overcapacity and falling rates currently afflicting the industry.
The company said insurance rates were declining almost universally and competition in the U.S. retail market was intensifying.
It also warned that the recent rise in sterling which reduced 1996 profits by 3.1 million pounds ($5.1 million) may hit 1997 results and that profits from its Lloyd's members agency were unlikely to be repeated at the 1996 level.
The comments were made as Willis unveiled pre-tax profits for the year of 91.6 million pounds, a rise of 83 percent over 1995, which included 30 million pounds in exceptional charges.
Stripping out exceptionals and disposals, profits from continuing operations were up 13 percent at 89.1 million pounds.
Willis said it expected to benefit from a programme designed to enhance performance and competitiveness but the shares lost ground after the results, slipping eight pence by early afternoon to 131-1/2 pence.
Analysts said the results merely confirmed the difficulties the sector faced.
Willis chairman John Reeve, however, pointed to the rise in profits and elimination of net debt as evidence of the successful implementation of plans to restore the group's financial health.
"The group is now focused on its core operation, following a programme of disposal, profitability has been improved and the balance sheet has been significantly strengthened," Reeve said.
Willis also drew comfort from its success in growing revenues and despite the difficult market conditions. it said it remained sceptical about the benefits of the recent industry trend of pursuing cost economies through mergers.
"We think there are huge risks in people businessses associated with that. We have a strategy for growing our business which we're comfortable with and as far as we're concerned that's what we're concentrating on," group executive director Max Taylor told Reuters in an interview.
Following the implementation of the Lloyd's of London Reconstruction and Renewal plan (R&amp;R) the group's members agency returned to profit for the first time since 1992.
The 14.5 million pound profit commission for the 1993 year included reserves from prior years. These were partly offset by contributions of 6.3 million pounds to the R&amp;R plan.
Willis said present indications were that profit commission on the 1994 year, receivable in 1997, will be around half those of 1993.
Profits for the 1995 year were likely to be significantly down, however, said one analyst, and there were big questions over whether it would be profitable at all in 1997 given the rating environment.
After severance costs of 11.3 million pounds in the 1996 figures related to the change programme, Taylor said he expected further costs in 1997 to be lower.
He said a fall in staff numbers of 11 percent in 1996 was unlikely to be repeated and further reductions were expected to be on a smaller scale and absorbed through natural wastage.
The change programme is expected to span three to five years and last year's actions were taken to underpin it. The real effort would now be going into the longer term effort of building capabilities, skills and resources, said Taylor.
($ = 0.612 British Pounds)
Britain's NatWest Group said on Thursday it was setting up a new business grouping, NatWest Wealth Management, to tap the potential of private banking, long-term savings and investment markets.
The unit will bring together asset management company Gartmore, life insurance and pensions unit NatWest Life and Investment Services and NatWest Ventures.
Private banking unit Coutts Group will join the new arm in January 1998 following the completion of a restructuring process.
NatWest group chief executive Derek Wanless said the new business offered "potentially very strong growth" for the group.
"It's a market with major growth potential because of demographic changes, people's need to save for sickness and old age," he said in an interview.
"It's an area where we've put a fair number of the building blocks in place over the past few years, particularly last year, when we bought Gartmore and integrated it with our own investment management company."
NatWest Wealth Management will have funds in excess of 60 billion pounds ($98 billion) under management.
It will be positioned to offer a comprehensive range of products and services to clients, ranging from the private investor through to the most sophisticated pension fund sponsor.
Paul Myners, chairman of Gartmore, Britain's fifth-largest fund manager, which NatWest acquired in April 1996, will be chief executive of the new unit from April 1 and will report directly to Wanless.
Myners said the businesses in the new group were already well-established and successful and together represented a "substantial force in the provision of long-term savings and investment products".
Wealth management was a significant market for the group's future and the creation of a dedicated sector represented a logical progression of its strategy, said Wanless.
It was also looking to ensure it got the best out of combining the Gartmore and NatWest brands and making use of the groups' distribution channels to independent financial advisers (IFAs).
"Cost savings were essentially in the integration of Gartmore and NatWest investment management which took place last year. The benefits are really on the growth side; the income, not the cost side of the business," Wanless said.
"It has no negative implications for headcount. We genuinely think this is a growth opportunity where we're growing together some interesting businesses both in terms of distribution and fund mangement."
He said that last year's investment in Gartmore was the principal building block from outside needed for the move and that it was now substantially a case of organic growth, building the distribution channels and capitalising on the other strengths of NatWest UK and Coutts. ($1=.6120 Pound)
Scottish Amicable adviser SBC Warburg is hoping to close the first stage in the sale of the life assurance group with the signing of confidentiality agreements with all potential bidders by the weekend, a source close to the deal said on Friday.
So far three companies, Abbey National, Prudential Corp and Australia's largest life insurer Australian Mutual Provident (AMP) have signed the agreements.
These give the bidders detailed financial information on ScotAm to enable them to finalise their offers.
The agreements go further, however, in preventing the bidder from publicly disclosing any details of the offers and forcing them to accept the ScotAm board's decision as final.
A number of other companies are reported to have expressed interest in ScotAm but have yet to sign the agreements.
One company rumoured to have contemplated a bid, Belgian-Dutch insurer Fortis, is said to have ruled itself out of the auction process, but the company has consistently declined to comment.
Another tipped to make a bid, Dutch group Aegon, has yet to show its hand.
The whole process is expected to take between four and six weeks before a final offer is recommended to policyholders by the ScotAm board.
Mutually-owned ScotAm effectively put itself up for auction earlier this month when it said it was to seek definitive offers from parties interested in acquiring it.
The sealed bid process has come in for some criticism and Warburgs and the ScotAm board are likely to go to great lengths to ensure fairness is seen to be done.
"I suspect they are aware that they may have to give more detail than otherwise they may have done under a controlled auction," commented one industry observer.
Abbey National, Britain's fifth largest bank, sparked the auction when it announced at the end of January that it was prepared to make an offer worth up to 1.4 billion pounds ($2.27 billion) for ScotAm.
The move came barely two weeks after ScotAm had published its own proposals to drop its mutual status through a flotation on the London stock market.
Prudential threw its hat into the ring with a 1.9 million pound bid last week, a move which prompted ScotAm to open the way for other interested parties to declare their interest.
Abbey National has said it may raise its offer once it has had access to ScotAm's financial details.
In deciding who wins the race, the question of the value of the bid is likely to include not just how much policyholders get up front but where that money comes from, how much goes into policies and what the bidder can offer in terms of future investment flexibility. ($1=.6167 Pound)
British insurers said on Tuesday they would require those wishing to take out new life insurance policies to reveal the results of genetic tests.
But the Association of British Insurers (ABI) said it would not ask people to take genetic tests when applying for life insurance for the next two years.
The policy statement, backed by all 440 ABI member companies, was a response to rapid developments in the area of genetics in recent years.
While still in its infancy, there is the possibility that new genetic tests will soon be developed that will be able to predict the chances of someone contracting certain diseases or their life expectancy.
Many U.S. companies already require applicants for insurance to undergo genetic testing. At present, Britons are asked to give results of tests they have undergone but are not asked to take tests to qualify for insurance.
Doctors can already diagnose the most common single gene defects such as muscular dystrophy and cystic fibrosis and screen for an individual's susceptibility to certain cancers.
Experts say it will soon be possible to predict the risk of more common disorders such as diabetes or rheumatoid athritis.
The ABI specifically pointed out Huntington's disease, a rare and untreatable hereditary disease that usually does not show up until middle age.
It is characterised by involuntary twitching and causes mental deterioration and eventual death.
Tuesday's announcement is likely to raise fears that an underclass may be created of people unable to insure themselves because of their genetic make-up.
But a spokesman for the ABI dismissed this possibility and said if new tests became available they were likely to benefit people, enabling them to adjust their lifestyles to the risks they run of heart and other diseases.
One expert on the ethics of genetics testing called the decision a good compromise.
"I very much welcome this decision because it seems to me to strike a balance between the private interests of individuals and the interests of insurance companies," said Ruth Chadwick, a University of Central Lancashire geneticist who coordinates Euro-Screen, a committee watching such developments.
Not requiring tests protected individuals, she said, while forcing people to disclose tests prevented those with genetic defects from taking out policies hoping for big payoffs.
But Chadwick warned: "There is a danger that genetic predisposition will be thought of as predicting conditions, which it is not."
Actuaries said they were concerned the debate on health insurance and genetic testing had barely started.
A statement from actuaries' professional organisations noted that Britain's National Health Service accepted good or bad risks without extra charge.
"The profession does not favour legislation on the use of genetic tests as it feels that no case has yet been made for such severe action nor has society discussed how commonplace such tests will be in future medicine," it said.
Genetic tests detrimental to applicants for life insurance up to a total of 100,000 pounds ($160,000) will be ignored where the insurance is linked to a new home mortgage under the new policy.
For new applications for other life insurance policies, individual companies will decide whether they wish to take account of the results of genetic tests previously taken.
($ = 0.621 British Pounds)
Britons wishing to take out new life insurance policies will have to reveal the results of genetic tests under a new industry policy announced by the Association of British Insurers (ABI) on Tuesday.
But life insurers will not ask people to take genetic tests when applying for life insurance under the scheme, which will run for the next two years.
The policy statement is backed by all 440 ABI member companies and is a response to the rapid developments in the area of genetics in recent years.
While still in its infancy, there is the possibility that new genetic tests will soon be developed which will be able to predict the chances of someone contracting certain diseases or their life expectancy.
Many U.S. companies already require applicants for insurance to undergo genetic testing. At present, Britons are asked to give results of tests they have undergone but are not asked to take tests to qualify for insurance.
Doctors can already diagnose the most common single gene defects such as muscular dystrophy and cystic fibrosis and screen for an individual's susceptibility to certain cancers.
Experts say it will soon be possible to predict the risk of more common disorders such as diabetes or rheumatoid athritis.
Tuesday's announcement is likely to raise fears that an underclass may be created of people unable to insure themselves because of their genetic make-up.
But a spokesman for the ABI dismissed this possibility and said if new tests became available they were likely to benefit people, enabling them to adjust their lifestyles to the risks they run of heart and other diseases.
The ABI said insurance companies did not wish to be perceived as delaying the development of genetic science and said the statement represented a "very carefully considered and responsible contribution" to the challenges presented by genetic developments.
"It is important that insurance companies continue to see the results of genetic tests so they can monitor developments and gauge any financial impact on their company," it said.
Actuaries noted the long-awaited statement of policy by the ABI, saying they were concerned the debate on health insurance and genetic testing had barely started.
A statement from actuaries' professional organisations noted that Britain's National Health Service accepted good or bad risks without extra charge.
"The profession does not favour legislation on the use of genetic tests as it feels that no case has yet been made for such severe action nor has society discussed how commonplace such tests will be in future medicine," it said.
Genetic tests detrimental to applicants for life insurance up to a total of 100,000 pounds ($160,000) will be ignored where the insurance is linked to a new mortgage under the new policy.
For new applications for other life insurance policies, individual companies will decide whether or not they wish to take account of the results of genetic tests previously taken.
Insurers are considering collating information where genetic test results are given to help with future policy development.
The policy will be fully reviewed in 1999 to take account of future developments in genetics ($ = 0.621 British Pounds)
Britain's Britannic Assurance declared on Tuesday a 209 million pound ($336 million) special bonus for life insurance policies, following discussions with the government on ownership of surplus insurance funds.
The payout will apply to all "with profits" policies in force on February 17, 1997. Details will be given with the 1996 bonus due to be announced next month.
The company said last year it discussing with the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) ownership of long-term assets, and a way to distribute the surplus to policyholders and shareholders.
Britannic has now agreed with the DTI that 902 million pounds of the excess assets within the long term fund can be attributable to shareholders.
Britannic also said it intended to increase its dividend for the year by 82 percent to 23 pence per share following an increase in life profits. This would be the basis for continuing the company's progressive dividend policy.
The news boosted Britannic shares, which jumped 71 pence, or nearly nine percent, at one stage before settling for a rise of 29 pence at 832.5.
The money attributable to shareholders forms part of total assets in the life funds which amounted to 5.682 billion pounds at the end of 1995.
Those assets were estimated to have risen by the end of 1996, Britannic chief executive Brian Shaw said, and updated figures would be released on March 18.
Britannic also announced a restructuring of its long-term funds and the results of a strategic review of its business.
The review will lead to new sales management and premium collection systems, streamlining of head office and investment in market analysis and product research.
The initiatives are expected to cut operating costs by around 25 million pounds, based on 1995 figures.
Britannic said it planned to build on its brand, investment management and distribution skills, financial strength and product development abilities to strengthen its position and improve value to policy and shareholders.
Restructuring the long-term fund will create two continuing "with profits" funds, one for its industrial branch and the other for the ordinary branch -- life and pensions business.
In future at least 90 percent of the surplus in the with profits funds will be allocated each year to with profits policies. The balance will be shareholders' profit for transfer to the profit and loss account.
The company has also created two separate non-profit sub funds -- one for life, one for pensions -- which will contain non-profits business and both of which will be owned by shareholders.
The shareholder transfer for 1996 will be increased by 23 million pounds following the declaration of the 209 million pound special bonus. ($ = 0.621 British Pounds)
Scottish Amicable on Thursday asked for firm offers for the company to be tabled by the end of February as it emerged that more potential bidders had joined the auction for the mutually-owned insurance group.
Three companies were already known to have signed confidentiality agreements which give access to ScotAm's books - Abbey National, Prudential Corp and Australian Mutual Provident (AMP).
But a source close to the deal said that others had also signed the agreements and that potential bidders were now "certainly more than three."
ScotAm said that all interested parties would be requested to table firm offers by February 28.
A spokesman for ScotAm declined to comment on either the number or the identity of companies who had signed the confidentiality agreements.
One possibility is Dutch insurance group Aegon whose acquistion of Scottish Equitable has already demonstrated its ability to provide extra capital to develop the business according to industry experts.
Another firm rumoured to have contemplated a bid, Belgian-Dutch insurer Fortis is reported to have ruled a bid out and Lloyds TSB said earlier this week it was not interested in bidding.
Lloyds chief executive Peter Ellwood said that the company had run a slide-rule over ScotAm but that the bid premium looked too high.
Meanwhile, The Scotsman newspaper on Thursday reported that AMP is considering moving its Bristol-based subsidiary London Life to Scotland if its Scottish Amicable bid is successful.
The paper said that AMP would use Scotland to expand into Europe, and that it placed considerable importance on the Glasgow office of Scottish Amicable Investment Managers (SAIM).
The Prudential and Abbey National are believed to have plans to downscale or close SAIM, the paper said.
Following the receipt of bids, ScotAm will hold further discussions after which bidders will be required to submit final, binding proposals.
At the end of the process, the board will recommend a single proposal and an announcement of the recommended acquiror is expected to be made by the end of March.
Under the terms of the confidentiality agreements the decision of the board is final.
"We believe the process we are publishing today will maximise value for policyholders and will be seen to have done so," ScotAm's chairman Sandy Stewart said.
In a move which may help deflect criticism of the sealed bid process, ScotAm said it would make firm offers public, if required to do so by a bidder.
In addition, the Department of Trade &amp; Industry and an independent actuary will be consulted fully prior to the announcement of the recommended offer.
ScotAm will also outline the board's reasons for its recommendation, the criteria used and summarise the relevant information on all "competitive proposals".
The circular to policyholders outlining the final bid is likely some time in May.
Abbey National sparked the auction at the end of January when it announced it was prepared to pay up to 1.4 billion pounds for ScotAm, barely two weeks after ScotAm unveiled its own proposals to drop mutual status and float on the stock market.
The Abbey offer was topped a week later by the Pru's 1.9 billion bid.
Both companies have said that their offers may be raised when they have more detailed financial information on ScotAm.
Lloyd's of London said on Thursday it had been granted judgements in two test cases against members who had failed to pay debts under the insurance market's reconstruction and renewal (R&amp;R) settlement.
The defendants, Dennis Leighs and David Wilkinson, had claimed they were not liable to pay their premium to Equitas, the company set up to reinsure and run-off pre-1993 liabilities of Lloyd's syndicates.
But the judge, Mr Justice Colman, said that they had failed to establish that any of the grounds argued represented "arguable defences or, if these actions were permitted to go to trial, would have any realistic prospect of success".
Lloyd's welcomed the decision and said it would now be pursuing other non-acceptors.
"This judgement enables Lloyd's to pursue all non-acceptors of the settlement who have argued that they are not obliged to pay their Equitas premium," said Philip Holden, head of Lloyd's financial recovery department.
"Our pursuit will be vigorous and, by virtue of this judgement, will be effective."
He said it was in the interests of all members that Lloyd's now proceeded to recover all outstanding debts.
It originally brought proceedings against three Names but dropped one because of concern over the defendant's age and ill health.
Under the terms of R&amp;R and at the discretion of the Council of Lloyd's, members who have not yet accepted have until February 28 to do so.
The rights to settlement credits or benefits, lost due to non-acceptance may also be reinstated at the discretion of the Council.
Insurance group Guardian Royal Exchange PLC on Tuesday reported a sharp fall in 1996 profits and said it was considering a major acquisition within the next twelve months, possibly in the life sector.
The company blamed tough competition and the worst catastrophe weather claims in the U.S. for 75 years for the profits decline, while bad weather and continuing subsidence losses in Britain also taking a toll.
But news that Guardian may spend around one billion pounds ($1.6 billion) on a life acquisition and disappointment that it had no plans to return capital to shareholders prompted the shares to reverse an initial rise on the back of the results.
The company told industry analysts that a UK life acquisition was top of the list, that it could comfortably spend one billion pounds and would be prepared to spend more if necessary.
Guardian is not a major player in the UK life market and on the plus side an acquisition could give it critical mass and economies of scale.
But the possible goodwill write off such an  acquisition could prompt was a concern, analysts said.
"Guardian looks very expensive on both an earnings and a dividend basis. The asset value is the only rationale as to why the shares are sitting at current levels," said one.
"Any large life acquisition would almost certainly result in paying a very substantial premium to asset value."
The decline in 1996 profits was broadly in-line with market expectations. Despite continuing pressures on margins, Guardian chief executive John Robins said there were bright spots.
The company had seen some hardening of premiums in selected sectors and regions such as British motor insurance and difficult conditions in Germany had not been as severe as some commentators had forecast.
It predicted rates in the motor market could rise by as much as eight percent over the next twelve months with household rates likely to see smaller increases of the order of two percent.
Competition in commercial markets continued to be fierce, though even here there were hopes of an upturn in rates by the end of the year.
For 1996, however, Guardian trading profits were down over 17 percent at 281 million pounds, before restructuring costs of 39 million pounds.
Pre-tax profits including investment gains dropped to 651 million pounds from 812 million pounds last year. Total premium income was down only slightly at 3.73 billion pounds.
While competition had risen and was likely to increase further, Guardian said it was confident about the future and that this was reflected in the increase in the dividend payout for the year by one pence to 10.0 pence per share.
The figures were broadly in line with market expectations although the headline operating profit was flattered by reserve releases to the tune of 10 to 15 million pounds and by a profit contribution from the internal reinsurance operation which may not be repeated.
Progress had been made on the integration of last year's acquisition of Legal &amp; General's commercial business and of the RAC insurance business.
Restructuring of the group's operations in Britain was also moving ahead, the company said.
A new management structure was set up at the beginning of 1997 and cost savings in the next two years are expected to equal this year's 39 million pounds of exceptional charges.
Those charges are expected to cover all the costs required to complete the restructuring over the next 12 to 18 months and while these might include further redundancies, these were unlikely to be of the same order of previous rounds of layoffs. ($ = 0.612 British Pounds)
Insurance group Guardian Royal Exchange Plc on Tuesday blamed competition and bad weather in the United States and Britain for a sharp fall in trading profits for 1996.
But despite continuing pressures on margins, Guardian chief executive John Robins said there were bright spots.
The company had seen some hardening of premiums in selected sectors and regions such as British motor insurance, and difficult conditions in Germany had not been as severe as had some commentators had forecast.
Trading profits for the year, however, were down over 17 percent at 281 million pounds ($458 million), before restructuring costs of 39 million pounds.
Pre-tax profits including investment gains dropped to 651 million pounds from 812 million pounds last year. Worldwide general insurance premium income was broadly unchanged at 2.91 billion pounds.
The figures were broadly in line with market expectations and Guardian shares were trading eight pence higher at 296 pence by mid-morning.
The dividend payout for the year was raised by 11 percent to 10.0 pence per share.
Robins said the results were achieved amid continuing competitive pressure, abnormally bad weather in North America and adverse weather and continuing subsidence costs in Britain.
But finance director James Morley told Reuters that the group expected premiums in the motor and household insurance markets to strengthen in the coming year although commercial rates were expected to continue to be weak.
"In UK household during 1996 we saw a rating environment where prices were going down. The particularly cold spell at the beginning of the year will have reminded people not to underprice household and we would expect the second half of the year to be flattish or slightly positive," said Morley.
Guardian said it wanted its business to grow organically and by acquisition. But it was not prepared to overpay and was determined to write for profit, not volume.
The results included a second half provision for the integration of the Legal &amp; General business and fundamental restructuring of the British insurance business. Robins said he believed they had achieved a great deal in effectively positioning the group for the future.
A new management structure was set up at the beginning of 1997 and cost savings in the next two years would equal this year's 39 million pounds of exceptional charges.
Those charges are expected to cover all the costs required to complete the restructuring over the next 12 to 18 months.
There will be some facility closures and further staff losses to come, said Morley, but he declined to put an overall figure on the number of likely layoffs.
The company said it continued to withdraw from non-core, non-performing markets and had three objectives -- greater attention to customer needs, greater focus on the cost base and increasing return on shareholders funds.
It continued to target increases in premiums only in sectors and regions where it was confident of profitable growth and acceptable underwriting margins.
"Where we have a strategic benefit from being in a market segment, then we will use our market presence to ensure we get the rate we require over the medium term. In the shorter term we will walk away from certain business if we can't get the right rates," said Morley.
($ = 0.613 British Pounds)
Commercial Union (CU) became the latest victim of sterling's recent strength on Wednesday, as the British insurance giant reported a sharp fall in profits for 1996.
A 64 million pound ($104.8 million) currency loss by the company, three-quarters of whose profits come from outside Britain, largely accounted for a near 13 percent fall in operating profits for the year to 444 million pounds.
U.S. weather related losses of 41 million pounds and severe competition in the general insurance market were a further drag on profits.
But overall the results broadly matched market expectations with the life business, which accounts for around 44 percent of premiums, showing healthy growth once currency effects were stripped out.
CU said it intended to continue to expand its life operations to take advantage of its "more consistent profit streams and its exciting growth prospects".
Finance director Peter Foster said the group would not rule out acquisitions to stimulate further growth.
"Our strategy of more emphasis on life business has proved viable so far...we will be looking at any suitable acquisition that we may come across," Foster said.
This might include overseas businesses but the company stressed it did not mean it would grow solely through acquisitions and that the focus remained on organic growth.
According to CU the strength in sterling had masked significant profit rises in continental Europe.
Over the year as a whole, the pound advanced 10 percent against the dollar, 17 percent against the French franc and around 12 percent against the mark.
After adjusting for the exchange rate, overall operating profits were down just three percent on 1995 and life profits 13 percent higher at 241 million.
Despite the underlying operating performance worries about the impact of the currency on CU's net asset value (NAV) prompted a sharp markdown in the shares.
The NAV was down to 545 pence at year-end 1996 from 582 pence a year earlier, though analysts said there had been quite a strong recovery in net asset value in the last six weeks.
By late afternoon, CU shares were 21 pence lower at 669 pence.
In general insurance, good results in France, the Netherlands and Canada helped offset part of the effects of competition in the British market and U.S. weather claims.
Despite this and even adjusting for the currency, general insurance profits were 21 percent lower at 356 million pounds.
Echoing comments from Guradian Royal Exchange (GRE) which reported results yesterday, CU said it was seeing signs of a rise in motor market rates.
Like GRE it expected to see motor rates firming through 1997. Household rates were also likely to edge ahead, particularly given recent storms in Britain and a cold snap at the start of the year.
($ = 0.610 British Pounds)
Prudential Corp Plc, Britain's biggest life insurance group, reported a healthy rise in profits on Wednesday and said British operations were expected to perform strongly again in the coming year.
But the company made no comment about negotiations with the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) over the ownership of so-called orphan assets.
Prudential (Pru) finance director Jonathan Bloomer said discussions with the DTI were continuing, but said it was difficult to say how long they would last.
"We always thought they would take a long time and there's nothing sensible that can be added to that. I think discussions will continue for a while yet this year."
One analyst suggested that it was encouraging that the company had passed up the opportunity to tone down expectations.
The Pru is believed to be looking to free up around three billion pounds ($4.9 billion) of orphan assets -- money built up in with-profits funds surplus to policyholders' needs.
Pru operating profits for the year rose over eight percent to 873 million pounds, with profits from continuing operations of 691 million pounds.
The combination of the confidence about new business prospects in 1997 and a higher-than-expected level of profitable new business in 1996 helped lift the shares by 11 pence to 574 pence.
A 10 percent rise in the dividend to a slightly higher than forecast 17.3 pence per share also provided support.
Pru's chief executive Sir Peter Davis called it a very successful year and said the results demonstrated the strength of the group's core business.
With the disposal of Mercantile &amp; General (M&amp;G) and the launch of Prudential Banking, considerable progress had been made in focusing the group on markets where the Pru had the expertise and the critical mass to generate real value for shareholders, he said.
The sale of M&amp;G for 1.75 billion pounds in December realised a profit of 766 million pounds.
Prudential Banking, launched on October 1, is already processing applications for 103 million pounds of mortgages and has taken 98 million pounds in deposits.
The company plans to expand the product range and move in to the personal loan market later this year.
Bloomer repeated the Pru's interest in establishing the high street distribution network which a building society acquisition would provide. With net cash at year-end standing at 1.1 billion pounds, the group has the financial strength to contemplate such a move.
But Bloomer said it was unlikely to make a move unless it enhanced shareholder value which, given current price levels in the sector, may be difficult to pull off.
The Pru is currently involved in a takeover battle for Scottish Amicable and made an initial 1.9 billion pound offer for the mutually-owned life insurer earlier this month, only 250 million pounds of which will come from shareholders' funds.
Prudential UK operating profits from the insurance business increased eight percent to 398 million pounds and profits for the savings and investment business were 323 million pounds, an increase of six percent.
After cutting Prudential UK's cost base by 170 million pounds over the past four years, it was approaching a point of diminishing returns, though the group was looking to reduce unit costs further, Bloomer said.
U.S. operations Jackson National Life saw operating profits growing 35 percent to $512 million.
While confident about the outlook for the business, Bloomer said growth was unlikely to continue at the 40 percent rate seen in recent years. ($ = 0.610 British Pounds)
Prudential Corp Plc, Britain's largest life insurance group, reported a healthy rise in profits on Wednesday and said it expected British operations to continue to perform strongly in the coming year.
But the company remained tight-lipped about negotiations with the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) over the ownership of so-called orphan assets.
Prudential (Pru) finance director Jonathan Bloomer said discussions with the DTI were continuing, but said it was difficult to say how long they might last.
"We always thought they would take a long time and there's nothing sensible that can be added to that. I think discussions will continue for a while yet this year."
Analysts believe the Pru is looking to free up around three billion pounds ($4.9 billion) of the orphan assets -- money built up in with-profits funds surplus to policyholders' needs.
Pru operating profits for the year rose over eight percent to 873 million pounds, with profits from continuing operations of 691 million pounds. Reflecting the 1996 performance and the group's confidence for the future, the dividend was raised by 10 percent to 17.3 pence per share.
Pru shares gave a muted response to the figures, adding seven pence to 570 pence by mid-morning.
Pru's chief executive Sir Peter Davis called it a very successful year and said the results demonstrated the strength of the group's core business.
With the disposal of Mercantile &amp; General (M&amp;G) and the launch of Prudential Banking, considerable progress had been made in focusing the group on markets where the Pru had the expertise and the critical mass to generate real value for shareholders, he said.
The sale of M&amp;G for 1.75 billion pounds in December realised a profit of 766 million pounds.
Prudential Banking, launched on October 1, is already processing applications for 103 million pounds of mortgages and has taken 98 million pounds in deposits.
The company plans to expand the product range and move in to the personal loan market later this year.
Bloomer repeated the Pru's interest in establishing the high street distribution network which a building society acquisition would provide. With net cash at year-end standing at 1.1 billion pounds, the group has the financial strength to contemplate such a move.
But Bloomer said it was unlikely to make a move unless it enhanced shareholder value which, given current price levels in the sector, may be difficult to pull off.
The Pru is currently involved in a takeover battle for Scottish Amicable and made an initial 1.9 billion pound offer for the mutually-owned life insurer earlier this month, only 250 million pounds of which will come from shareholders' funds.
Prudential UK operating profits from insurance business increased eight percent to 398 million pounds and operating profits for the British savings and investment business was 323 million pounds, an increase of six percent.
After cutting Prudential UK's cost base by 170 million pounds over the past four years, it was approaching a point of diminishing returns, though the group was looking to reduce unit costs further, Bloomer said.
U.S. operations Jackson National Life saw operating profits growing 35 percent to $512 million.
While confident about the outlook for the business, Bloomer said growth was unlikely to continue at the 40 percent rate seen in recent years. ($ = 0.610 British Pounds)
Almost 8 out of 10 people in Britain are opposed to insurance companies using genetic test results as the basis for charging higher premiums or refusing to provide cover, according to an opinion poll commissioned by The Genetics Forum released on Wednesday.
The news comes just a week after the Association of British Insurers (ABI) announced that people seeking life insurance would be required to report the results of any genetic tests to enable insurers to assess the financial impact on the industry over the next two years.
The poll also underlined fears that the ABI's stance would discourage people from undergoing genetic testing with almost three out of ten people asked saying they would not take a test now they are required to disclose the results to an insurer.
This could lead to people being deterred from seeking diagnosis of some treatable conditions or prevent them being able to make informed decisions about starting a family.
According to the ABI guidelines detrimental test results may be taken into account for any type of insurance except life cover linked to mortgages of less than 100,000 pounds though several larger companies have distanced themselves from this.
Standard Life, for instance, has said it would not seek the results of genetic tests for any policies.
Julie Sheppard of The Genetics Forum, a non-profit organisation committed to the socially responsible use of genetic engineering said that the poll showed that the public did not trust insurance companies with genetic information.
"Genetic tests are still in their infancy and their conclusions may remain uncertain and imprecise for many years. Many tests will only tell an individual that they may, as opposed to will, develop a disease in later life."
"It isn't sensible or fair to be charged more for your insurance or refused it altogether on the basis of a condition you may never get."
The Genetic Forum poll also found that almost four out of 10 people would object if a tissue sample which they had given anonymously was used for research without their knowledge or consent.
Seven out of 10 said they would object if their anonymous tissue was sold to a pharmaceutical company for research without their knowledge or consent.
The Genetic Forum said too much was being left to the discretion of insurance companies and individual researchers.
The Human Genetics Advisory Commission (HGAC) set up last year after a British parliamentary committee called for the creation of a body to consider the "broad social, ethical and/or economic consequences of developments in human genetics" meets for the first time on February 27.
Pensions and property group Liberty International Holdings  said on Thursday it might go on the acquisition trail to develop its financial services interests.
The company, 69 percent-owned by South African insurance giant Liberty Life, said it was always open to acquisitions and was willing to use its strong balance sheet to fund them.
"We've got various developments in the financial services area -- unit trusts, pensions and offshore. Those are the areas we want to be in long term and if they lead us into acquisitions that's fine - but we don't feel any pressure to do them," said Liberty managing director David Fischel.
Liberty currently has around 380 million pounds ($619.1 million) in cash on its balance sheet though this may have little bearing on the size of any future acquisition.
"We could spend one billion, two billion or 50 million pounds, it depends on the quality of the acquisition," said Fischel.
Liberty, which has a 72 percent stake in Britain's fourth largest quoted largest property company Capital Shopping Centres, which it floated as a separate company in 1996, launched a new, low-cost pension vehicle -- PensionStore -- in January.
It also controls Portfolio Fund Management Limited, a British unit trust group with some 50 million pounds under management.
In October, the group announced an alliance with British Telecom and post office fund managers Hermes which it promised would "demystify" the British pension market.
At the launch of the venture which offers specialised investment services to the UK pensions industry, Liberty chairman Donald Gordon said he believed pensions would be the fastest growing business in the world over the next 20 years.
The possibility of an acquistion was raised as Liberty reported a seven percent increase in pre-tax profits for 1996 to 100.4 million pounds.
The dividend at 16 pence per share was up 10 percent on the previous year. Liberty shares, however, slipped on the results ending the day 13-1/2 pence lower at 466-1/2 pence.
The advance in profits was helped by the performance of CSC which owns two of Britain's largest out of town shopping centres - Lakeside, Thurrock, east of London, and the MetroCentre, Gateshead, in north east England..
Strong underlying rental growth - up 38 percent at Lakeside - in an improving retailing environment was the main factor behind the performance.
CSC, which has five of the top ten shopping centres in Britain and attracts over 155 million customers annually, was enjoying a "very good growth phase" and had a strong position in the market according to Fischel.
The group could grow it further by expanding existing centres or building new ones such as the 250 million pound shopping centre development at Braehead Park, Glasgow, he said.
Shares in CSC climbed 69 percent to 366 pence in 1996. Adjusting for the CSC share price, Liberty's net asset value per share would have amounted to around 500 pence per share at year-end.
The shares finished the day 1-1/2 pence lower at 392-1/2 pence. ($= 0.613 British Pounds)
Britain's National Westminster Bank Plc said on Friday it would be making a first half provision of 50 million pounds ($81.4 million) after finding mispricing errors in the interest rate options book of its Natwest Markets unit.
The bank said a senior trader had been suspended for "failure to supervise", pending the conclusion of an internal inquiry.
A second trader, who had resigned from NatWest before the errors had been discovered, has been reported to the Securities &amp; Futures Authority (SFA) regulator.
NatWest said that no clients had been affected by the discovery, adding that the Bank of England was being kept informed.
The SFA confirmed NatWest Markets had sent it information which it was now studying.
An SFA spokesman said no statement was planned at the moment.
"Clearly we have to look at the information, assess the situation and decidewhat is the next step foward."
A Bank of England spokesman also declined to comment further.
Dealers were left guessing who was behind the transactions that led to the provision or even whether they took place on an exchange or the over-the-counter options market.
The London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange, the site for a large part of London's options trading, had no immediate comment on the news.
Options are contracts which give buyers the right, but not the obligation, to buy or sell an underlying security at a set price in the future.
Mispricing could arise in various ways, for instance, a broker could be given a price from clients but somehow get the price wrong in executing the trade.
One options dealer suggested it could be down to how an individual dealt with issues such as margins on his firm's trades.
"Basically if you're a senior trader or a top person you can actually change prices or positions for margining," the dealer said.
One highlight of Natwest Markets' results released earlier this week was a 25 percent rise in profits from what it called "other dealing" to 171 million pounds.
That was mainly the result of strong increases in rate risk management products, among them interest rate options.
Derivatives markets have been involved in a string of large losses for companies around the world.
While the exact nature of the "mispricing errors" is unknown at this stage, the memory of Nick Leeson's activities in the derivatives market is still fresh in many minds.
The $1.4 billion losses run up by Leeson eventually led to the collapse of Barings in 1995 and its subsequent acquisition by Dutch bank ING .
The banking industry attracted more bad publicity last year after Morgan Grenfell sacked fund manger Peter Young after it was discovered he had breached rules on investing in unlisted companies.
The huge bonuses paid out by banks has been cited by some as one reason for the high risks some, like Leeson, are prepared to take.
Only yesterday Donald Gordon, a leading figure in the financial services industry and chairman of Liberty International attacked the payment of large bonuses by investment banks as a "massive over-incentivisation of personnel".
He said it had produced an "excessively materialistic culture" in the world's finacial markets which had led to a number of financial accidents and would undoubtedly lead to more dramatic catastrophes in the years to come. ($ = 0.614 British Pounds)
The battle for control of Scottish Amicable became a three-way race on Friday as the deadline for firm offers for the mutually-owned life insurer passed.
The company said that it had received three initial bids from high street bank Abbey National Plc and insurance groups Prudential Corp Plc and Australian Mutual Provident (AMP).
Details of the bids were not released.
While technically the door is still open for other bidders to come in, a source close to the deal said that was "unrealistic" at this stage.
Under the terms of the auction process, ScotAm agreed it would make firm offers public if required by a bidder. It said none had asked it to do so.
With the auction effectively a sealed-bid process and bidders unable to see competing offers, there would appear to be little advantage in one company giving rivals a target by making public its own proposals.
AMP development director Jonathan Schwarz said the group believed it would be wrong to handicap discussions with ScotAm by conducting them in the "glare of publicity".
Both the Pru and Abbey said they had nothing to add to earlier statements.
Discussions with the three companies will be held with a view to obtaining final offers by mid-March.
ScotAm chairman Sandy Stewart said the three proposals represented an "excellent outcome to this phase of the process".
"We can now move on to the next phase with every expectation of delivering maximum value to policyholders."
The company said it would not be expressing an opinion on the merits or otherwise of any proposal until the evaluation process was complete. Last week ScotAm asked for firm offers for the company by today. It hopes to recommend a single proposal to policyholders by the end of March.
National Westminster Bank was among a "about half a dozen" companies which signed confidentiality agreements to gain access to ScotAm's books but pulled out earlier this week. Lloyds TSB has also admitted it ran the slide rule over ScotAm but said it felt the bid premium looked too high. Schwarz said ScotAm was one of a number of current opportunities which fulfilled the group's criteria. He said the group was looking to acquire British and U.S. businesses with quality local management, marketing and distribution in place which, with the backing of AMP's financial strength, could deliver "substantial organic growth". The auction was sparked by Abbey National's bid for the company at the end of January. That came barely two weeks after ScotAm had released its own proposals to drop mutual status and float on the London stock market. Abbey's offer was topped a week later by the Pru's 1.9 billion pound ($3.1 billion) bid, though that figure includes a 1.1 billion pound loan element. Both companies have said that their offers may be raised when they had more detailed financial information on ScotAm.
($ = 0.614 British Pounds)
Stiff competition and severe weather in the U.S. led to a 15 million pound ($24.2 million) fall in 1996 profits from British insurer General Accident Plc on Tuesday, despite a record final quarter.
The weather-related losses knocked 30 million pounds off operating profits which slipped to 421 million pounds over the year.
Echoing recent remarks from rival insurers, chief executive Bob Scott described the market as "increasingly competitive", although he was hopeful of a rise in motor premiums in the coming year.
General Accident intends to raise all motor rates, covering about 800,000 vehicles, by around 3.2 percent in April.
That increase will be reviewed in July and Scott said an eight percent rise for the year as a whole was the sort of increase needed given current market conditions.
The big question is whether such rises stick. Last year's four percent April increase resulted in an eventual rise of between two and three percent.
There were, however, no signs of rate increases in the homeowner or commercial sectors, said Scott.
Despite the fall in 1996 profits and even allowing for a 10 million pound boost from a change in the way the group accounts for overseas earnings, the results were at the top end of market expectations.
Year-end net assets per share, up a slightly less-than-expected three percent at 675 pence by year-end, have since risen to 734 pence.
A 10-1/2 percent increase in the dividend for the year to 34.25 pence per share was also ahead of forecast and by late afternoon the shares had added 11 pence to 848 pence.
Analysts welcomed a resilient underwriting performance, especially in the fourth quarter in Britain and the United States, and the level of profitability in new business in the group's life operations.
"There's some justification in adding some goodwill over the net asset value (NAV) into the share price for future profitable new business in life," commented one analyst.
The acquisition of Provident Mutual in January 1996 helped fuel a 37 percent increase in life and pension profits over the year to 108 million pounds.
Provident contributed 18 million pounds after reorganisation costs of 16 million pounds and Scott said the group was now looking to capitalise on the pension expertise which Provident had brought.
The key for the life company was the profitability of new business, said Scott, but he ruled out any major acquisitions in the drive to expand the business.
"At the present time there's nothing wrong with organic growth in life. We've proved we're capable of achieving that."
The group has set itself the goal of increasing the proportion of more stable life earnings to a level which covers dividends each year. In 1996 the proportion of dividend covered by net life earnings in 1996 was 44 percent.
Scott also dismissed speculation of a merger or takeover involving General Accident.
"We've got the benefits of scale in our major businesses. We don't have to do anything. We'd like to make further acquisitions in the U.S. Midwest but don't see any need to dramatically change our current shape," said Scott.
Investment income over the year was up seven percent but the rise in stock markets to record levels over 1996 has prompted the company to reduce exposure to British and North American equities over the past three quarters and shift money into bonds. ($ = 0.619 British Pounds)
British insurer General Accident PLC reported a fall in annual profits on Tuesday, despite a record final quarter in 1996.
Operating profits slipped 15 million pounds to 421 million ($680 million) although a rise in weather-related losses of 30 million pounds more than accounted for the decline.
The recent strength of the pound was offset by a change to an average translation of overseas earnings instead of a year-end translation which added 10 million pounds to the operating line.
Despite the fall, profits were above market forecasts and a 10.5 percent increase in dividend for the year to 34.25 pence per share also beat expectations.
Net assets per share rose to 675 pence from 653 pence.
By late morning General Accident shares had added 8-1/2 pence to 845-1/2 pence.
General Accident chief executive Bob Scott described the market as increasingly competitive but added that the strategy of focusing on underwriting skills and building the life business was bearing fruit.
Scott said the group wanted to focus life operations in Britain and the goal was to increase the proportion of life earnings to a level that covered dividends each year.
The proportion of dividend covered by net life earnings in 1996 was 44 percent but Scott ruled out any major acquisitions in the drive to expand the business.
"At the present time there's nothing wrong with organic growth in life. We've proved we're capable of achieving that," said Scott.
Provident Mutual, acquired in January 1996, contributed 18 million pounds to the results, net of reorganisation costs of 16 million pounds and General Accident said it was now looking to capitalise on the pension expertise which Provident brought to the group.
The key for the life company was the profitability of new business and the group had done well in a year which included the integration of Provident, said Scott.
Scott dismissed speculation of a possible merger or takeover of General Accident.
"We've got the benefits of scale in our major businesses. We don't have to do anything," he said. "We'd like to make further acquisitions in the U.S. Midwest but don't see any need to dramatically change our current shape."
The rating environment continues to be mixed and General Accident echoed comments from Commercial Union and Guardian Royal Exchange that there were signs of firming motor rates.
"There are certainly signs that in personal motor rating increases are coming through. We're putting another rate increase through in commercial motor," said Scott.
There were, however no signs of rate increases in the homeowner or commercial sectors.
Like other insurers, General Accident results saw an increase in weather losses over the year and said that results from Australia were also disappointing. ($ = 0.619 British Pounds)
B.A.T industries said on Wednesday it was interested in expanding its British life insurance activities through acquisition but had been put off bidding for mutual insurer Scottish Amicable by the price.
B.A.T. Chief Executive Martin Broughton made the comments as the group, which also has extensive tobacco interests, reported a three percent fall in trading profits at its financial services arm.
Those figures included a 160 million pound ($257.8 million) charge for U.S. environmental claims dating back to the 1960s.
"We've said in the past that the portfolio of brands in our British American Financial Services unit would benefit from filling out in the life broker business," said Broughton.
"Too many people were looking at Scottish Amicable, I think it would have turned out to be too high a price."
Scottish Amicable effectively put itself up for sale in February and is considering bids from Prudential Corp, Abbey National and Australian Mutual Provident.
Broughton's remarks mirrored comments made at the half-year stage that the group wanted to build its presence in the independent financial advice sector which accounts for around half of all British life insurance and pension business.
But B.A.T chairman Lord Cairns refused to comment on speculation that the group had approached Commercial Union as a possible partner.
He did say the company remained open-minded about its future structure, leaving the door open to a possible demerger.
B.A.T owns insurance groups Allied Dunbar and Eagle Star in Britain and Farmers in the U.S.
"We are not wedded to a particular structure... We have an open mind," said Cairns.
The unexpected provisioning in the 1996 figures came after a change in the way the group quantified possible environmental claims.
In the past these had been assessed on estimates based on claims experience.
Wednesday's provision followed a study by consultants Tillinghast-Towers Perrin which looked at individual sites in the U.S. to calculate B.A.T's possible exposure.
Given all the available information, the company said today's move would signal an end to such provisioning.
"They do now look fairly well reserved compared with the industry average," one analyst said.
In the United States, many companies have moved across to the more prudent way of reserving now used by B.A.T.
Echoing comments from competitors, Broughton said the general insurance trading environment remained difficult in 1996. The company had seen a slight pickup in motor rates but commercial lines remained very competitive, he said.
Excluding the environmental charge, general insurance profits were up three percent at 686 million pounds while life and investment businesses were up 16 percent at 495 million pounds.
Total premium income rose nine percent to 10 billion pounds.
Analysts said the results and comments on the state of the markets were broadly as expected.
Allied Dunbar trading profits rose 32 percent to 203 million pounds over the 12 months, though the comparison was flattered by a 1995 provision for costs associated with the Securities &amp; Investment Board pensions review.
Eagle Star profits fell 135 million pounds to 85 million pounds with competitive markets and the shedding of unprofitable businesses leading to a 12 percent fall in premium income.
Premium income in Eagle Star's life business was 18 percent higher at one billion pounds.
Profits at B.A.T's North American insurance business Farmers rose nine percent to 632 million pounds. Profits at the general insurance management business rose 12 percent to 476 million pounds and in the life business three percent to 156 million pounds. ($ = 0.620 British Pounds)
Composite insurer Royal &amp; Sun Alliance Group Plc on Thursday reported lower results in its first year since it merged and said it would seek shareholder approval to buy in up to five percent of its shares.
But large provisions for U.S. environmental claims and the impact of the pound's strength took the gloss off the figures reported by the group, formed in a six billion pound ($9.7 billion) merger last year.
Including the increased provisions and 32 million pounds for currency movements, operating profits fell to 706 million pounds from 915 million in 1995 for the combined group.
After an initial gain on the buyback news, the shares closed down 9-1/2 pence at 494 pence.
A lower-than-expected net asset value and a poor performance in the British motor insurance market compounded the market's disappointment.
The 167 million pounds in provisions, largely put aside for U.S. asbestos and environmental claims dating back to the 1960s and 1970s, follows a change in the way the group assesses possible liabilities.
On Wednesday, B.A.T Industries subsidiary Eagle Star set aside 160 million pounds in a similar move.
Both companies have said that they expect it to mark the end to such provisioning.
The dividend for the year was raised to 19 pence per share in line with last year's management forecasts.
The operating figures did not include 201 million pounds relating to consolidation costs, some 30 or 40 million more than analysts had expected.
But management declared themselves pleased with the results and said the group remained on target to achieve the annual cost savings of at least 175 million pounds identified at the time of the merger.
Chief executive Richard Gamble said the integration was progressing well, especially on the staffing front, and the group was continuing to hold on to business.
But he played down the possibility of an acquisition to strengthen its life operations or exposure to Continental Europe, emphasising that the current focus was on integration.
The group had decided to buy back shares in anticipation of continued strengthening of its capital position, said deputy chairman Roger Taylor, who hinted that it could be repeated in the future.
The company will need shareholders' permission at the annual meeting in May before it can carry out the buyback.
U.S. weather costs mirrored the experience of competitors who have all highlighted the impact on profits of some of the worst weather on record in North America last year.
U.S. weather losses at 96 million pounds were 36 million higher for the year. Together with the reserving for environmental claims, this turned a 134 million pound profit in 1995 into a 14 million pound loss.
Profits for the general insurance business as a whole after the changes in claims reserving were 480 million pounds, down from 754 million in 1995.
In Britain, a 28 percent fall in profits reflected an increase in the frequency and average cost of personal lines claims -- motor claims frequency was up eight percent and costs seven percent -- and continuing competition.
The figures also included an unexpected 50 million pound increase in reserves split between reinsurance of the U.S. environmental costs and domestic insurance indemnity.
On a brighter note, Royal &amp; Sun said it was confident motor rates had bottomed out and was scheduling increases for 1997.
Worldwide life profits increased by 15 percent to 213 million pounds and were up 13 percent to 150 million pounds in Britain.
The company said it was appointing Patrick Gillam, chairman of Standard Chartered bank, as non-executive chairman from May 9. ($ = 0.620 British Pounds)
Royal &amp; Sun Alliance Group plc , one of Britain's leading insurers, on Thursday unveiled its first set of annual results following last year's merger and said it would be seeking shareholders' permission to buy in up to five percent of its shares.
But large provisions for U.S. environmental claims and the impact of the pounds's recent strength took the gloss off the figures, the first since Britain's Royal Insurance and Sun Alliance were put together in a six billion pound ($9.7 billion) merger last year.
The 167 million pounds in provisions, largely put aside for U.S. asbestos and environmental claims, follows a change in the way the group assesses possible liabilities.
On Wednesday, B.A.T Industries subsidiary Eagle Star on Wednesday set aside 160 million pounds in provisions.
Both companies have said that they expect it to mark the end to such provisioning.
Including the currency and environmental charges operating profits for the year were 706 million pounds compared with 915 million pounds in 1995 for the combined group.
By late morning Royal &amp; Sun shares were trading eight pence lower at 495 pence despite an earlier jump to the day's high of 515 on initial reaction to the share buyback.
The operating figure did not include 201 million pounds related to the cost of consolidating operations, some 30 or 40 million pounds more than analysts had expected.
But management declared themselves pleased with the results and said the group remained on target to achieve the annual cost savings of 175 million pounds identified at the time of the merger.
Royal &amp; Sun chief executive Richard Gamble said the integration was progressing well, especially on the staffing front, and the group was continuing to retain business.
But he dismissed the possibility of an acquisition to strengthen its life business or exposure to Continental Europe.
"There's an awful lot going on in integrating the two companies and that is where our mind is focused. That's where we have to keep our concentration."
The dividend for the year was raised to 19 pence per share in line with management's forecast at the time the merger was announced last May. Net asset value per share was 399 pence at year-end and had increased to 417 pence by March 5.
"This was a very good operating result in a difficult year which was affected by exceptional weather in the U.S. and continuing soft markets," said Royal &amp; Sun deputy chairman Roger Taylor.
The group had decided to buy back shares in anticipation of continued strengthening of the group's capital position, added Taylor.
The weather related costs mirrored the experience of competitors who have all highlighted the impact on profits of some of the worst weather on record in North America last year.
Profits for the general insurance business after the changes in claims reserving were 480 million pounds, down from 754 million pounds in 1995. Improvements in Canada and Scandinavia were offset by reduced profits elsewhere.
U.S. weather losses at 96 million pounds were 36 million pounds higher than in 1995. Together with the reserving for environmental claims this turned a 134 million pound profit in the U.S. in 1995 into a 14 million pound loss and more than offset an improvement in the core book of business, the company said.
In Britain, a 28 percent fall in profits reflected an increase in the frequency and average cost of personal lines claims, changes in claims reserving and continuing competition.
Life profits increased by 15 percent to 213 million pounds with increases in both British and overseas operations.
($ = 0.620 British Pounds)
The head of the Securities and Investments Board (SIB), Britain's top financial regulator, on Friday criticised slow progress made in compensating victims of pensions mis-selling in Britain, and called on all parties to ensure a speedy conclusion to the situation.
SIB chairman, Sir Andrew Large, said that progress had hitherto been "unacceptably slow" but welcomed signs of increased commitments to a rapid resolution emerging from meetings with major firms.
Large's comments followed a statement from British Treasury minister Angela Knight on Thursday urging the pensions industry to speed up payment to individuals hit by pension mis-selling in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
She said that she was looking for "rapid and decisive results from the pensions industry. Targets will be set to ensure that people are put right".
Large said he was determined to secure redress for those missold personal pensions and welcomed any contribution which helped secure that aim.
"All parties have a responsibility for bringing this review to a speedy conclusion - the industry, the occupational pension schemes, the regulators and the government."
Large is due to stand down as chairman of the SIB in May.
Knight's comments came just two days after the ruling Conservative Party, facing a General Election expected to be held on May 1, announced plans to overhaul the pension system in Britain.
As many as 1-1/2 million people in Britain may have been affected by being wrongly advised to take out personal pensions when they would have been better off remaining in occupational pension schemes.
An industry review was launched in 1994 but only a small proportion of those affected have so far been compensated.
Latest figures on the review published two weeks ago revealed that of nearly 500,000 "priority cases" just over 10,000 people had been offered compensation.
The SIB announced a simplified pensions review process last November in order to break the log-jam on the issue, but the results of this will not start feeding through until later this year.
The Personal Investment Authority, which regulates the sale of investment products to the public, has been holding discussions with major pensions providers to clear the backlog.
About 40 of the largest life companies account for around 90 percent of personal pension business. The discussions are likely to be concluded in the next three weeks.
British insurer Legal &amp; General (L&amp;G) on Thursday reported a double digit rise in profits for 1996 and gave an upbeat assessment of the outlook for the group.
But the company ruled out acquisitions in the life and pensions business and said that despite stiff competition, rising sales and profits would continue to underpin strong dividend growth in the future.
"Our strategy is not dependent on mergers and acquisitions. We don't want our efforts diverted by someone else's problems," said L&amp;G chief executive David Prosser.
The in-line results and prospects for dividend growth helped L&amp;G shares to a new all-time high of 423 pence. By late morning the shares were trading at 415-1/2 pence, a rise of 9-1/2 pence on the day.
Analysts said there were few surprises in the figures, though the dividend was slightly ahead of forecast.
The trebling of the value of new business, was singled out as particularly positive.
"There were exceptional factors in there but nevertheless they've done a tremendous job in taking the new business value up from 20 million ($31.9 million) to 60 million pounds. That was the most striking piece of good news," commented one analyst.
Despite a "very competitive" trading environment, which he said was likely to continue, Prosser expressed satisfaction at the year's performance.
Sales growth continued to be based on competitive pricing and product innovation but reductions in profitability produced by cutting prices were being offset by increases in business volume, he said.
"There's a lot of market share about if you do this business sensibly and we do appear to be in a virtuous circle. We're winning additional sales growth, getting lower unit costs as a result, good growth in embedded value of new business and a good increase in shareholder value," he told Reuters.
More competitive products, supported by lower administartion costs, cost effective sales distribution and good investment returns, result in higher sales, greater customer loyalty and increased profit, said Prosser.
Despite a 54 percent jump in new business in 1996, L&amp;G still had less than five percent market share and the focus going foward would continue to be on growing volume, said Prosser.
But the sharp increases in British bulk annuity business in 1996 which saw single new premium business rise to more than four times 1995 levels, is unlikely to be replicated in 1997.
Operating profits for the twelve months were up over 15 percent to 291.4 million pounds and the dividend was raised 14 percent to 11.13 pence per share.
Profits from life and pensions businesses rose nearly 14 percent to 250 million pounds while general insurance profits rose to 29.9 million pounds from 23.4 million pounds the previous year.
The sale of the company's commercial lines business resulted in a pre-tax exceptional profit of 70 million pounds.
The investment maangement arm had a good year in winning new business and with 48.1 billion pounds under management, a 20 percent increase on the year, the group is now one of Britain's largest fund managers.
Like rival insurers the group had seen some firming in motor rates but this was slow and very selective.
"Household is more dificult. I think some people are seeing rate reductions and some are getting rate increases. Household is becoming more selective on underwriting and pricing of risk -- the shape of pricing is changing," said Prosser.
($ = 0.626 British Pounds)
Three companies are expected to be left in the running for control of mutually-owned life insurance company Scottish Amicable at the deadline for final offers on Friday evening.
Insurance groups Prudential Corp and Australian Mutual Provident (AMP) and high street bank Abbey National have all been working on offers to be weighed up by the ScotAm board and its advisers SBC Warburg.
A source close to Warburgs said a bidder from outside the three front-runers was not anticipated.
The sifting of the offers is likely to take place behind closed doors with not one of the likely bidders opting to make public details of its proposals.
In an effort to deflect criticism of the sealed-bid process ScotAm had agreed to publish details of offers, if required by a bidder.
For the moment, none have asked it to do so.
"We're not at this stage asking for our bid to be revealed. I think everybody's waiting to see whether anyone wants to have a shootout now - it's a bit of a stand off... it's very much a case of playing by ScotAm's rules," said a source close to one of the bidders.
Those rules include confidentiality agreements and an undertaking to accept the board's decision, expected by the end of the month, as final.
ScotAm, based in Stirling in central Scotland, has arranged for an independent tribunal to resolve any dispute arising from the the takeover battle.
The board has repeatedly stressed that the interests of its 1.1 million policyholders will be uppermost in its final decision.
Those interests are not limited to headline figures and upfront payouts but extend to the bidders long-term investment plans.
One of Warburg's main difficulties will be comparing what are likely to be very differently structured proposals, and independent actuaries and the Department of Trade &amp; Industry will be consulted before a decision is made.
Job security for ScotAm's 2,200 employees is also likely to play its part and all three bidders have been quick to calm fears of job cuts at ScotAm.
AMP has said it would consider moving its Bristol-based London Life buisness to Scotland if it won while both Abbey and the Pru have said job preservation in Stirling would be a priority.
AMP, Abbey and the Pru are all that are left of half a dozen companies, including National Westminster Bank and Lloyds TSB who last month signed confidentiality agreements with ScotAm to evaluate the company as a takeover prospect.
The final price -- widely expected to top two billion pounds ($3.2 billion) -- is said to have deterred many from taking their interest further and Lloyds admitted recently that after running the slide rule over ScotAm, it felt the bid premium looked too high.
Both the Pru and Abbey have already said that their original proposals might be increased once they had access to more detailed financial detail on ScotAm.
Abbey's original bid was worth up to 1.4 billion pounds while the Pru's 1.9 billion pound offer included a loan element to bolster ScotAm's life fund.
Those bids came barely two weeks after ScotAm had published its own proposals to shed its mutual status and float itself on the stock market.
AMP has not yet given any indication of what it might be prepared to pay for ScotAm, but is financially strong has said it was keen to make acquisitions in both the British and U.S. market.
($ = 0.627 British Pounds)
Scottish Amicable on Monday confirmed that three companies had submitted final offers for the mutually-owned insurance group by last Friday's bid deadline.
High street bank Abbey National plc and insurers Prudential Corp plc and Australian Mutual Provident (AMP) must now wait until the end of the month to find out who has won the fight for control of the hotly-pursued ScotAm.
None of the bidders have taken up the option of making their offers public, allowing the company's board and its advisers SBC Warburg to weigh up the competing bids behind closed doors.
In an effort to deflect criticism of the sealed-bid process ScotAm had agreed to publish details of offers, if asked to do so by a bidder.
But for the moment all three seem content to abide by Scotam's preference for confidentiality. They have also committed themselves to accepting its decision at the end of March as final.
The board's endoresement will go a long way in ultimately securing ownership of the group but does not guarantee it.
The plans must be approved by three-quarters of those policyholders voting on the board's recommendation (corrects from "Two-thirds of the 1.1 million policyholders who own the company must approve the choice") and after widespread criticism of management's handling of both its own plans to float ScotAm and the auction process, its recommendation is likely to come under close scrutiny.
ScotAm, based in Stirling in central Scotland, has arranged for an independent tribunal to resolve any dispute arising from the the takeover battle and has repeatedly stressed that the interests of its policyholders will be uppermost in its decision.
Those interests are likely to be focussed upon bidders' long-term investment plans rather than upfront payouts and one of Warburg's main difficulties will be comparing very differently structured proposals.
Independent actuaries and the Department of Trade &amp; Industry are to be consulted before the final decision is made.
Job security for ScotAm's 2,200 employees is also likely to play a major part and all three bidders have been quick to calm fears of job cuts.
AMP has said it would consider moving its Bristol-based London Life business to Scotland if it won while both Abbey and the Pru have said job preservation in Stirling would be a priority.
AMP, Abbey and the Pru are all that are left of half a dozen companies, including National Westminster Bank and Lloyds TSB who last month signed confidentiality agreements with ScotAm to evaluate the company as a takeover prospect.
The price tag -- widely expected to top 2 billion pounds ($3.2 billion) -- has been cited by many companies as the reason for withdrawing from the race with acquisition goodwill likely to top one billion pounds.
AMP has made no effort to disguise its desire to expand in both the British and U.S. market and has said it would shift its attention to another target if it were to miss out on ScotAm.
Both the Pru and Abbey have already said that their original proposals might be increased once they had access to more detailed financial detail on ScotAm.
Abbey's original bid was worth up to 1.4 billion pounds while the Pru's 1.9 billion pound offer included a loan element to bolster ScotAm's life fund.
Those bids came barely two weeks after ScotAm had published its own proposals to shed its mutual status and float itself on the stock market.
($ = 0.624 British Pounds)
Scottish Amicable on Monday confirmed that three companies had submitted final offers for the mutually-owned insurance group by last Friday's bid deadline.
High street bank Abbey National plc and insurers Prudential Corp plc and Australian Mutual Provident (AMP) must now wait until the end of the month to find out who has won the fight for control of the hotly-pursued ScotAm.
None of the bidders have taken up the option of making their offers public, allowing the company's board and its advisers SBC Warburg to weigh up the competing bids behind closed doors.
In an effort to deflect criticism of the sealed-bid process ScotAm had agreed to publish details of offers, if asked to do so by a bidder.
But for the moment all three seem content to abide by Scotam's preference for confidentiality. They have also committed themselves to accepting its decision at the end of March as final.
The board's endoresement will go a long way in ultimately securing ownership of the group but does not guarantee it.
Two-thirds of the 1.1 million policyholders who own the company must approve the choice and after widespread criticism of management's handling of both its own plans to float ScotAm and the auction process, its recommendation is likely to come under close scrutiny.
ScotAm, based in Stirling in central Scotland, has arranged for an independent tribunal to resolve any dispute arising from the takeover battle and has repeatedly stressed that the interests of its policyholders will be uppermost in its decision.
Those interests are likely to be focused upon bidders' long-term investment plans rather than upfront payouts and one of Warburg's main difficulties will be comparing very differently structured proposals.
Independent actuaries and the Department of Trade &amp; Industry are to be consulted before the final decision is made.
Job security for ScotAm's 2,200 employees is also likely to play a major part and all three bidders have been quick to calm fears of job cuts.
AMP has said it would consider moving its Bristol-based London Life business to Scotland if it won while both Abbey and the Pru have said job preservation in Stirling would be a priority.
AMP, Abbey and the Pru are all that are left of half a dozen companies, including National Westminster Bank and Lloyds TSB who last month signed confidentiality agreements with ScotAm to evaluate the company as a takeover prospect.
The price tag -- widely expected to top two billion pounds ($3.2 billion) -- has been cited by many companies as the reason for withdrawing from the race with acquisition goodwill likely to top one billion pounds.
AMP has made no effort to disguise its desire to expand in both the British and U.S. market and has said it would shift its attention to another target if it were to miss out on ScotAm.
Both the Pru and Abbey have already said that their original proposals might be increased once they had access to more detailed financial detail on ScotAm.
Abbey's original bid was worth up to 1.4 billion pounds while the Pru's 1.9 billion pound offer included a loan element to bolster ScotAm's life fund.
Those bids came barely two weeks after ScotAm had published its own proposals to shed its mutual status and float itself on the stock market.
($ = 0.624 British Pounds)
Britannic Assurance on Tuesday promised to speed-up the settlement of cases of pension mis-selling as the insurance group reported a near 50 percent jump in its profits for 1996.
The company admitted it had between 12,000 and 13,000 cases classified as priority cases but said that the resources already committed to the issue would help accelerate the resolution of those outstanding.
"Our objective is to complete a substantial proportion of priority cases this year... But that depends not only on our own resources but on the ability of occupational schemes to answer our queries," said Britannic chief executive Brian Shaw.
The industry was now in a much better position to clear up the backlog, he said, thanks to the work done over the past couple of years.
Pension providers have come under increasing criticism for the delays in compensating victims of pensions mis-selling in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
As many as 1-1/2 million people may have been wrongly advised by the financial services industry to take out personal pensions instead of staying in occupational schemes.
A review was launched in 1994 but only a tiny proportion of those affected have so far received compensation.
The Personal Investment Authority (PIA), which regulates the sale of investment products to the public, came under heavy fire last week for its handling of the scandal.
Shaw made his comments as Britannic reported a 47 percent increase in pre-tax profits to 93.9 million pounds ($149 million), helped by a 23 million pound boost related to February's announcement of a 209 million pound special bonus for policyholders.
The bonus resulted from a government clarification of ownership of 'orphan' assets -- money surplus to policyholders' needs in with-profit funds.
Under an agreement with the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), 902 million pounds of the 5.68 billion pound life fund has been attributed to shareholders.
That helped lift the dividend by 82 percent to 28 pence per share, which Shaw said would provide the basis for double-digit dividend increases in the future.
Britannic shares added 12 pence to 871 pence.
Following a strategic review of its businesses, the company said it would be looking to build on its brand, investment management, distribution skills and product development capabilities to deliver enhanced value to shareholders and policyholders.
It also said that reversionary bonus scales for traditional business -- bonuses added to policyholder's investment during the course of the policy -- would be unchanged with modest reductions in annual bonus rates for unitised business.
Terminal bonuses for traditional business have been maintained.
New regular premiums rose 7.7 percent to 37 million pounds in 1996 and single premiums 16.8 percent to 137 million pounds.
It was also announced that William Haynes has been appointed to the Britannic board as sales and marketing director. ($ = 0.630 British Pounds)
About three million Norwich Union  policyholders are to receive free shares under flotation plans announced on Thursday that would value the insurer at about five billion pounds ($8 billion).
Almost two million will receive shares worth 800 pounds on average and another one million "non-profit" members of the mutually-owned insurance group will receive a fixed hand-out of shares worth between 330 and 400 pounds on the group's flotation in June.
The demutalisation and flotation - the first by a British insurer - will rank Norwich among Britain's largest 50 companies.
Norwich Union's 10,000 employees will share in the giveaway, receiving 150 shares each.
Norwich's adviser Dresdner Kleinwort Benson estimated the shares would be worth between 220 and 265 pence each had they been listed at the end of February.
The company, Britain's third largest life insurer, also unveiled plans to raise a further 1.75 billion pounds through an offer of new shares in May.
Existing Norwich members will be able to purchase shares at a discount, the size of which has yet to be finalised.
Members will vote on the proposals at an extraordinary meeting in London on April 18 with the company needing the backing of three-quarters of those who vote.
The size of the planned payouts is comfortably ahead of the 500 pounds many industry observers had expected.
Norwich chief executive Allan Bridegwater said he believed the group's mutual structure was no longer appropriate and that flotation was the best way forward for the company and its members.
"The distribution of free shares represents a significant release of value to qualifying members," he said.
"The discounted offer of additional shares will give members a further opportunity to participate in the future of Norwich Union."
The share handout will be worth a total of around 3.1 billion pounds. The two million with-profit members will receive a minimum of 300 shares with additional shares based on the value and duration of their holdings as of October 1, 1996.
Three-quarters of with-profit policyholders - life insurance policies which share in the investment profits of the life fund through bonuses - will get between 300 and 600 shares. Non-profit members will get a fixed allocation of 150 shares.
Most of Norwich Union's half-a-million overseas members will have the choice of a cash payment instead of free shares.
The flotation will allow the separation of the group's life operations from the risks associated with its more volatile and cyclical general business.
It will also strengthen the group's financial position and allow the core life business greater investment freedom.
The general insurance business will be transferred from the life fund to shareholder ownership and the life and pensions operations to a subsidiary company.
Norwich Union, which reported pre-tax profit in 1996 of 483 million pounds, said it believed the opportunities for sustained growth were good but that results in its general insurance arm would continue to be affected by pricing pressure in 1997, particularly in Britain.
Around 1.5 billion pounds of the money raised under today's plans will go into the with-profits fund to enable the company to continue to keep up policy benefits to existing policyholders.
The balance, less the 120 million pound cost of the flotation, will be used for corporate purposes.
While the company did not rule out the possibility of future acquisitions, it said it had no immediate plans to do so and was not "raising a war chest."
Policyholders circulars were due to be mailed on Thursday and the group expects the prospectus for the additional share offer to be issued in May. ($ = 0.624 British Pounds)
