Hong Kong's pro-Taiwan community flew Nationalist Chinese flags across the territory on Thursday to mark Taiwan's national day for what could be the last time before China takes over in mid-1997.
As champagne glasses clinked amidst the laughter of hundreds of guests, Taiwanese hosts and well-known artistes flown in for the grand event in the posh Regent Hotel fronting the Victoria Harbour, many wondered if they would be able to celebrate in the same style next year.
"We don't know about next year, we have to see how the future Hong Kong government decides," Zheng An Guo, general manager of the Chong Hua Travel Agency, Taipei's de facto mission in Hong Kong, told reporters.
Hong Kong, a British colony for over a century and a half, reverts to Chinese rule on July 1, 1997. Under its Basic Law, a mini-constitution which takes effect from the handover, is a clause that Hong Kong must observe the "one-China" principle.
Communist China regards Taiwan as a rebel province since the Nationalist government fled to the island after losing the Chinese civil war in 1949 and has long sought to push the island into diplomatic isolation.
"I'm not sure what the future is for the celebration of the Double-ten event next year but we really want to continue if we can, even (if it is) within some other format," said Zhang Su Hui, a Chong Hua spokeswoman.
She added the form of the event next year and the fate of future Hong Kong-Taiwan relations would have to be sorted out through high-level cross-straits negotiations.
Pro-Taiwan sources believe the post-handover authority is likely to prevent flashy celebrations of the event -- known as "Double-ten" because it falls on the 10th day of the 10th month -- and to bar public display of Taiwanese flags and gatherings.
While the continued existence of the de facto Taiwanese mission is less in doubt -- so long as it abides by rules -- the raising of the Taiwanese flag, representing clear skies, white sun and the earth flushed with redness of the warrior's blood, would probably not be allowed.
"This is very clear, and the principle is very clear... after 1997, Hong Kong must abide by the 'one China' principle as laid down in the Basic Law," said a spokesman with Xinhua, Beijing's de facto embassy in Hong Kong.
Asked if raising of the Taiwan flag after the handover would contravene the Basic Law, he said, "It should be. After 97, this matter according to the Basic Law would be enforced by the Hong Kong government, the central (Beijing) government would not interfere in this matter."
Norwegian engineer Kvaerner ASA has set its sights on increasing its Asia Pacific portfolio in coming years where burgeoning economies are taking on more sophisticated technology, a senior official said on Friday.
"Our turnover would be up by about 10 percent in 1997, and 50 percent (of the increase would be) generated by Asia," said John Fletcher, chairman and managing director of Kvaerner Corporate Development, the group's corporate development arm.
Total turnover in 1996 would hit US$10 billion, of which 35 percent would be generated from Asia, Fletcher said in an interview. Asia made up less than 10 percent of the company's annual turnover in the early 1990's, he added.
Kvaerner's half-year results in August showed a sharp 56 percent fall in pre-tax profit to 706 million crowns on turnover of 22.94 billion crowns.
Kvaerner, Norway's second largest listed company and an employer to 60,000 worldwide, took over British conglomerate Trafalgar House in April and moved promptly to integrate Trafalgar's engineering and construction units.
Its new organisation framework revolves around six core areas of shipbuilding, process engineering, oil and gas engineering, construction, metals and pulping.
Fletcher said Kvaerner's business was currently very strong in India, Indonesia, Thailand and China.
Kvaerner's involvement in China goes back 40 years and partook in developing the country's steel industry over the decades, Fletcher said.
On hand now are over 30 projects in China -- spanning industrial hardware, power generation, and steel for mostly joint venture companies led by international shareholders -- worth some US$500 million, and the amount was set to increase to US$750 million in 12 months' time, he said.
The company is eyeing a tender expected to open by end 1997 to build hydro-turbine engines for the giant Three Gorges dam project, which would be awarded at the end of 1997.
"Kvaerner is involved in a (proposed) consortium on the Three Gorges project whereby the first set of turbines would be manufactured by Kvaerner and the second set would have local manufacturers involved," Stephanie Chick, business development manager said at the interview.
Fletcher dismissed China's ongoing austerity measures and credit clampdown as "cyclical" and believed the country was now poised to move to some "good years".
The company also has about 30 orders on hand in Indonesia and is involved in building a US$450 million, 120,000 tonne per year facility in Thailand to produce refined copper wire that is scheduled to come on stream in 1998, Fletcher said.
-- HONG KONG NEWSROOM (852) 28436441
A leading Chinese dissident has fled to Hong Kong just days after a colleague in Beijing was sent to a labour camp and is reported to be seeking asylum in the United States, government-funded radio said on Sunday.
Radio Television Hong Kong quoted an unidentified source close to veteran democracy activist Wang Xizhe as saying he had seen Wang in Hong Kong and he appeared to be in good health.
Wang, who would be the second Chinese dissident to escape to the United States via Hong Kong this year, was expected to arrive there within the next 24 hours, a source aligned with the democratic movement in Hong Kong said.
Another Hong Kong source earlier said Wang could leave Hong Kong for the United States as early as Sunday night.
Wang has been missing from his home in the southern Chinese province of Guangdong since fellow activist Liu Xiaobo was arrested in Beijing last Tuesday and ordered to serve three years in a labour camp.
"The source said Mr Wang started planning his departure as soon as Mr Liu was arrested," Radio Television Hong Kong said.
"He confirmed that he had seen the dissident in Hong Kong and that his health was good," it said.
Wang had approached members of the pressure group, the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of the Democratic Movement in China, for help, the radio said.
They in turn had asked the Hong Kong government to help the democracy activist to seek political asylum in the United States, it said. A government spokesman declined to comment.
Dissident Liu Gang fled last May following months of police harassment at his home in northeastern Liaoning province since his release after serving a six-year prison term as a leader of the 1989 student-led demonstrations for more democracy.
Wang Xizhe had been active in recent months, sending several daring open letters to the government.
On September 30, Wang joined activist Liu Xiaobo in issuing a statement urging China's communist authorities to honour a promise in 1945 to give people freedom of the press and speech and to form political parties and stage demonstrations.
In a bold move, the two demanded Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin be indicted, impeached and step down for violating the constitution for saying the People's Liberation Army was under the "absolute leadership" of the party instead of the state.
Wang was paroled in 1993 after serving 12 years of a 14-year term for sedition and remains deprived of his political rights and thus is not permitted to issue such public statements.
Wang, one of China's most outspoken proponents of democracy, began his activities in 1974 when he has one of three authors of a renowned pro-democracy article that was pasted up as a wall-poster in Guangzhou, capital of Guangdong province.
Wang and his two co-authors served several years in jail for his audacity in challenging the authoritarian rule of Chairman Mao Zedong but was released in 1979.
That same year he took part in the Democracy Wall movement in Beijing, but was not arrested until 1981.
His reported escape comes amid a renewed crackdown on China's tiny, struggling democracy movement.
Detained dissident and former student leader Wang Dan faces the capital charge of plotting to subvert the government in a trial that could take place as early as this week based on evidence such as writings critical of the state and accepting funds from abroad, a human rights group said.
A leading Chinese dissident has fled to Hong Kong just days after a colleague in Beijing was sent to a labour camp and is reported to be seeking asylum in the United States, government-funded radio said on Sunday.
Radio Television Hong Kong quoted an unidentified source close to veteran democracy activist Wang Xizhe as saying he had seen Wang in Hong Kong and that he appeared to be in good health.
Wang has been missing from his home in the southern Chinese province of Guangdong since fellow activist Liu Xiaobo was arrested in Beijing last Tuesday and ordered to serve three years in a labour camp.
"The source said Mr Wang started planning his departure as soon as Mr Liu was arrested," Radio Television Hong Kong said.
"He confirmed that he had seen the dissident in Hong Kong and that his health was good," it said.
Wang had approached members of the pressure group, the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of the Democratic Movement in China, for help, the radio said.
They in turn had asked the Hong Kong government to help the democracy activist to seek political asylum in the United States, it said. A government spokesman declined to comment.
However, one Hong Kong source with close ties to the Democratic Movement said Wang could leave Hong Kong for the United States as early as Sunday night.
Wang would be the second Chinese dissident to escape to the United States via Hong Kong this year.
Dissident Liu Gang fled last May following months of police harassment at his home in northeastern Liaoning province since his release after serving a six-year prison term as a leader of the 1989 student-led demonstrations for more democracy.
Wang Xizhe had been active in recent months, sending several daring open letters to the government.
On September 30, Wang joined activist Liu Xiaobo in issuing a statement urging China's communist authorities to honour a promise in 1945 to give people freedom of the press and speech and to form political parties and stage demonstrations.
In a bold move, the two demanded Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin be indicted, impeached and step down for violating the constitution for saying the People's Liberation Army was under the "absolute leadership" of the party instead of the state.
Wang was paroled in 1993 after serving 12 years of a 14-year term for sedition and remains deprived of his political rights and thus is not permitted to issue such public statements.
He has long been one of China's most outspoken proponents of democracy.
Wang began his activities in 1974 when he has one of three authors of a renowned pro-democracy article that was pasted up as a wall-poster in Guangzhou, capital of Guangdong province.
Wang and his two co-authors served several years in jail for his audacity in challenging the authoritarian rule of Chairman Mao Zedong but was released in 1979.
That same year he took part in the Democracy Wall movement in Beijing, but was not arrested until 1981.
His reported escape comes amid a renewed crackdown on China's tiny, struggling democracy movement.
Detained dissident and former student leader Wang Dan faces the capital charge of plotting to subvert the government in a trial that could take place as early as this week based on evidence such as writings critical of the state and accepting funds from abroad, a human rights group said.
The president of Chinese state oil refiner Sinopec said on Thursday the country planned to increase refining capacity and ethylene production to help keep up with rapid economic growth and fast rising energy demand.
"Within the ninth five-year plan (1996-2000), we will boost our economic system and growth...According to the government, we have been designated a pillar industry in the country," said Sheng Huaren, president of China Petrochemical Corp (Sinopec).
Sheng was speaking at the beginning of a five-day exhibition in Hong Kong featuring more than 60 Sinopec subsidiaries, amongst them refiners, petrochemical plants, engineering companies and trade and investment arms.
Sheng outlined Sinopec's expansion plans in two phases.
By 2000, the company will have increased its refining capacity to over 200 million tonnes per year (4.0 million barrels per day  bpd ) while its ethylene production capacity would hit around five million tonnes per year.
By 2010, refining capacity will hit 300 to 350 million tonnes per year (up to 7.0 million bpd) while ethylene production would reach 8.0 to 10 million tonnes, Sheng said.
Sinopec's crude refining capacity is currently 166 million tonnes per year, with ethylene output at 2.36 million tonnes per year.
Fast economic growth is forecast to raise China's oil demand. Experts say refined oil product consumption will rise to 4.2 million bpd in 2000 and 6.8 million bpd in 2010 from 3.07 million bpd in 1995.
The world's sixth largest oil producer, China became a net oil importer in 1993 when brisk economic development outpaced domestic oil output, which is burdened by ageing oilfields and a lack of new discoveries.
While attempts are being made to locate new fields, Beijing has also given a clear mandate for refineries, particularly those along the coast and in big cities, to expand their capacities and upgrade to produce cleaner, more environmentally friendly products.
There are also indications that primary oil refining expansion will be accompanied by upgrading secondary petrochemical plants.
"The code is now "oil and chemical'. Based on experiences of the oil industry elsewhere, such an approach is more realistic, comprehensive," said a senior official with the Fujian refinery, in the southeastern province of Fujian.
China's biggest refinery, Yanshan in Beijing, plans to increase its 9.5 million tonnes per year capacity to 10 million tonnes before 2000, a senior official told Reuters.
Ethylene production, which has been expanded from 300,000 tonnes per year to 450,000 tonnes per year since September 1994, will be increased to 600,000 tonnes during the same period, she said.
In Fujian, the 2.5 million tonnes per year refinery will be expanded to 4.0 million tonnes by 1997. Talks are also underway with foreign investors to expand capacity further to 8.0 million tonnes per year and build an ethylene plant of 600,000 tonnes capacity, a Fujian official said.
Fierce bidders for the 10 billion yuan ($1.2 billion) joint venture plan are Amoco Corp and Exxon Corp.
Yangzi refinery in Nanjing in Jiangsu province plans to raise capacity to 8.0 million tonnes from 5.5 million tonnes per year, a senior refinery official said.
It signed a letter of intent with BASF AG in March to build an integrated petrochemical site. The 50-50 joint venture, worth 50 billion yuan ($6 billion), has 16 plants, one of which is a 600,000 tonnes per year ethylene facility.
(US$1 = 8.3 yuan)
--Hong Kong newsroom (852) 28436441
Emaciated refining margins and soaring demand have forced China to raise domestic prices on gasoil effective Friday, Chinese oil sources said.
Sinopec earlier confirmed the ex-refinery price for diesel, or gasoil, was being raised to 1,990 yuan per tonne from 1,900 yuan.
This is the first time prices have been raised since ceilings on domestic refined product prices were introduced in May 1994 to lock in margins for domestic refiners.  
"If prices are not raised, refineries, especially those along the coast cannot survive," a trader with state refiner Sinopec said by telephone.
"Refineries have lobbied for a long time for prices to be raised," he said, adding mainland refiners had been reeling from soaring crude bills this year.
Chinese refiners have been holding back importS of crude oil in international markets this year.  
Prompt prices of North Sea Brent, a global benchmark, are currently $24.20 per barrel. Earlier this week they hit a five-year high of $25.06 per barrel -- representing a 57 percent rise in prices from the low of this year of $15.93.
Asian benchmark Tapis crude is currently valued at five-year highs of $26.40 per barrel -- a 35 percent increase on the 1996 low of $19.45.
Chinese refineries have also been afflicted by a 110 yuan increase in domestic crude prices since January to between 864 and 794 yuan per tonne.  
Sources said it was not immediately clear whether prices of other petroleum products would move up in tandem as Beijing had initially been reluctant to approve the diesel increase due to fear of causing an inflationary backlash.
Other Sinopec sources said the move may be intended to encourage domestic production of more gasoil, over higher-valued products such as gasoline.
"Sales of gasoil are very brisk, the moment it's out it's sold, refineries are just not producing enough to satisfy demand," a source with the coastal Fujian refinery said.
--Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 28436441
The sentencing of Chinese dissident Wang Dan to 11 years in prison in Beijing on Wednesday sparked fears in Hong Kong about curbs on freedom when the territory reverts to China next year.
More than 100 demonstrators marched to China's diplomatic mission in Hong Kong to protest against the verdict and a human rights group vowed to lobby for a resolution to be passed at the United Nations condemning China's human rights record.
"Wang Dan is innocent. Release Wang Dan," protesters shouted as they marched to the headquarters of Xinhua news agency, Beijing's de facto embassy in the British colony.
There they joined other campaigners in a candle-lit gathering.
A Beijing court found the 27-year-old Wang guilty of conspiring to subvert the government after a trial lasting only four hours. Xinhua said the trial proved he had received funds from hostile overseas forces, aided the families of jailed dissidents and set up an "opposition force" by uniting illegal organisations.
Wang had earlier served four years for his role in the 1989 pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing crushed by the army with heavy loss of life.
"We worry that the Chinese government (would) apply a similar standard in Hong Kong," legislator Bruce Liu of the Association for Democracy and People's Livelihood said.
Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten said: "I recognise the very considerable concern that many people in Hong Kong, and many people around the world, feel about a sentence imposed on a young man for activities which in most places, including Hong Kong, would be entirely legal."
"By any legal standards, today's trial of Wang Dan was a farce," said Robin Munro, director of the Hong Kong office of Human Rights Watch Asia.
"Clearly, its sole purpose was to put Wang Dan behind bars for as long as possible with the minimum legal fuss and bother."
While Hong Kong has been promised a high degree of autonomy for the next 50 years under a Sino-British handover treaty, many doubt whether the freedoms now enjoyed will be preserved.
Munro said his organisation would lobby the United States and European countries to pass a resolution at the United Nations condemning the human rights situation in China.
The sentencing of Chinese dissident Wang Dan to 11 years in prison in Beijing on Wednesday sparked fears in Hong Kong about curbs on freedoms when the territory reverts to China next year.
Hong Kong activists denounced the verdict, and a human rights group vowed to lobby for a resolution to be passed at the United Nations condemning China's human rights record.
A Beijing court on Wednesday found the 27-year-old former student leader Wang guilty of the capital offence of conspiring to subvert the government.
Wang, who faced a potential maximum penalty of death for the charge, was also stripped of political rights for two years, a typical Chinese punishment for critics of communist rule.
The verdict, at a trial lasting less than four hours, raised an outcry in the British colony, which returns to Chinese rule in 244 days.
"We worry that the Chinese government (would) apply a similar standard in Hong Kong," legislator Bruce Liu of the Association for Democracy and People's Livelihood said.
"Then the freedom of Hong Kong will be limited and (people) will be charged if we openly criticise the Chinese government."
Pro-democracy activists who staged an overnight vigil in front of Beijing's de facto embassy in Hong Kong shouted slogans when they heard the news about Wang on the radio.
Robin Munro, director of the Hong Kong office of Human Rights Watch Asia, said the trial was extraordinarily short for what was deemed the most serious offence in China's criminal law.
"By any legal standards, today's trial of Wang Dan was a farce. Clearly, its sole purpose was to put Wang Dan behind bars for as long as possible with the minimum legal fuss and bother," Munro told Reuters.
"What more evidence does the international community now need before it will wake up to the fact that (Beijing) is not advancing towards a more liberal regime...but is becoming less tolerant of peaceful political opposition and absolutely determined to silence critics by any means possible?" he said.
While Hong Kong has been promised a high degree of autonomy for the next 50 years under a Sino-British handover treaty, many doubt whether the freedoms now enjoyed will be preserved.
Munro said his organisation would lobby the United States and Europe to pass a resolution at the United Nations condemning the human rights situation in China.
Hong Kong activists also planned a demonstration in front of China's mission on Wednesday night, and another on Sunday.
Royal/Dutch Shell's plan to build an oil refinery in China inched closer to reality on Monday when Chinese oil officials revealed Beijing was close to giving its long-awaited approval.
A senior Chinese oil official involved in the US$6 billion refinery and chemical complex plan told Reuters that Beijing was poised to give its stamp of approval before the end of 1996.
"From what I know, it will be approved very soon by the Chinese government," the official said by telephone in Beijing.
"It will probably be this year," said the official.
The petrochemical complex, planned for Huizhou, in southern China's booming Guangdong province, has been on the drawing board since the late 1980s. A feasibility study report was presented to Beijing in February 1994.
Shell plans to hold 50 percent in the complex and China National Offshore Oil Corp (CNOOC) 20 percent, while the Guangdong provincial government, China Merchants Holding Company and state refiner SINOPEC each would have 10 percent.
"The Chinese side and Shell have discussed this for several years. Both sides have spent a lot of effort, money," said the official, who declined to be named.
If successful, the Shell plant would be the second joint venture refinery in the country to involve foreign participation. The 100,000 barrel per day Dalian refinery in northern China began trial runs in October. France's Total holds 20 percent of that facility along with various Chinese partners.
Indications that fresh developments on the long-stalled project might soon emerge came in September when a top Shell official met Chinese Premier Li Peng to discuss the company's future cooperation with China.
The project figured highly on the agenda when John Jennings, chairman of Shell Transport and Trading Co, met the Chinese premier in Beijing, oil sources earlier disclosed.
"That clearly was a sign that both sides were positive about the project," said a Shell spokesman by telephone.
Beijing's positive stance was spurred by the overriding concern that the country needed to increase its oil production and refining capacity to meet rising oil demand, the Chinese oil official said.
China's oil consumption is forecast to explode in the next few years, fuelled by economic reforms.
Experts estimate refined oil product consumption would grow at an average yearly rate of 5.7 percent during 1995-2000, reaching 4.1 million bpd in 2000 and 5.3 million bpd by 2005.
To meet rising demand, China would need to import 40 to 50 million tonnes of crude oil by 2000 compared with 17.09 million tonnes in 1995, experts said.
The World Bank has said China would overtake the United States as the world's biggest economy within the next generation and foreign oil companies are keen to tap its domestic market by building new refineries.
Shell's project has faced countless hurdles since the early 1990s, from high costs to strained bilateral relations.
The project was kept on tenterhooks in early 1993, when Sino-British ties plunged to a low over Hong Kong after Governor Chris Patten introduced democratic reforms in the colony, which reverts to Chinese rule in mid-1997.
China's credit-tightening policy in 1994 and centralisation of the country's oil policy in the same year erected further hurdles for the costly joint venture project.
"This project was initially thought to be gunned down... because it was too costly. But now, they want to go ahead with it," a source with state refiner SINOPEC said by telephone.
At the same time Shell started a long-drawn-out fight for more access to the booming domestic market in China.
Some Chinese officials are known to be reluctant to giving foreign oil companies toeholds in the massive market while others preferred foreign investments be channeled into upgrades of older refineries.
A Shell spokesman in Hong Kong said the company was hopeful of a speedy decision from Beijing.
Details of the joint venture have still to be worked out and the petrochemical complex, which would take at least four to five years to complete, would be ready only after 2000, Chinese oil sources said.
China, in a bid to boost the its aerospace industry, this week put on what has been touted as the biggest and costliest airshow it has ever held.
"It has been a dream for years for China's aerospace community to host a grand international airshow," Liang Guangda, vice-chairman of the organising committee of Airshow China '96 said on Wednesday.
"(It) will demonstrate the great success of China's reform and opening-up and improve understanding between China and aeronautical communities around the world," Liang said.
The six-day airshow at Zhuhai airport in southern Guangdong province, which started on Tuesday, is estimated to have cost China 350 million yuan ($42 million), organisers said.
The show brought together 300 domestic and foreign aircraft and parts producers, including heavyweights like Boeing, Airbus and McDonnell Douglas.
Held over a 53,000 square metre site overlooking the South China Sea, China put on show its premier jet fighter the China F-8II, and the Russian SU-27 fighter jet, of which China is known to have sizeable numbers.
And standing prominently in the large open grounds was China's space rocket, the Long March Number 2.
The event has been a venue for local and foreign aviation companies to sign joint venture agreements.
Collins Avionics &amp; Communications Division, a unit of Rockwell International Corp said on Wednesday that it signed a deal with two Chinese parties Shanghai Avionics Corp and Shanghai Broadcast Equipment Factory to develop a tracking system, normally used in aircraft, for ships and cars.
They would form a new joint venture company Shanghai Rockwell Collins Navigation and Communications Equipment Co Ltd in Pudong, Shanghai, to develop the product.
The device, called a global positioning system (GPS), can be used to track location, read tide changes and fuel consumption.
China, eager to make the airshow a biennial event, has left little to chance. Work started in May this year, beginning with building of two large exhibition halls and thousands have been recruited to put together the show, organisers said. (US$1 = 8.33 yuan)
Air China, China's largest carrier, plans to increase its international routes next year and will boost its fleet with the addition of five passenger planes, a senior manager said on Wednesday.
"We would be concentrating on expanding our international routes within the ninth five-year plan (1996-2000)," said Zhang Jinming, general manager of the airline's publicity centre, told Reuters at the China Airshow '96.
The carrier would be starting flights from Beijing and Shanghai to Los Angeles on June 29, 1997, and planned to start routes next year from Beijing to Fushan in South Korea and to Brazil, Zhang said.
The five-day airshow at Zhuhai airport in southern Guangdong province is touted as China's largest and costliest aviation and aerospace exhibition to date, bringing together domestic and foreign aircraft and parts producers.
Increasing demand for domestic and international travel since the start of rapid economic reforms has also boosted China's civil aviation industry. The country now has 30 passenger carriers.
Air China, established in 1955 and China's longest-running carrier, currently flies 44 international and domestic routes, Zhang said.
Flights from China to Los Angeles would either be two or three times a week, he said, adding that the launch dates for service to South Korea and Brazil have yet to be finalised.
The airline, which has a fleet of 64 Boeing passenger jets, would also be taking delivery of three Airbus A340 passenger planes and two Boeing 747s in 1997, Zhang said.
Zhang said the proliferation of Chinese carriers in recent years had given way to cut-throat competition.
"Because of competition, some companies have slashed prices. For us, we have cut by similar amounts, " he said. But he added that the company, given its long and proven track record, was more keen to conduct business based on reputation.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6441
China would, if requested by Hong Kong, provide its support to stabilise fluctuations in the territory's financial markets after the handover next year, China's central bank governor said on Wednesday.
"In case of need, the People's Bank of China will, at the request of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) and in accordance with the Basic Law and market practices, provide its support," said Dai Xianglong during a dinner speech to the Hong Kong Association of Banks.
But Dai said he believed the HKMA was fully capable of handling fluctuations in Hong Kong's financial markets around the handover.
The British colony reverts to Chinese rule at midnight on June 30, 1997. Under joint Sino-British treaties, Hong Kong will maintain its own separate financial regime and currency.
Dai did not elaborate on what measures the central bank would take if the need arose.
In response to reporters questions, Dai said there was no truth in recent press reports that China was putting together a 300 billion yuan fund to help stabilise Hong Kong's financial markets after the handover.
"I don't know where those reports came from. There is no such thing," Dai told reporters at a press conference after the dinner.
China's central bank was determined to let Hong Kong run its own financial system, he said.
"The People's Bank of China will not replace the Hong Kong Monetary Authority and will not set up any branches in Hong Kong," Dai said. "Mainland financial institutions in Hong Kong will not enjoy any special privileges. They will be subject to the same supervision of the financial regulatory authorities of Hong Kong on the same regulatory standards."
He also said Beijing would not levy any tax in Hong Kong nor would it, for any reason or in any manner, use Hong Kong's Exchange Fund or other assets.
Dai said mainland companies participating in Hong Kong's market would be on the same footing as foreign or Hong Kong firms.
Addressing concerns that Shanghai would overtake Hong Kong in financial importance, Dai said Shanghai's financial status would be enhanced in the future.
"However, for a relatively long period of time, it (Shanghai) will not be an international financial centre, let alone replace Hong Kong," he said.
Dai also said there was a close business relationship between China and Hong Kong.
Hong Kong investment in China reached US$78.6 billion by the end of 1995, accounting for 58 percent of total foreign investment in the mainland.
In 1995, 90 percent of syndicated loans in China were arranged in Hong Kong and 90 percent of Chinese enterprises listed overseas chose to list in Hong Kong.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6441
When outgoing Chief Justice Sir Ti Liang Yang joined the contest to become Hong Kong's first local leader, he opened up a competition which had been seen as a clash of business titans.
Yang, 67, resigned in September as Chief Justice in a bid to become Hong Kong's Chief Executive and step into Governor Chris Patten's shoes when the British depart at midnight next June 30.
A prim, avuncular figure, he dropped his knighthood title "Sir" in October, choosing to be addressed as "Mister".
He was knighted in 1988, the year he became the first Chinese to head the judiciary under British rule.
The former judge's nearest rival is regarded as shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa who, until Yang joined the fray, had faced a rival businessman, Peter Woo. The latest public popularity poll gave Yang 42.6 percent, well ahead of Tung's 32.9 percent.
Woo, rated third, and former appeals court judge Simon Li, rated fourth, are regarded as unlikely winners in the eyes of the Hong Kong public, who see the two laggards more as spoilers than odds-on favourites for the leadership mantle.
However, it is not the public who will be casting the votes when the winner emerges on December 11, but the 400 members of a China-controlled Selection Committee.
Trying to prove he has the common touch, Yang made a show recently of moving out of his palatial official residence on Hong Kong's Peak, along with his chauffeur-driven Jaguar, and moved into a rented apartment.
He then went on a demonstrative jaunt around the territory on public subways and ferries. But days later when he went to tour slums, he arrived in a chauffeur-driven Mercedes.
"I never imagined they were so poor," he said after visiting a "cage home", a small room with rented caged-in bedspace that can be home to a dozen people.
Yang stresses his "neutral" background. "I have no business affiliation. I have no direct official connection with the civil service," he said.
"To that extent, I am very neutral and therefore I think I shall be able to adopt an independent view on matters and judge matters on their merits," Yang said.
Born in a privileged family and remembered by his former teachers in Shanghai as a thoughtful, intelligent student, Yang and his family moved to Hong Kong after the 1949 communist takeover on the mainland.
The soft-spoken, bespectacled Yang has promised a "moderately conservative" style of rule, without drastic changes.
"If I were to become Chief Executive, I'm at the head of a moderate, relatively conservative government," Yang said.
"I don't want to see more great challenges or great reforms over the initial couple of years after 1997," he said.
He apparently had in mind the political landscape before Patten arrived and spearheaded democratic reforms to the approval of many in Hong Kong but to China's utter fury.
Yang, a self-declared Chinese patriot, provoked a storm late last year when his misgivings about the territory's much-coveted Bill of Rights, spoken in private conversation to a senior Chinese official, were leaked to the media.
It pushed him into the limelight and attracted accusations of toadying to Beijing. Some pressure groups called for him to resign, which he promptly rejected.
Yang, who once described himself as a "bridge between the East and the West", appears to have ridden that storm, as the popularity polls indicate.
Pro-democracy demonstrators stormed into a plush Hong Kong conference centre on Friday in an attempt to disrupt a historic meeting convened by China to choose Hong Kong's future leaders.
They were stopped by police before reaching the meeting, inaugurated earlier in the day by China's Foreign Minister Qian Qichen.
Protesters had gathered before dawn outside the Hong Kong Convention Centre where the 400-member Selection Committee was due to start its month-long mission to select the territory's Chief Executive and 60 members of a replacement legislature.
As delegates were returning from lunch, about a dozen demonstrators plunged through a side door of the convention centre and were chased up escalators by police.
They managed to reach the sixth floor, one floor away from the meeting, before at least seven were seized by police as they unfurled banners and shouted slogans.
Eyewitnesses said that two prominent members of the Democratic Party, Andrew To and Chan Kwok-leung, and independent activist Wong Chung-ki, were among those detained in the building.
In a second attempt to storm the building, three screaming demonstrators were dragged away by police on the street outside.
Scuffles ensued and at least one policeman was slightly injured when up to 40 chanting protesters surged against crowd control barriers, waving models of black coffins above their heads to symbolise the death of democracy.
Some of the demonstrators had camped overnight outside the building where Britain will formally return its colony to China in 228 days' time.
They were surrounded by police at dawn and herded behind barriers across the road.
Hong Kong's pro-democracy lobby has attacked the selection process and refused to take part in the selection committee which they have branded as undemocratic.
They are adamantly opposed to China's plan to dissolve the elected legislature and replace it with an interim provisional chamber until new elections are held.
Waving banners and using loudhailers, demonstrators chanted "We want a directly elected legislature" and "We reject the reversal of democracy".
Some of them held up black boxes, saying "This is a coffin. It represents the death of democracy and freedom in Hong Kong."
Members of the Democratic Party had planned to pass a letter to Qian but were unable to get past police lines. An official eventually came out to accept the letter.
"We hope you will exchange views with Hong Kong people on the setting up of the provisional legislature and selection of the Chief Executive," the letter said.
The Selection Committee was holding a first round of voting on Friday to narrow down the list of candidates to step into the shoes of colonial governor Chris Patten when British rule ends at midnight on June 30 next year.
To qualify, candidates for the job of Chief Executive must be nominated by at least 50 members of the committee.
Two business magnates and two former judges are regarded as the front-runners in the race. The Selection Committee meets again on December 11 to pick the winner.
China's Foreign Minister Qian Qichen was greeted by angry protesters on Friday when he arrived to open a historic meeting to choose Hong Kong's future leaders.
Police scuffled with demonstrators when they blocked access to the Convention Centre, where Britain will formally return its colony to China in 228 days' time.
Qian will preside over the 400-member Selection Committee, which began its month-long mission to select the Chief Executive and 60 members of a replacement legislature.
A group of about 30 police surrounded a handful of student activists and herded them towards barricades where other protesters were sequestered. Many had spent the night on a protest fast outside the building.
Hong Kong's pro-democracy lobby has attacked the process and refused to take part in the selection committee which they have branded as undemocratic.
They are adamantly opposed to China's plan to dissolve the elected legislature and replace it with an interim provisional chamber until new elections are staged.
One student was pushed to the ground before being hauled over the barricades into the cordoned-off area by other protesters. "I am very frightened," the university student said. "I don't know why they pushed me."
Waving banners and using loud hailers, about 40 demonstrators chanted "We want a directly elected legislature" and "We reject the deterioration of democracy".
Police flung themselves against the barricades to hold back surging demonstrators, some of whom held up a large black box.
"This is a coffin. It represents the death of democracy and freedom in Hong Kong," one demonstrator said.
Members of the Democratic Party had planned to pass a letter to Qian but were unable to get past police lines.
"We hope you would exchange views with Hong Kong people on the setting up of the Provisional legislature and selection of the Chief Executive," the letter to Qian said.
The Selection Committee is due to hold a first round of voting on Friday to narrow down the list of candidates to step into the shoes of colonial governor Chris Patten when British rule draws to a close at midnight on June 30 next year.
To enter the final run-off for the job, a candidate must be nominated by at least 50 members of the committee.
Two business magnates and two former judges are regarded as the frontrunners in the race.
The Selection Committee meets again on December 11 to pick the winner.
Commercial sponsors have flocked to the Portuguese enclave of  Macau to back Sunday's annual Grand Prix despite fears that China wants to steal the show.
Fans of Asia's answer to Monte Carlo fear a Formula One track, recently constructed just across the border in the southern Chinese city of Zhuhai, will seduce sponsors and signal the death knell for Macau's Formula Three race.
Macau has no special track with the race run through the enclave's twisting streets.
But the concerns have not materialised this year at least and Macau is festooned with banners, kiosks and giveaways from sponsors including French oil concern Elf, Budweiser and Corona beer, watchmaker Omega and Japanese tyre manufacturer Yokohama.
"Zhuhai hasn't really affected Macau because most of its sponsors are here for very specific reasons," said Stephanie de Kantzow, an organiser of the Macau Formula Three Grand Prix.
The annual event, about 60 kilometres west-southwest of Hong Kong, started in 1954 and many of the world's top drivers have cut their teeth on the tricky 6.2 km (3.8 miles) Guia street circuit. Double Formula One world champion Michael Schumacher, and current Formula One champion Damon Hill are past Macau competitors.
China also insists it is not seeking to edge Macau out of hosting international motor racing.
"We won't affect Macau. Macau's speciality is in the Formula Three, our aim is to host Formual One and the GT (Global Touring) Rally," Yu Binglin, vice-mayor of Zhuhai, said in a recent interview.
Elf, one of the event's major sponsors, said there was no reason for it to pull out of Macau even though another race track has sprung up in China.
"Macau has a history of automobile racing. As long as Formula Three Grand Prix exists in Macau, Elf will be present in Macau. Business and selling products is one thing, sport is another," Michael Bonnet, Elf's director of commercial activities told Reuters.
"What we wish to build in Asia are several (motor racing) schools to develop young drivers from Macau and rest of Asia ... we want to find potential champions in Asia."
Elf sponsored a Formula Campus Challenge in early November at the China Zhuhai 1996 International Race.
Royal/Dutch Shell, which lost its bid as fuel sponsor to Elf in 1995, said it would tender for the 1997 Macau race.
"Macau and Zhuhai have their individual merits, like individual tenders. Macau belongs to our Hong Kong business (budget) rather than China. We'll try to do it next year," Albert Wong, a spokesman for Shell, said earlier last week.
But China, which is determined to muscle its way into the glamourous circuit of international motor racing, is expected to give Macau a good run for its money.
Zhuhai, just 15 km (9 miles) northeast of Macau, boasts a 4.32 km dedicated racing circuit.
The Federation Internationale de L'Automobile (FIA) is conducting a study on whether its is up to standard for endorsement as a suitable Formula One venue.
FIA is also discussing with Chinese officials Zhuhai's possible hosting of a Formula One race in 1997, a senior Zhuhai government said.
"What Zhuhai has done is that it has opened up a whole new area of sponsorship. People who hadn't sponsored car racing before seem to be coming to Zhuhai to see if there's a possibility of being involved in sponsorship," de Kantzow said.
Britain and China have agreed to work on a new anti-espionage law in Hong Kong, to take effect after the colony is handed back to Beijing next year, a Chinese official said on Friday after three days of negotiations.
Chinese Ambassador Zhao Jihua, China's team leader in the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group (JLG) talks, said the countries agreed that Britain's official secrets act would be localised.
"The official secrets act is a British law...which was extended to Hong Kong. Hong Kong has not got its own official secrets act so we are talking about the localisation of the act in Hong Kong," Zhao told a news conference.
But Beijing also warned Britain not to rock the boat by making any major legal changes on its own before the territory of 6.3 million people reverts to China next July 1.
Speaking amid heightened anxiety over the handover of Hong Kong to Chinese rule, Zhao also tried to reassure local people they would continue to have complete freedom of movement after 1997.
"For Hong Kong residents, they can rest assured that the freedom of entry and exit into and out of Hong Kong will continue to be guaranteed," Zhao said.
But Zhao said Chinese negotiators had protested to Britain about a draft anti-subversion bill unveiled by the colonial administration last week, a law that sets legal markers against China-style jailings of dissidents.
China reacted angrily to the move when it was announced. Britain has accused China of blocking efforts to draft laws on subversion, sedition and treason for the handover.
Zhao said Britain had violated the 1984 Joint Declaration, the Sino-British handover treaty, and Hong Kong's future constitution, the Basic Law.
"During the plenary session, the Chinese side pointed out to the British side that the British action is in fact unilateral change in the law previously enforced in Hong Kong without consultation and consensus with China.
"This is a breach of the Joint Declaration. This act is attempting to legislate on behalf of the future Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China. In essense this is an act which is in contravention of the Basic Law.
"Such an act will never be acceptable to the Chinese side and the British side has to bear full responsibility for all the consequences," Zhao said.
He said Beijing hoped there would be no more "disturbances" because it ran against the aim of having a smooth transition.
"We certainly hope it won't affect our relations. But I can't deny that it will definitely affect future discussions."
Hong Kong's lawmaking chamber suffered a blow last week when its speaker broke ranks to vie for a seat in an interim body Beijing plans to install in the territory next year, political analysts said on Sunday.
Andrew Wong, Legislative Council president, made an about-turn when he said he was seeking a seat in the Provisional Legislature, a body he denounced during 1995 elections.
But his move to join 31 colleagues seeking seats in the provisional body, which China will put in place of the Legislative Council, threatens to widen schisms already dividing the chamber, commentators said.
"Cracks which have already emerged within the Legislative Council over the bid by some members for a seat on the Provisional Legislature will widen in the next six months," said Chris Yeung, political commentator with the Sunday edition of the South China Morning Post newspaper.
Yeung warned of a flurry of motion debates, adding that "the normal operation of the Legislative Council will be adversely affected to a great extent, if not paralysed".
China, angered by a string of democratic reforms implemented by colonial Governor Chris Patten, has vowed to disband the present elected legislature and replace it with the provisional assembly when Hong Kong returns to Chinese rule in mid-1997.
On Wednesday, the Selection Committee, carefully assembled by China, is expected to choose the man who will succeed Patten as the territory's first post-colonial leader.
The committee's next task is to name the 60-member Provisional Legislature on December 21.
Wong, denounced by some fellow legislators, would not say whether he supported the Provisional Legislature, but he tried to convince reporters he would remain an impartial leader of the existing chamber.
"You ought to wait until I act partially -- and when that happens, criticise me and I will retract my decisions and previous rulings," Wong told reporters on Saturday.
While it is not yet clear how and where the future Provisional Legislature will meet and operate before it actually assumes office next July 1, observers said the existence of two lawmaking bodies cannot auger well for the territory.
"In any country, when you have two bodies from which laws emanate at the same time, there's going to be some confusion and dispute," said Michael DeGolyer, associate professor at Hong Kong's Baptist University, who is in charge of a long-term study on the transition.
"For the next six months, we're obviously going to be in a very confused state. Normally this causes all kinds of political and economic chaos."
Parcels giant DHL Worldwide Express, which has had its foot through the door of Eastern and Central Europe since the mid-1980s, was braced to break even on growing regional business by 2000, a senior executive said.
"I would say that certainly by the year 2000 we would be in a breakeven position as a region in its own right," said Peter Davies, regional director of the European rim, during an interview with Reuters on Monday.
Turnover generated from DHL's business in Eastern and Central Europe, including the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), would total US$155 million in 1996 compared with US$110 million in 1995, and hit US$200 million in 1997.
The breakeven comes after years of losses from the late 1980s when the region plunged into massive changes with the fall of the Berlin Wall and the break up of the former Soviet Union.
Davies, responsible for Eastern and Central Europe including the CIS, said DHL was well aware of short-term difficulties but had maintained operations in the region with its sights set on the long term.
"If you go into the market to make a fast buck, then you are in there for the wrong reason...you have to have a long term view to that," Davies said.
"DHL doesn't make a profit as such, but it's okay, we know that. We have a long-term investment plan," he said.
But staying power of the company, which employs some 3,500 people in the region, might just be starting to pay off having captured 75 percent of market share there.
Growing foreign investments by its clients in the more mature economies of Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic as well as the CIS have meant more business, Davies said.
And in places like the former Yugoslavia where basic infrastructure and services were not well in place, delivery services were seen as particularly critical, he said.
The company has invested some US$46 million through expanding facilities and aircraft purchases in 1996 for Eastern and Central Europe and topped off another seven percent of the amount in training.
It now operates in 165 locations in the region and would add another 35 stations in 1997, Davies said.
"We have invested much, especially in the countryside and the next stage would be expansion of facilities," he said.
--HONG KONG NEWSROOM (852) 28436441
The United States envoy in Hong Kong reminded China on Tuesday of its pledge to preserve Hong Kong's "vital" freedoms after Britain hands the colony over to China next year and said Washington would be watching.
Richard Boucher, the U.S. Consul-General in Hong Kong, stopped short of saying what his government could do for the territory if China reneged on its promises after it resumes sovereignty over Hong Kong on July 1.
"As Hong Kong heads towards the transition, the handover has been assuming higher visibility as a factor in U.S. foreign policy... It is one of the key events in Sino-U.S. relations over the next few years," Boucher said.
"We have our voice, interest and participation in China and Hong Kong. It is not a threat...but we want to first see what happens," he said in a speech to the Foreign Correspondents' Club of Hong Kong.
The freewheeling British colony of over a century and a half is promised far-reaching autonomy for 50 years under a Sino-British treaty and related documents.
Quoting the ancient Chinese sage Confucius, Boucher said a measure of whether Hong Kong was well ruled after 1997 would be if "its subjects are content and foreigners are attracted".
He reminded Beijing of its promises made about Hong Kong -- the survival of freedom of speech, press, assembly, movement, travel, religion, among others. "That is a sweeping, vital and unrestricted pledge," he said.
With only 203 days left under the British flag, Hong Kong people are nervous over the future of these freedoms and about China's plan to replace their elected Legislative Council with a provisional legislature, to be chosen this month, overseen by Beijing.
Boucher, echoing criticisms made previously by other senior U.S. diplomats, described the provisional body as "unnecessary and unjustified".
"It is important for Hong Kong to have a legislature that is constitutionally elected."
Boucher refrained from commenting on whether Hong Kong Chinese residents holding U.S. passports would enjoy U.S. consular protection after the handover.
"We do in every case offer consular protection when we can but the question of dual nationality is very complicated...and I can't give details now," he said. Some 37,200 U.S. citizens live in Hong Kong, many of them dual nationals.
Boucher also said China had signalled to Washington that U.S. Navy ships could continue to make recreational port visits to Hong Kong after 1997, although details had to be worked out.
About 70 U.S. warships call in at Hong Kong each year.
One of Hong Kong's best-known pro-democracy politicians, Emily Lau, was dragged away kicking and screaming by police after lying down on a road to protest against China's methods of choosing a post-colonial leader.
Up to 40 pro-democracy activists scuffled with riot police outside the Hong Kong Convention Centre, where a committee of 400 chosen by Beijing voted for a chief executive to rule Hong Kong after Britain hands the colony back to China at midnight next June 30.
Police said 29 demonstrators were arrested for obstruction and would be released on bail later in the day.
A dozen activists shouting "oppose the phoney election" lay down on the road and were dragged away by police.
Lau, an independent democrat fiercely critical of China's communist rulers, was among those carried off, witnesses said. It was not immediately clear whether Lau was among those arrested.
Fellow legislators Andrew Cheng of the Democratic Party and trade union leader Lee Cheuk-yan were also hauled away.
"It's a sad day for Hong Kong. What can ordinary Hong Kong citizens do -- they cannot vote," John Wing-ling Tse, a legislator of the Democratic Party, said.
Earlier, protesters erected a "tomb of democracy" outside the building and condemned the voting as the end of freedom and the rule of law in the territory.
A panel of 400 chosen by China voted for the future leader. None of the rest of Hong Kong's 6.3 million people had a vote, causing the democracy lobby to dismiss the process as a sham.
Several hundred pro-democracy activists demonstrated on Tuesday evening and 20 diehards camped out overnight with an imitation tomb in front of the Grand Hyatt Hotel.
The first thing in the line of sight when Selection Committee members arrived was the imitation ancient Chinese-style grey arched tomb, constructed from wood.
The structure faced the Hong Kong Convention Centre with the inscription "Tomb Of Hong Kong Democracy And Rule Of Law". Candles flickered in the wind beside it.
The committee was convened to carry out the first of two historic tasks -- to elect the man who will step into the shoes of Governor Chris Patten when Britain pulls out. The clear favourite, shipping magnate Tung Chee-Hwa, emerged victorious.
The committee's second task, on December 21, is to choose a provisional legislature that will replace the current elected Legco (Legislative Council) on July 1.
The scuffles erupted after police urged the demonstrators, from the United Front Against the Provisional Legislature, to move to a cordoned-off area.
Occasionally the group marched a short distance bearing the tomb aloft, as in a funeral procession. In front of the tomb a banner was posted saying "Death of Hong Kong Rule Of Law".
"We are against the Selection Committee's so-called election of the first chief executive," said Cheng. "The selection is not real because it is done by Beijing," the legislator said.
The protesters brandished a colourful banner with the slogan "Oppose the False Election Of The Chief Executive, Oppose The Provisional Legislature" and denounced China for not allowing Hong Kong's electorate to vote.
One of Hong Kong's best-known pro-democracy politicians, Emily Lau, was dragged away kicking and screaming by police after lying down on a road to protest against China's methods of choosing a post-colonial leader.
Up to 40 pro-democracy activists scuffled with riot police outside the Hong Kong Convention Centre, where a committee of 400 chosen by Beijing voted for a chief executive to rule Hong Kong after Britain hands the colony back to China at midnight next June 30.
A dozen activists shouting "oppose the phoney election" lay down on the road and were dragged away by police.
Lau, an independent democrat fiercely critical of China's communist rulers, was among those carried off, witnesses said. It was not immediately clear if they were arrested.
Fellow legislators Andrew Cheng of the Democratic Party and trade union leader Lee Cheuk-yan were also hauled away.
"It's a sad day for Hong Kong. What can ordinary Hong Kong citizens do -- they cannot vote," John Wing-ling Tse, a legislator of the Democratic Party said.
Earlier, protesters erected a "tomb of democracy" outside the building and condemned the voting as the end of freedom and the rule of law in the territory.
Only the 400 electors chosen by China voted for the future leader. None of the rest of Hong Kong's 6.3 million people had a vote.
Several hundred pro-democracy activists demonstrated on Tuesday evening and 20 diehards camped out overnight with the imitation tomb in front of the Grand Hyatt Hotel.
As the Selection Committee members arrived in shiny limousines, their first sight was an imitation ancient Chinese-style grey arched tomb, constructed from wood.
The structure faced the Hong Kong Convention Centre with the inscription "Tomb Of Hong Kong Democracy And Rule Of Law". Candles flickered in the wind beside it.
The committee was convened to carry out the first of two historic tasks -- to elect the man who will step into the shoes of Governor Chris Patten when Britain pulls out. The clear favourite was shipping magnate Tung Chee-Hwa.
The committee's second task, on December 21, is to choose a provisional legislature that will replace the current elected Legco (Legislative Council) on July 1.
The scuffles erupted after police urged the demonstrators, from the United Front Against the Provisional Legislature, to move to a cordoned-off area.
Occasionally the group marched a short distance bearing the tomb aloft, as in a funeral procession. In front of the tomb a banner was posted saying "Death of Hong Kong Rule Of Law".
"We are against the Selection Committee's so-called election of the first chief executive," said Cheng. "The selection is not real because it is done by Beijing," the legislator said.
The protesters brandished a colourful banner with the slogan "Oppose the False Election Of The Chief Executive, Oppose The Provisional Legislature" and denounced China for not allowing Hong Kong's electorate to vote.
"This is an abuse of their human rights. Some people are more equal and have more rights. In other cultures it is always your vote that counts. In Hong Kong this is apparently not the case," Tse said.
"They say they represent Hong Kong and Hong Kong people but they are not elected. How can they represent us if they are not elected? What is an election with 400 appointees?"
Shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa made his first appearance in China as Hong Kong's leader-in-waiting on Thursday as Beijing prepared the next milestone in the British colony's transition to Chinese rule.
In a one-day meeting on Thursday in Shenzhen, just over the border from Hong Kong, Tung was endorsed as successor to colonial governor Chris Patten by the 150-member Beijing-picked Preparatory Committee, which is crafting the territory's political future.
Britain hands Hong Kong back to China on July 1.
Tung, 59, was selected as the post-handover leader in Hong Kong on Wednesday by a separate 400-member body carefully assembled by Beijing, smothering his two rivals by winning 80 percent of the votes.
At the Preparatory Committee meeting in Shenzhen, presided over by Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, Tung was greeted with hearty applause, smiles and back-patting as he entered the hall.
"We have already completed the selection of the first Chief Executive of Hong Kong... Tung Chee-hwa received the majority vote of 320," said senior Chinese envoy Lu Ping, director of the Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office.
Preparatory Committee Vice Chairman Wang Hanbin urged delegates to show their support for China's endorsement of Tung.
"If you don't have any objection, then approve it by applauding," Wang said, prompting the delegates, who include some of Hong Kong's top business leaders, to begin clapping.
In a meeting with reporters later, Tung reiterated his hope that Anson Chan, Hong Kong's popular chief secretary and head of the civil service, would stay on as his deputy.
"I haven't decided on my deputy, I hope Anson Chan will stay and I hope she can be my deputy," Tung said.
Tung said he would also work closely with the current British-led government to promote Hong Kong in the final months of colonial rule and ensure a smooth transition.
Tung's selection was met with scuffles, anger and apathy on Wednesday in Hong Kong, where pro-democracy activists and politicans denounced the selection process as undemocratic and condemned the magnate's appointment.
In addition to endorsing Tung's appointment on behalf of the Beijing government, Thursday's Preparatory Committee meeting in Shenzhen will also discuss a package of procedures for establishing a provisional legislature on December 21 that will replace Hong Kong's elected chamber with the handover.
The legislature plan has been strongly opposed by Hong Kong pro-democracy groups, which see it as a move to crush freedom and introduce repressive laws.
An official said the gathering was also expected to discuss a move by Britain to introduce a lenient anti-subversion law in Hong Kong before the handover. A Preparatory Committee legal sub-group has recommended repealing the British law.
Tung has said he would take a hard line against meddling by provincial Chinese bosses who may disregard Beijing's edict that Hong Kong be a Special Administrative Region of China with considerable autonomy in governing its own affairs.
Hong Kong's Economic Times newspaper said China was expected to rank the future chief executive as equal to a state councillor.
This position, one level below vice-premier, would mean he outranks provincial governors and will help discourage interference in Hong Kong affairs by regional cadres, it said.
China endorsed Hong Kong's Tung Chee-hwa on Thursday as the man to lead the territory after it reverts to Chinese rule in 1997.
The 59-year-old shipping magnate proved the overwhelming choice of a Beijing-vetted panel to lead the territory after the British pull down the flag, ending more than 150 years of colonial rule.
The Preparatory Committee, the 150-strong body of prominent Hong Kong and Chinese citizens established to manage the handover, extended China's recognition of Tung's new role at a session in the southern China boomtown of Shenzhen.
The endorsement was proposed by Preparatory Committee vice-chairman Wang Hanbin. "If you don't have any objection, then approve it by applauding," Wang said.
The delegates, who include some of Hong Kong wealthiest and most powerful tycoons and deal-makers, dutifully clapped in unison.
Tung, whose father fled the Chinese communist revolution in 1949, will take over the helm when the colony reverts to China in 201 days' time, at midnight on June 30.
Tung said on Thursday that China's role in bailing out his family shipping empire when it ran into trouble a decade ago would not affect his leadership.
"Gratitude is one thing. Being the chief executive is another. The chief executive has to put interests of Hong Kong people before anything else," Tung said in an interview with Cable Television.
Hong Kong newspapers, many of which had prepared celebratory issues ahead of Wednesday's poll in which Tung eclipsed his two rivals by taking 80 percent of votes cast, heralded him as proof that Hong Kong people could run Hong Kong.
Tung has said he will take a hard line against meddling by provincial bosses who may seek to disregard Beijing's edict that Hong Kong will be a Special Administrative Region of China with considerable autonomy in governing its own affairs.
Hong Kong's Economic Times newspaper said China was expected to rank the future chief executive equal in status to a state councillor.
This position, one level below vice-premier, would mean he outranks provincial governors and would help ensure against interference in Hong Kong affairs by regional cadres, it said.
Tung's victory was considered a foregone conclusion in Hong Kong, where he has been regarded as China's man since President Jiang Zemin singled him out for a pointed handshake in January.
The Preparatory Committee is scheduled to address during the afternoon session what promises to be its most controversial task -- setting the ground rules for a Provisional Legislature in Hong Kong to replace the existing elected chamber.
China, angered by the reforms spearheaded by British Governor Chris Patten, vowed to neutralise them by dissolving Hong Kong's legislature when it takes control.
Navigating this potential minefield could prove Tung's biggest immediate headache.
Opposition in Hong Kong to the new chamber is stiff and many people are deeply concerned about the confusion that may arise if two rival legislatures jockey for power in the final six months of British rule.
Taiwan's call for a "Greater China" joint-venture bank on Wednesday was greeted with caution in Hong Kong, where analysts and businessmen said more details were needed to convince the industry of its feasibility.
"It's a good idea. There's certainly a good deal of cross-border trade through Hong Kong," said Carmel Wellso, regional banking analyst with ING-Barings.
"But most large corporations would probably have established relationships with existing banks," he added. "What value is this new company going to have?"
A leading Taiwan business leader said on Wednesday in Taipei that Taiwan, China and Hong Kong business heavyweights were considering forming a joint-venture bank in Hong Kong to promote commercial links across the Taiwan Strait.
"We have proposed the idea to our Hong Kong and mainland Chinese counterparts to jointly set up a bank in Hong Kong," Hsu Sheng-fa, chairman of Taiwan's Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Industry, was quoted by an aide as saying.
While most people in Hong Kong contacted by Reuters acknowledged the political significance behind the idea, they said business and profit were what mattered.  
"This idea is very grandiose...but in business, the priority is making money because we have to put in investments," said a Hong Kong-based businessmen with strong links to Taiwan.
"Mainland Chinese banks have many restrictions, what will this bank deal in?"
Taiwan's Hsu made the proposal in a meeting with visiting business delegations from Hong Kong and the communist mainland, Taiwan's arch-rival since a civil war split them in 1949.
The Hong Kong and China entrepreneurs were in Taipei for an unofficial economic forum, the first large-scale cross-strait contact since the Taiwan government's November announcement of a freeze on cooperative initiatives with China.
Taiwan has banned direct contact -- including banking communications -- with China since the civil war. Contacts must be conducted through a third region, usually Hong Kong.
Despite the ban and a 17-month-old deadlock in unofficial Taiwan-China talks, some 30,000 Taiwan-funded businesses have poured more than US$20 billion into investments in China since relations began to thaw in the late 1980s.
Hong Kong, a British colony for more than 150 years, will revert to Chinese control at midnight next June 30.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6441
Hong Kong's leader-in-waiting Tung Chee-hwa returned on Thursday from meeting Chinese leaders in Beijing and pledged to get down to the serious work of shaping his administration.
Tung, a former shipping magnate, also said he won reassurances from Beijing that the territory would enjoy a high degree of autonomy after Britain hands it back to China next June 30, after 150 years of British colonial rule.
"After receiving my appointment, I'll have to face many pressing tasks ahead, meeting the governor, the chief secretary Anson Chan, picking my team," Tung told reporters.
One of Tung's foremost tasks is to form an advisory cabinet called the Executive Council and to decide which senior civil servants to keep after the handover.
"But I haven't got specific dates as I've just arrived," he said, when pressed for details on his future team.
"I'm delighted the Chinese central leadership has time and again assured me...Hong Kong must have a high degree of autonomy and Hong Kong people would truly govern Hong Kong," the chief executive designate said.
Tung's popularity ratings have soared since he was picked by the Beijing-controlled Selection Commitee as the territory's Chief Executive.
A poll, conducted by the University of Hong Kong after Tung's selection on December 11, showed his popularity rating at a record high of 70.1 points.
But Tung, flanked at the airport by Zhang Junsheng, a vice director of Xinhua, China's de facto mission in Hong Kong, fought back at critics who say he would merely be Beijing's yes-man.
"I'm not the conquering hero, neither am I subdued" he said.
Tung hinted he might soon get legal endorsement for a China-backed provisional legislature which Beijing intends to put in place of the territory's current elected legislature.
"I've said many times before I believe the provisional legislature is legal...it would be nice if (China's) National Peoples' Congress could reaffirm this one more time," he said.
The legislature is to be formed this Saturday by the 400-member Selection Commitee that is meeting over the border in the city of Shenzhen in case of any legal challenge in the Hong Kong courts.
Tung also urged civil servants to stay on after the handover.
"Many senior Chinese leaders are concerned about civil servants staying on, to have a stable transition. I myself have said I hope they can stay on," he said.
China rejected a British challenge to take it to the World Court and staged a vote on Saturday to set up a Hong Kong parliament that will oust elected lawmakers when Beijing recovers the territory next July.
Under heavy security and in a hall decked with red curtains and the Chinese communist red crest with five stars, an elite of 400 carefully chosen Hong Kong electors met in the Chinese city of Shenzhen to pick new legislators for the territory.
The members of the China-controlled Selection Committee cast ballots for the 60-seat legislature in big red envelopes.
They were choosing from 130 pro-Beijing candidates who had been screened by China's representatives in Hong Kong before the selection ballot.
Each elector could list up to 60 names from among the 130 hopefuls, who include 34 incumbent lawmakers.
The result, to be announced later on Saturday, is likely to be denounced by Britain and some of its allies as a travesty of democracy and a breach of handover agreements.
Britain is handing Hong Kong back to China at midnight next June 30 under a treaty that promises the territory of 6.3 million people can keep for 50 years its capitalist system.
Presiding over the gathering in Shenzhen, Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen attempted to shoot down Britain's World Court threat and said London should wake up to reality.
"What is regrettable is that Britain has lacked the courage to face reality," Qian said in a speech before the voting.
"This election should have been held in Hong Kong, but because of Britain's refusal to cooperate we had no choice but to hold it here in Shenzhen."
On Friday, British Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind challenged China to go to the International Court of Justice in The Hague to prove the legality of its so-called provisional legislature.
Hong Kong's colonial Governor Chris Patten also attacked the proposed legislature, calling it a "rubber stamp" and an "echo chamber".
China is creating the body in retaliation for democratic reforms introduced by Patten. The reforms enlarged the mass franchise when the present Legislative Council (Legco) was elected last year with a landslide for pro-democracy forces.
Saturday's vote was a turning point in Hong Kong's future and moved Legco a step closer to oblivion.
Events are moving apace, with less than 200 days to go before the change of flag. Ten days ago the Selection Committee chose Tung Chee-hwa, a 59-year-old shipping magnate with strong pro-Beijing loyalties, to succeed Patten next July 1.
The Hong Kong public has had no say in who should be their first Chinese leader and lawmakers after the British withdrawal. Nor have they had a say in the removal of their elected legislators.
A survey this week showed only a third of Hong Kong people backed the provisional legislature and only a quarter trusted China.
The creation of the interim lawmaking body in Shenzhen was conducted amid tight security.
Trucks towed away suspicious cars hours before the meeting began and guards with binoculars were posted atop the building across the street from the voting hall.
Some of more than 100 journalists, many of whom arrived on Friday, were detained for up to an hour while their travel documents were verified by Chinese border guards.
China on Monday responded coolly to a request for talks from Hong Kong's populist Democratic Party, insisting the party first play by Beijing's rules.
Beijing told the party it had to abide by rules governing the creation of the Selection Committee, a 400-member body which will chose Hong Kong's post-handover leader and provisional legislature, replacing the present elected chamber.
"The Preparatory Committee secretariat...welcomes the Democratic Party's posture and willingness to communicate with us (Beijing)," said a statement from Xinhua news agency, China's de facto embassy in Hong Kong.
The Preparatory Committee is an influential panel of members handpicked by China that is overseeing the transfer of sovereignty.
"We hope the Democratic Party...can abide by the Basic Law and rules governing the setting up of the Selection Committee as laid down by the National People's Congress and the Preparatory Committee," Xinhua said. The agency was referring to Hong Kong's post-handover constitution, promulgated in 1990.
"At the same time, (this statement) clearly points out that this is the first step towards communication between the Democratic Party and us and the rest of Hong Kong people," Xinhua said.
The British colony reverts to China at midnight on June 30, 1997.
China's reply follows a letter from the party in mid-August seeking dialogue with Beijing after China's Foreign Minister Qian Qichen opened the door a crack by suggesting that dissenting views would be permitted on the Selection Committee.
Xinhua on Monday did not mention any time nor venue for talks but Beijing's latest move was seen as positive by the Democratic Party.
"We welcome it," vice-chairman Yeung Sum told reporters on Monday.
The Democratic Party's long-standing advocacy of democracy has angered Beijing which has dubbed its leaders as subversives and pointedly excluded it from the Preparatory Committee.
Hong Kong's colonial Governor Chris Patten on Monday refused a request by future leader Tung Chee-hwa to support the interim legislature China will install in the territory when the British depart next year.
Shipping magnate Tung, emerging from his first meeting with Patten since being chosen on December 11 by a China-controlled committee to head Hong Kong from next July 1, told reporters that Patten flatly refused to provide any help to the new legislature in the run-up to the transfer of sovereignty to China.
"I brought up the work of the provisional legislature. I hope Mr Patten and the Hong Kong government can give help," Tung told reporters outside Government House, Patten's residence.
"But Mr Patten's position was very clear. I didn't successfully convince him," Tung said.
Both men emerged from a 1-1/2 hour meeting to exchange hearty handshakes and make brief speeches to the press, but mentioned little else of what transpired behind closed doors.
Describing the discussion as "long and constructive", both said they agreed to meet in the future when the need arose.
Patten, looking serious next to Tung, managed the occasional smile for photographers but turned to lead Tung into a waiting car immediately after his successor completed his short speech.
Neither of them took questions.
Monday's meeting was conducted under a cloud of strained Sino-British relations after China snubbed British objections and went ahead last Saturday with naming the provisional legislature that will replace the current elected Legislative Council (Legco) when Hong Kong returns to Chinese control 190 days from now.
The interim assembly was designed by China to reverse electoral reforms that Patten introduced unilaterally in recent years.
The move came under an international spotlight after British Foreign Minister Malcolm Rifkind on Friday challenged China to let the World Court rule on the legality of the new assembly.
Patten also lashed out at the new lawmaking body on Saturday, calling its appointment by a 400-member Selection Committee "a bizarre farce" and a "stomach-churning" process.
"What it shows about China is that, here it is taking over responsibility for a First World economy but they're trying to foist on us political institutions which a Third World country would reject," Patten had said.
"Here we are having foisted on us institutions which, frankly, you wouldn't try to run a tennis club with," he said.
China, however, has warned Britain against creating problems and to keep out of Hong Kong's affairs after the handover.
"After 1997, Hong Kong will be an internal affair of China. No foreign countries can interfere with China's internal affair," China's envoy in Hong Kong, Zhou Nan, told reporters.
"Whether Britain wants to accept my advice is up to it. But if it wants to create more new trouble, I don't think it will be out of the ordinary," he said on Monday at a public function.
The controversial new body is dominated by pro-Beijing figures, including 33 incumbent lawmakers and many politicians who lost to pro-democracy candidates in the 1995 Legco election.
The Democratic Party, the biggest single winner in last year's election with 19 of the 60 Legco seats, boycotted the creation of the provisional body, branding it undemocratic.
The Provisional Legislative Council, as it will be known, is to sit from July 1 until a new legislature can be created via elections.
Hong Kong's future leader Tung Chee-hwa said on Monday the Beijing-approved body set up to replace the existing elected legislature in mid-1997 would soon hold its first sitting -- not in Hong Kong, but in China.
Tung was speaking after his first informal meeting with the post-colonial deputies who will take up lawmaking in Hong Kong after Britain hands back the territory at midnight next June 30.
The new chamber will soon hold its first official session most likely across the border in the southern Chinese city of Shenzhen, Tung told reporters.
"The provisional legislature must meet for the first time. It'll probably be in Shenzhen. It would be very soon," he said.
"We also discussed very unofficially the tasks ahead for the provisional legislature," Tung said.
The 60-member chamber was selected this month by a 400-strong selection committee comprised of Hong Kong people vetted by China.
The same panel earlier chose Tung to run the territory after colonial Governor Chris Patten departs in 183 days' time.
The provisional legislature is stiffly opposed by Hong Kong's Democratic Party, which emerged from 1995 elections for the present Legislative Council with the most votes of any party but will lose its seats next July 1.
The party calls the provisional body a travesty of democracy that will be illegal if it functions before the change of flag. Their threats of legal action have forced the body to meet in China.
The colonial government has agreed to cooperate with Tung on issues regarding the transfer of sovereignty but not with the provisional legislature.
On Monday Tung who has promised to respect the neutrality of Hong Kong's 180,000 civil servants, urged them to face the reality of the provisional legislature.
"The political neutrality of the civil service is very important, we must respect that. But after 1997, the provisional legislature will work with the civil service. That's a reality."
Many in Hong Kong are worried that stable government and the rule of law will evaporate when communist-ruled China takes back the capitalist territory of 6.3 million people.
On Saturday Tung persuaded Hong Kong's top civil servant, Chief Secretary Anson Chan, to stay in her post after the handover. But he has yet to decide the fate of other top officials.
In one of the first signs of cracks in the top echelon of officials, chief graft-buster Michael Leung, head of the Independent Commission Against Corruption, last week announced he would not serve beyond the handover.
Tung, who met Leung on Monday, said he failed to persuade Leung to change his mind. "It is a real pity. I wish he would stay...but he explained that it was for personal reasons he was leaving," he said.
The future leader of Hong Kong said on Thursday he would discuss the legality and funding of the territory's controversial post-colonial assembly with China's legislators during his visit to Beijing this weekend.
"I will discuss with the National People's Congress (NPC) the legal status of the provisional legislature, and also find out more on the arrangements for its funding," Tung Chee-hwa told reporters after a public function.
The former shipping boss did not say whether he would ask the Chinese parliament to pass a law to endorse the existence of the provisional legislature, which was formed on December 21 in China's southern city of Shenzhen.
Tung had previously said he may ask the NPC to enact such legislation if the need arose.
Britain and the pro-democracy movement in Hong Kong say China's installation of the provisional legislature is illegal under the 1984 United Nations-registered Joint Declaration, which sets out the framework for the colony's returns to China.
China, upset by Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten's electoral reforms in the twilight of British rule, set up the legislature to reverse these reforms when it resumes sovereignty of the colony at midnight on June 30.
The interim chamber was chosen by a 400-strong Selection Committee, hand-picked by Beijing. The committee also selected Tung to succeed Patten.
Tung has said the provisional legislature would soon hold its first meeting. However it will meet in China, not Hong Kong, in order to avoid a legal challenge by the colony's Democratic Party. The territory's biggest pro-democracy group says it is constitutionally illegal to have two legislatures operating at the same time.
Tung said he would try to persuade the Democrats to accept the provisional body during a meeting with them next Thursday. "The provisional legislature has the right to exist. I hope that everyone ... can accept it," he said.
The chief executive-designate also said he would hold talks with Chinese officials during his two-day visit to the Chinese capital, but would not be more specific.
Tung visited Beijing on December 17 for the first time after his selection as Chief Executive and was received by President Jiang Zemin, Premier Li Peng and Foreign Minister Qian Qichen.
Hong Kong's future leader Tung Chee-hwa is making plans to travel to major Western countries in a bid to raise the profile of the territory and clear the air over important issues related to its sovereignty transfer.
The roadshow, still in the works and its timing dependent on Tung's workload, could materialise before July 1, when the British colony of more than 150 years reverts to Chinese rule, his spokeswoman told Reuters on Sunday.
"Mr Tung's trip is to give a real picture of Hong Kong. He feels some countries do not really understand the real situation in Hong Kong," spokeswoman Elin Wong said by telephone.
"It would be this year. If it is possible, before (July 1) but it depends on his workload," Wong said, adding it would probably include the United States and some European countries.
The trip, which would be Tung's first outside China since being selected in December under close Beijing supervision as the territory's first post-handover chief, would focus on a wide range of issues related to Hong Kong's handover.
"He will not just talk on any particular issue, but a range, on all aspects that are important to Hong Kong," Wong said.
Tung, however, is expected to focus on what he has deemed to be misunderstandings in the West over an interim lawmaking chamber which China has vowed to install in place of Hong Kong's elected legislature upon the handover.
The 60-member provisional legislature was formed in December by a pro-China panel of 400, the same body which selected Tung as Hong Kong's first Chief Executive from July 1.
Hong Kong's British-run government has refused to cooperate with the body and the territory's pro-democracy camp, particularly the popular Democratic Party, also opposes it.
At a public function on Saturday, Tung said Western countries, particularly the U.S., has not properly understood the provisional legislature and other important issues related to Hong Kong's handover.
"Mr Tung said he would try his utmost to promote Hong Kong before July 1, and he hopes to clear all the misunderstandings now held by Western countries," the China-funded Wen Hui Pao newspaper reported on Sunday.
In his fiercest attack to date on critics of the provisional legislature, Tung told them last week to stop criticising the future lawmaking chamber when talking to Western leaders, adding their actions were a disservice to Hong Kong.
China's Zhenhai Refining &amp; Chemical Co Ltd, whose stock price has been lashed by the U.S. missile attacks on Iraq, said investors had over-reacted and assured it was able to overcome present difficulties.
"I would call the reaction in (the stock market in) Hong Kong merely psychological...there is minimal real impact, and if crude prices are high now we just would not buy," said a senior manager in Ningbo, eastern Zhejiang province, by telephone.
The Chinese oil refiner's share price in Hong Kong crashed almost 10 percent to HK$2.05 intraday on Tuesday before closing at HK$2.075, down 20 cents on investor fears that the refinery would be hit badly by the sharp hike in crude oil prices.
It regained only partway on Wednesday to close at HK$2.175.
After the first U.S. missile attack on Tuesday, oil prices hit their highest level since Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990, and investors feared Zhenhai - which runs predominantly on imported crudes and sells most of its output into China's domestic markets where product prices are strictly fixed - would be hit.  
But the eight-million tonne per year refiner, which had stopped buying crude oil cargoes since the start of the Iraqi crisis on Monday, said its crude stock-pile would help tide over high prices, at least in the short term.
"It's very hard to say how prices will go, but for now, we have our two months worth of crude stock-pile," he said.
The refiner, China's third largest, imports up to 55 percent of its crude needs from overseas, and covers 25 percent from China's offshore production.
Twenty percent is supplied from China's highly subsidised domestic onshore production, the manager said.
While 30 percent of Zhenhai's output is sold into international markets, the volume would be increased should high crude oil prices persist, he said.
"There is no limit on how much we can export, so we can push it up to cover our higher costs," he said.
-- HONG KONG NEWSROOM (852) 2843-6441
Long before Hong Kong's handover to China, celebrity painter Liu Yu Yi, whose portrait subjects include Beijing's leaders, is already benefiting from the return of Britain's last Asian outpost to the Chinese fold.
Spanning an entire wall in his home in Hong Kong's posh Mid-levels district is an almost finished oil painting depicting over 200 famous personalities at a feast celebrating the handover at midnight on June 30.
Central on the canvas is China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, the man hailed as the architect of the "one country, two systems" formula under which Hong Kong would be treated after the handover.
Raising a toast, Deng is flanked by President Jiang Zemin, Premier Li Peng and Tung Chee-hwa, the man who will run Hong Kong after Britain hands back its colony of more than 150 years.
"I am using art to capture this momentous event that is watched by all nations of the world," Liu, reclining on a sofa, told Reuters during an interview.
THE CHINA BREAKTHROUGH
Trained at the Central Academy of Fine Arts in Beijing, Liu shot to fame in 1993 when he sold "Liang Xiao" (Festive Evening) -- a flashback to a historic gathering of China's leaders in 1950 -- for HK$8.36 million (US$1.08 million).
It was the highest price paid for a contemporary Chinese work of art, and he has been hitting jackpots ever since.
He sold "Song of the Goddess Nu Wa" for HK$8.88 million in 1994 and "Gathering of Immortals" for HK$10.8 million in 1995.
THE HONGKONG CONNECTION
Whether because of his talent, access to high places or being in the right place at the right time, Liu has penetrated the ranks of the rich and influential since coming to Hong Kong in 1991.
Liu, whose entire family lived on his monthly wage of 40 yuan (US$4.80) in the 1970s, has done portraits of Hong Kong business titans such as Li Ka-shing, Stanley Ho, Simon Li, Gordon Wu and Run Run Shaw.
Mindful of the handover five months away, Hong Kong's rich and pragmatic have been embracing their mainland peers, be they politicians, businessmen or artists, and are stocking up their homes with Chinese art and antiques.
But the well-connected Liu, who drew Tung into his work on the handover more than five months before the tycoon was even selected as Hong Kong's first colonial leader, betrayed little when asked what sparked the insight.
"I just thought he was the likeliest candidate," he chuckled before adding that the dozen empty headslots would be drawn in after Tung announces his team-designate.
SUCCESS DIDN'T COME EASY
Liu's real break came in 1988 when "Festive Evening" was exibited in the Memorial Hall of the late Chinese leader Mao Zedong.
It prompted a request from Beijing for Liu to create another work. The resulting "Ren Min Wan Sui" or "Long Live The People" has adorned Beijing's Tiananmen Rostrum since 1990.
But all this did not come easy for the artist who was sent off to toil in a rural commune during the ultra-leftist years of the Mao-inspired Cultural Revolution (1966-1976).
"I suffered tremendous shock, persecution. They said I was a 'black' artist, that I did not conform politically," Liu said.
"Seven years. Seven years I lost time to practise my art. I only came back in 1977, then I painted again," he said.
CULTURAL REVOLUTION HARDSHIPS PROVIDED INSPIRATION
Ironically, it was those years of persecution and aimless toil that inspired "Liang Xiao", his first work after the end of the revolution, and a piece which would take him till 1984.
"After the Cultural Revolution, I wanted to say many things which had been locked in my heart. I saw all the chaos and fighting. I was very depressed and I suffered a lot," Liu said.
"I knew this can never be repeated. I wished that it would be 'liang xiao' every night. That every night would be wonderful and whole for the country. That was what I wanted to say."
Things have looked up since for Liu, whose works echo the leanings of socialist realism, a creed that was hammered into intellectuals and artists during the late 1950s.
Snubbing the formulaic mountains, valleys, bamboo trees and the miniature people of lofty Chinese landscape art, Liu said: "These works have lasted for too long in China. From the Song Dynasty onwards, too many, too many.
"Under my hand, my pursuit is different...that of entry into the world, not retreat. To immerse into this world," he said.
FELLOW ARTISTS AND CRITICS LESS KIND
While Liu's talent as a portrait painter is admired, the material success that his brushes have brought more than just raised eyebrows from those in his trade.
Gallery owner Karl McLean, who helped sell "Song of the Goddess Nu Wa", said: "He's a very good portrait painter, and has very good connections in Beijing...but the artists hate him, they think he is just political and very commercial.
"I think he's a very clever guy, he's a very smart guy. He knows how to make money and he knows how to handle the rich. He knows how to get them to pay up big time," McLean told Reuters. (US$1 = HK$7.73)
British Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind on Saturday flies earlier than expected to Hong Kong where he can expect a tough reception on what may be his last visit before it is handed back to China in July.
Legislators in the territory are gearing up to grill Rifkind on Sunday on the fate of Hong Kong's freedoms and human rights laws after the British colony of more than 150 years reverts to Chinese rule at midnight on June 30.
Rifkind, who was in Singapore this week for a meeting of Asia-Europe meeting, is arriving in Britain's last major Asian outpost on a shortened visit before leaving for London for a key parliamentary vote.
A spokesman for the British Foreign Office mission in Hong Kong said Rifkind's timetable in the colony had been moved forward and he was expected to leave on Monday morning.
On Sunday, Rifkind was expected to meet Hong Kong's future leader, Tung Chee-hwa, Governor Chris Patten's team of executive councillors, legislators and other senior officials.
If he had kept to his orginal schedule, Rifkind would have missed an important parliamentary vote on Monday called by the opposition Labour Party over Agriculture Minister Douglas Hogg's handling of the "mad cow" disease.
But Rifkind's visit to Hong Kong, although short, will be far from easy.
Just 136 days before the handover, Hong Kong is beset with worries over China's plans to replace its elected chamber on July 1 with a provisional legislature, which was formed last December under close Chinese supervision.
The freewheeling territory of 6.3 million people is also concerned about threats to cut back its civil liberties.
"We want Rifkind to clarify on whether there would be two legislatures operating before July 1," said Yeung Sum, deputy head of the Democratic Party, Hong Kong's largest.
"I think he should make a strong statement on it, because...it is the British and Hong Kong government running the place before July 1. If there are two legislatures running at the same time...it will be very confusing," Yeung said.
The Democratic Party has threatened to sue the provisional chamber should it try to enact laws or operate on Hong Kong soil before July 1.
Britain has also said the move is illegal under a 1984 Sino-British handover treaty on Hong Kong and has challenged China to let the world court rule on the legality of the body.
A pro-China Hong Kong newspaper on Saturday slammed the idea as ridiculous.
"Rifkind recommends letting the world court arbitrate on the provisional legislature. That is ridiculous and laughable," the Wen Hui Pao newspaper said.
It said whatever happened in Hong Kong after July 1 was a matter entirely for China to handle.
Britain's Home Office has warned ethnic minority residents in Hong Kong that they will not get British passports when the colony is handed over to China if they relinquished other passports in order to qualify.
In a statement made available late on Friday, the British government said applicants should be solely British before February 4, when the plan to grant full passports to 8,000 ethnic minority Hong Kong residents was announced.
"This means that anyone voluntarily renouncing another nationality on or after that date will not qualify," it said.
Hong Kong's ethnic minorities had previously faced the threat of becoming stateless when China resumes sovereignty over the British colony of over 150 years at midnight on June 30.
While they will have residency rights in Hong Kong after the handover, it was unclear whether they would be entitled passports of the future Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.
But the condition set down by Britain is widely seen as an attempt to plug a loophole after local newspapers reported some ethnic minority residents were ditching their other passports in the hope of qualifying for full British ones.
A prominent business leader in Hong Kong's Indian community on Saturday slammed the February 4 cut-off.
"This is not the right attitude of the British government. They shouldn't give conditions to it. They should give full passports without any clauses," Nari Dadlani told Reuters by telephone.
Dadlani, a naturalised Hong Kong resident of 38 years who holds no other passport, said he would stay on in Hong Kong even if he was to be granted full British citizenship.
"What we need is only an insurance, when emergencies arise. We are not going to take the first flight to London with this passport...we are much more happy here in Hong Kong," he said.
"And even when it comes to that, the Indian community is going to take a lot of capital to the U.K. We are not going to ask for social security and such things," Dadlani said.
In its statement, the British Home Office said necessary legislation would first need to be enacted before those concerned, mostly Indians and Pakistanis, could apply to become British citizens.
Applicants should be ordinarily resident in Hong Kong and they, including spouses and children, must qualify in their own right, it said
Successful applicants would be granted full British citizenship from July 1, the statement said.
British Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind met future Hong Kong leader Tung Chee-hwa on Sunday for the first time since Tung was chosen but failed to narrow the gulf between the outgoing and incoming governments.
Tung told reporters after the talks that London had refused to budge from its objections to Chinas plans to install an interim appointed legislature and dilute Hong Kongs civil liberties laws, policies Tung endorses and Hong Kongs pro-democracy lobby vociferously opposes.
Rifkind later lashed out at sceptics who argued Britain was impotent against Chinas plans for Hong Kong after the handover at midnight on June 30, a date now just 19 weeks away.
"We will not only maintain maximum pressure until June 30. Through our involvement (in Hong Kong), we will be able to continue to monitor and make public our opinion on the compliance by the Chinese authorities with the Joint Declaration," he told a news conference.
The 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration binds Britain to restoring Hong Kong to China in mid-1997 and China to maintaining Hong Kongs freedoms and capitalist way of life intact for 50 years.
Tung said he still harboured hopes the British would relent and cooperate with Chinas provisional legislature which will replace an elected chamber returned under the auspices of recent democratic reforms spearheaded by the colonial governor, Chris Patten.
"Britains position has always been clear, but I hope they will reconsider," said Tung, a billionaire shipping magnate who was anointed by Beijing in December.
Britain argues that the formation of the provisional legislature, which reverses the Patten reforms, is illegal under the terms of the Joint Declaration.
Rifkinds brief visit, perhaps his last to Hong Kong before the flag comes down on more than 150 years of British colonial rule, was cut short to let him return early to London for a key vote in the British parliament on the "mad cow" crisis.
A loss could trigger a vote of no confidence in the ruling Conservative Party, which is lagging in public opinion polls. A British general election must be held no later than May 22.
Hong Kongs South China Morning Post newspaper, miffed that Rifkind was putting domestic concerns ahead of Hong Kongs problems, headlined its Sunday editorial: "When mad cows matter more than Hong Kong".
With 135 days to the handover, Hong Kong is awash with conflicting emotions which have pitted the pro-Beijing and pro-democracy camps against each other and sparked acrimonious exchanges and counter-accusations.
Tung last week hit out at the Democracy Party, accusing it of blackening Hong Kongs name overseas by spreading doomsday predictions about the loss of freedoms.
He argued that Hong Kongs economy was buoyant, its people upbeat, and he described Chinas plans as mere technicalities.
"This is just the beginning. The way things are going, Tung Chee-hwa and his government-in-waiting will be running out of popularity long before July 1," pro-democracy lawmaker Margaret Ng wrote in a newspaper column on Friday.
Rifkind said Tung would need to show his independence of mind if he wanted to keep the confidence of Hong Kong people.
"He (Tung) is very emphatic that he is not under any direction from the Chinese government that they have not sought to influence his views or to tell him how to behave," Rifkind said of Hong Kongs future leader.
"Wherever his views might differ from those of the Chinese authorities, if they do differ, it would be in his own interest to make that clear, so that his independence is well understood," he added.
British Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind met future Hong Kong leader Tung Chee-hwa on Sunday for the first time since Tung was chosen but failed to narrow the gulf between the territory's outgoing and incoming governments.
Tung, a shipping magnate anointed by Beijing in December, told reporters after the talks that London had not budged in its refusal to aid a provisional legislature that China would install when the British leave later this year.
"On the work of the provisional legislature, I've urged the Hong Kong government to give assistance and help," Tung said.
"Britain's position has always been clear, but I hope they will reconsider."
Britain argues that the formation of the provisional legislature, set up by a China-appointed panel to replace the elected chamber, is illegal under the terms of the 1984 Sino-British handover treaty on Hong Kong.
Hong Kong reverts to China at midnight on June 30.
Rifkind's brief visit, perhaps his last to Hong Kong before the flag comes down on more than 150 years of British colonial rule of the territory, was cut short to let him return early to London for a key vote in Parliament on the "mad cow" crisis.
A loss could trigger a vote of no confidence in the ruling Conservative Party, which is lagging in the polls. But Hong Kong's South China Morning Post, miffed that Rifkind was putting domestic concerns ahead of Hong Kong's problems, headlined its Sunday editorial: "When mad cows matter more than Hong Kong".
Britain is to hold a general election before May 22, and it is not known who will be at the helm at the time of the handover. But whoever holds the foreign secretary's portfolio in the final days of the countdown can be assured of a bumpy ride.
With 135 days to go until the transition, Hong Kong is awash with conflicting emotions that have pitted the pro-Beijing and pro-democracy camps against each other and sparked acrimonious exchanges.
Tung last week hit out at the Democracy Party, accusing it of blackening Hong Kong's name overseas by spreading doomsday predictions about the loss of freedoms.
He argued that Hong Kong's economy was buoyant, its people upbeat, and described China's plans as mere technicalities.
His comments have hit a raw nerve with the vocal pro-democracy movement in Hong Kong, which argues that a tide of opinion has been rising against what they describe as Tung's increasingly authoritarian policy statements.
"This is just the beginning. The way things are going, Tung Chee-hwa and his government-in-waiting will be running out of popularity long before July 1," pro-democracy lawmaker Margaret Ng wrote in a newspaper column on Friday.
"Mr Tung's ship of state is charting a decidedly retrogressive course," she wrote. "Confidence may yet be restored provided this paranoia about democracy is put aside."
Another symbol of Hong Kong's British heritage passed into the history books during Rifkind's visit.
The 115-year-old Royal Observatory, given its "royal" prefix by King George V in 1912, dropped the royal coat of arms from its emblem. Its new logo has spiralling cloudbanks symbolising typhoons, the fierce storms that periodically pound Hong Kong.
Hong Kong lined up on Thursday to pay its respects to China's dead leader Deng Xiaoping.
Colonial Governor Chris Patten was one of the first to be escorted inside the Xinhua news agency, Beijing's de facto mission in Hong Kong, to offer his condolences. Deng died late on Wednesday at the age of 92.
"I have written to director Zhou Nan, the head of the New China News Agency (Xinhua), expressing my condolences and of course if there is a condolence book opened I will want to sign that with the senior members of my administration," Patten told reporters before going in.
Asked if he would sent flowers, he replied: "I don't think that would be appropriate."
There has been little love lost between Government House and Xinhua during Patten's four-and-a-half-year tenure as the 28th and last British Governor of Hong Kong.
China denounced Patten as a political prostitute, a criminal for one thousand years and worse for spearheading democratic reforms in the twilight of British rule.
China plans to undo his reforms by dissolving Hong Kong's elected legislature and replacing it with an interim appointed chamber.
Patten was followed on Thursday by the man who will step into his shoes when the colony is handed over to China at the stroke of midnight on June 30, now just 131 days away.
Future leader Tung Chee-hwa, flanked by members of his inner cabinet, bowed three times to a large black and white photograph of Deng.
Hong Kong's politically powerful billionaires and new generation of pro-Beijing politicians turned up in force and were reverently ushered in.
An elderly couple, however, jumped the gun.
They turned up early in the morning, before Xinhua had managed to make arrangements for mourners for the man whose reforms transformed China from a weak, impoverished nation to an emerging economic powerhouse.
They were told to come back in the afternoon.
Five demonstrators staged a brief protest against Deng who they described as "the Butcher of Beijing" for his role in the brutal crushing of the student-led pro-democracy movement centred on Beijing's Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1989.
"One man has just died, but so many are mourning for him. Don't forget the number of people who died on June 4," they said.
Chinese flags flew at half mast across Hong Kong, Thursday morning newspapers were delayed and pupils at "patriotic" pro-Beijing schools stood in silence after news that China's patriarch Deng Xiaoping had died.
"Deng Dead," screamed banner headlines in Hong Kong's Hong Kong's newspapers when they eventually appeared. All devoted acres of newsprint to the life and times of China's paramount leader, who had wanted to visit Hong Kong after it was reunited with China in July this year.
"Come later. Lots of papers are changing their main sections," a newspaper hawker told early commuters en route to Hong Kong's Central business district.
Deprived of reading matter many plugged in their headphones and switched between different Hong Kong radio stations.
Some expressed grief but many inhabitants of the British colony of Hong Kong took Deng's demise in their stride.
"I couldn't sleep well the whole night. He was a great leader of our nation. He improved China," said Ko Chiu, 80, who was among a group of elderly practioners of Tai Chi, or Chinese shadow boxing.
But another elderly resident Auyeung Pak, 85, paused from his slow jog in a Hong Kong park to shrug off Deng's death.
"It's normal for a man of that old age. I'm not too sad."
Chinese flags at China's de facto mission in Hong Kong, the Xinhua News Agency, flew at half-mast.
Pupils at the Piu Kiu Middle School, which follows a mainland Chinese curriculum, observed a minute's silence.
Some analysts have predicted Deng's death will create uncertainty in Hong Kong, threatening stability during its delicate transition to Chinese rule at midnight on June 30, 1997, a date now 131 days away.
But there was scant sign of much emotion in the business district.
"It's business as usual," said an employee of the state-owned bank of China as he hurried into the bank's futuristic highrise headquarters.
He's lucky to have lived for so long," said a 55-year-old women, pausing briefly in her tai chi regime.
A camera-toting Taiwanese tourist, accompanied by her two young daughters, said she did not care.
"I don't feel anything. I heard it early this morning."
Newspapers in Hong Kong were dominated on Friday by reaction to the death of Deng Xiaoping, with many eulogising his reformist policies that made China, Hong Kong's future sovereign, rich and strong.
"Nobody in the course of this century raised the material standards of living of more people than Deng Xiaoping," the widely-circulated South China Morning Post said.
"That, in itself, would ensure Deng his place among the leading figures of the century," it said in its editorial.
Little effort was spared as newspapers splashed full-colour photographs of mourners in Hong Kong and China's southern border city of Shenzhen in Guangdong province.
While some papers noted Deng's role behind the military crackdown against 1989 Tiananmen Square democracy protests, the issue was not emphasised.
The military suppression had outraged Hong Kong at the time and shook confidence in the territory, which reverts to Chinese sovereignty at midnight on June 30.
"He deserves to be treated as one of China's greatest leaders," the Hongkong Standard said in a front-page editorial.
Deng, who died late on Wednesday at the age of 92 of complications from Parkinson's disease and a lung infection, was widely credited with transforming China from an improverished Stalinist state into an emerging economic powerhouse.
China's economic flowering helped drive Hong Kong, as factories owned by the territory's businessmen mushroomed in neighbouring Guangdong province and Chinese products poured through Hong Kong's port.
Deng also engineered the "one country, two systems" formula paving the way for the return of the British colony to China.
"Learn from Xiaoping's merits, actualise the one country, two systems," the independent Chinese-language Ming Pao said. "This is the best way to fulfil his dream...to ensure his vision lasts forever."
Some papers ran polls, awarding high marks for Deng's achievements. A Ming Pao survey of over 1,900 respondents found Deng scoring 6.4 out of nine for his achievements, while 60 percent thought his death would not affect Hong Kong.
Tin Tin Daily News said a poll of 90 people it conducted showed 85 percent were confident that the one-country, two-systems formula would be implemented.
Normally trim Beijing-backed newspapers Wen Wei Pao and Ta Kung Pao boasted separate takeouts filled with condolence advertisements from companies and individuals.
Perhaps the only discordant note in Hong Kong's eloquent song of praise was an off-colour quarter-page photograph on the front page of the Chinese-language Apple Daily, which it claimed to be Deng's last picture taken while alive in hospital in December.
Photographed secretly through a crack in the door, it showed a wan Deng, with eyes red-rimmed and puffy, staring blankly into space.
China's state refiner Sinopec is pushing through a series of measures to alleviate diesel shortages that have sparked a bizarre rise in prices in the country since late 1996, Chinese oil sources said this week.
After two successive rises in official diesel prices in the fourth quarter of 1996, Sinopec's Beijing headquarters is now urging its almost 40 refineries to increase the cut of diesel from every barrel of crude they refine.
"Gas oil (diesel) has been in short supply in the country as a whole since the fourth quarter of last year," a well-placed Sinopec source said by telephone from Beijing.
"As for Sinopec, we are trying to regulate the production of gas oil as against gasoline to meet market demand," he said.
The current gasoline/diesel production ratio stands at 1:1.3 for almost all of China's refineries. But Sinopec in Beijing is pushing for a more suitable ratio of 1:1.4, the source said, adding that the change would take some months to materialise.
Diesel import quotas, which were not fully utilised in 1996 due to high international prices, might also have exacerbated the shortage in the supply chain, and China might be forced to import more this year, the Sinopec source said.
He declined to estimate the amount of diesel likely to be imported this year.
The plan to raise domestic diesel output comes after two officially sanctioned price rises in late 1996 to encourage refiners to produce more diesel, Chinese oil sources said.
Domestic diesel prices had been frozen at 1,900 yuan per tonne since May 1994, when Beijing imposed strict price ceilings to crack down on profiteering. Prices were raised to 1,990 yuan per tonne in October 1996 and 2,190 yuan per tonne in December.
While Beijing, fearful of inflation, keeps a watch on prices, Chinese oil sources admit there is little central authorities can do to prevent flagrant price spikes in far-flung provinces hit by shortages.
"In situations of shortage, provinces can raise prices, it is difficult for Beijing to control," the Sinopec source said.
However, some Chinese sources said earlier this week that shortages might only be isolated to some inland provinces as some coastal regions were still enjoying high inventories.
"Storage levels are healthy in some areas," said a Singapore-based trader with Chinese state oil trader Sinochem.
Storage terminals at some coastal regions were at full capacity after importers sucked in a massive 1.9 million tonnes that started arriving from mid-January, a Sinopec source in Singapore said.
"Central authorities were afraid there wouldn't be enough for spring and even refiners were urged to crank up their gas oil production," he said.
Authorities might have frozen import quotas for now -- until the bottleneck clears -- but it was likely to be short term because China was short of diesel for this year, he added.
A Chinese oil trader from the southern Maoming refinery, China's second largest, said diesel prices had hit as high as 5,000 yuan per tonne in some provinces suffering shortages.
"Prices were between 4,000 and even 5,000 yuan in December in places like Hunan and Sichuan," the trader said by telephone earlier this week. Refineries raised prices because their net costs had increased.
Chinese refiners have had sharply reduced profit margins since Beijing raised domestic crude prices by about 110 yuan in January 1996 to between 864 and 794 yuan a tonne on 80 percent of its crude sold within the country.
Fearful of an inflationary backlash, Beijing had, until October, kept prices of all oil products unchanged. Sinopec, which made exceptional profits in 1995 and 1994, bore the brunt of the rise in crude prices.
"Refining margins last year, compared with the earlier two years, were very bad. A lot of our profit went to our upstream companies," the Sinopec source said.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 28436934
Lehman Brothers and state-owned China International United Petroleum and Chemicals Co Ltd (Unipec) on Monday announced settlement of a 22-month foreign-exchange trading quarrel and resolved to get on with business.
The US$44 million dispute over currency and swap option trading had been broiling since November 1994.
The settlement means that only one of Lehman's three high-profile disputes with Chinese state-owned companies remains to be resolved.
A joint statement by Unipec and Lehman said only that their foreign exchange trading dispute had been resolved.
"Unipec plays a vital role in China's economy as the largest importer of crude oil...with this situation behind us, Lehman Brothers is keen to get on with developing our business in China," Lehman said.
Unipec returned the compliment, saying that it anticipated working with Lehman in the future.  
Lehman filed a US$44 million lawsuit in New York in November 1994 claiming that the Chinese trader had reneged on obligations over certain foreign exchange and swap transactions after incurring losses.
Unipec had hit back with a counterclaim saying Lehman had taken orders from certain Hong Kong firms with which Unipec was not affiliated
"Unipec and Lehman have come to a settlement agreement. Lehman has cancelled the lawsuit, and we have cancelled our counterclaim," said a senior Unipec manager by telephone.
The quarrel brought unwelcome attention to Unipec and illuminated the sometimes unorthodox ways in which Chinese companies deal with foreign counterparts.
Oil industry watchers said the case had hurt the reputation of the Chinese oil trader, which was set up only in January 1993, and it would be a while before it regained the confidence of its peers.
"Damage has already been done to Unipec, and it has been suffering especially in the U.S., with everyone asking for letters of credit when the case exploded...it's better for them to close the matter," said an oil trading manager with a major oil company in Singapore.  
Another oil industry observer agreed, saying "it takes a while for people to accept them back."
Still outstanding is Lehman's US$53 million suit against China's Minmetals International Non-Ferrous Metals Trading Co, which arose in late 1994 in similar circumstances.
Minmetals subsequently filed a US$128 million countersuit, including six counter claims of fraud, alleging Lehman knew the investments were unsuitable for it.
"We would love to reach a settlement (with Minmetals). We are now in negotiations and that's about it," a Lehman spokesman in Hong Kong said by telephone.
Lehman in April reached a settlement with the New York branch of oil trader Sinochem, parent of Unipec, of a US$20 million lawsuit concerning losses incurred on US$300 million of securities trades which the Chinese firm refused to recognise.
European parliamentarians urged Hong Kong people on Tuesday to "speak up and not shut up" in the face of growing fears that China will roll back democratic freedoms when the territory reverts to China.
They also said they will recommend to the European Parliament to urge Britain to contest China's decision to replace the territory's elected legislature with an appointed interim chamber at the handover at midnight of June 30.
"Our message to Hong Kong is don't shut up, speak up," said Graham Watson, a member of the British Liberal Democratic Party, at a news conference during a two-day visit.
Citing a European maxim, Watson said, "What is required for evil to triumph is for good people to remain silent", adding that democracy was now the way of the world, while totalitarianism and dictatorship was evil.
Watson and three other members of the European Parliament (MEPs) met Hong Kong's future leader Tung Chee-hwa, prominent lawyers and members of Hong Kong's current elected legislature, and will meet colonial Governor Chris Patten.
Hong Kong, a British colony of over 150 years, reverts to China from July 1, and fears are mounting among its 6.4 million people that its democratic freedoms and rights, introduced by Britain in the final years of its rule, will be snuffed out.
Chief amongst Hong Kong's worries is a China-crafted provisional legislature which will replace the elected chamber, and Beijing's plan to amend or strike down a string of laws protecting civil liberties and democracy.
Tung, who replaces Patten on July 1, has backed the proposed changes, arguing that they were mere technicalities and necessary to preserve social order.
The MEPs, who criticised Britain for being too late in bringing democracy and civil rights to Hong Kong, also said London should contest the legality of the shadow legislature in the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in The Hague.
"We believe the United Kingdom would have a good case...for going to the United Nations, even the Security Council and asking for the matter to be referred to the ICJ," Watson said.
"We believe that the abolition of the elected Legislative Council is an illegal act, and we believe it should be challenged in international law," he said.
London has said its hands are tied on the matter as China has refused to refer the issue to the world court. The MEPs however thought the matter should be pursued.
"There is nothing to stop the United Kingdom taking it to the United Nations...we would like to see the panoply of legal instruments in due process in law be used, even if in the end the process is frustrated," Watson said.
A dozen activists staged a noisy protest at the office of future leader Tung on Tuesday morning, demanding an apology for his support of China's plans.
The group, a coalition of 27 grassroot organisations which called itself the Hong Kong People's United Front for the Defence of Human Rights, chanted slogans and called on Tung to relate the views of Hong Kong people to Chinese leaders.
"We strongly request the future chief executive to apologise to all Hong Kong people and to honestly reflect their views to the Chinese government and to do his duty by defending human rights, freedom and the rule of law," the group said in a letter later given to Tung's office employees.
China on Wednesday gave Hong Kong a free hand to arrange media coverage of the colony's historic handover to Beijing, ending fears that the country's communist rulers might restrict press access.
Chinese and British negotiators working on details of Hong Kong's transfer of sovereignty announced the agreement after their latest round of talks.
"We very much look forward to as many as possible of the international press and the local press being interested in participating and recording and reporting on the handover ceremony," Hugh Davies, British team chief at the Joint Liaison Group (JLG), told reporters.
The JLG negotiates the fine details of the transfer of the territory of 6.4 million people to Chinese rule.
Many in Hong Kong, including human rights activists and pro-democracy politicians, had voiced fears that China would not consent to a media invasion without the right to vet which journalists attended.
In a joint statement both countries said arrangements for media coverage would be made by the Hong Kong government.
"The two sides have agreed to entrust the Hong Kong government to receive and process applications from journalists, as well as handle and arrange other matters relating to media coverage of the handover ceremony," the statement said.
Application forms for media accreditation will be distributed by the Hong Kong government's Handover Ceremony Coordination Office from March 15 and should be returned before April 7.
Hong Kong, a British colony for over 150 years, reverts to Chinese rule at midnight on June 30, and the government expects 6,000 foreign and local media representatives to cover the event.
Asked if the Hong Kong government would set any special conditions for accreditation, Davies said he did not envisage applicants being turned down.
"There will be no criteria applied ... provided you don't turn out to be a terrorist," he told reporters.
Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten told a meeting of central bankers on Friday that the territory's economic prosperity was due to its increasingly democratic government.
In remarks aimed as much at official audiences over the border in China as at the central bankers attending the financial conference he was addressing, Patten said Hong Kong people had developed the institutions and values of a civil society.
"The government has responded (positively) to that process and to the changes in aspirations which have accompanied it, by welcoming ever wider public participation in the process of government," he told the conference, organised by the Hong Kong Monetary Authority and the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
He drew attention to China's commitment, in the Sino-British accords covering the British colony's return to China this July 1, to allow the development of democracy in the territory.
Hong Kong, a territory of 6.4 million people on the south China coast, reverts to China after more than 150 years as a British colonial possession, under a 1984 Sino-British treaty.
The treaty, the Joint Declaration, guarantees the territory will have a high degree of autonomy and keep its freewheeling capitalism for a further 50 years after the handover.
The territory is one of the world's economic marvels. It is the eighth largest trading economy and sits on one of the world's biggest pots of foreign reserves -- US$66 billion.
However, China has launched moves over the past year to scrap Hong Kong's elected legislature, reverse Patten's reforms that widened the democratic franchise and roll back laws on civil liberties, when Beijing resumes sovereignty.
Beijing's moves have stirred outrage among the territory's pro-democracy groups and opposition from Britain and the United States, undermining a smooth transition.
"Democracy, as promised and pledged in the Joint Declaration and in the Basic Law, has taken root and started to flourish here. This has strongly underpinned Hong Kong's economic prosperity and Hong Kong's social stability," Patten said.
He said Hong Kong's stability in the next century would need what he called "responsive government". Economic and social change would put huge strains on society, Patten said.
"Those pressures demand sophisticated and responsive institutions of public administration to channel them productively into communal progress rather than letting them build up to the detriment of political and economic stability.
"Hong Kong has responded creatively to the pressures that it's faced, preparing itself for all the challenges which, like all the developing economies of Asia, it will face in the coming century. That's not a process which should or could be stopped."
Hong Kong's future leader Tung Chee-hwa met a political opponent on Monday he has accused of badmouthing Hong Kong abroad in the run-up to Chinese rule, holding talks that appeared to strike a conciliatory note.
However, Tung and Democratic Party leader Martin Lee, a fierce critic of China, remained poles apart on key issues at the heart of the democratic camp's worries about Hong Kong's return to Chinese rule at midnight on June 30.
In a meeting he described as "cooperative" and "good", the second since the shipping magnate was selected in December as Hong Kong's future leader, Lee said his party allowed Tung to clarify his position if he believed he had been misinterpreted.
"If he thinks we have misunderstood him, he can tell us, so we can clear any misunderstanding," Lee told reporters.
Lee said he gave Tung a "position paper" highlighting issues Lee would be discussing with political and business leaders in an upcoming trip to the United States, Canada and Europe.
The paper stated what the Democrats saw as Tung's stance on key issues about Hong Kong's handover, giving the future leader a chance to clear up any misunderstandings over his position.
Lee, who has made many trips overseas to lobby against the provisional legislature and China's plans to roll back on rights and civil liberties at the handover, has been attacked by Tung in recent weeks for criticising Hong Kong abroad.
But the long-time champion of democracy in the territory, who will receive the National Endowment for Democracy's 1997 Democracy Award on Washington's Capitol Hill on April 9, said he would continue to go on his overseas lobbying trips.
He also dismissed suggestions from the media that the party would censor itself in the future.
"No, we will still speak (overseas), but if Mr Tung says he has been misunderstood, we will consider his views, we will definitely not be censoring ourselves," Lee said.
The party also stood firm against the provisional legislature.
"I told Mr Tung so long as this provisional legislature were to have its first, second, third readings on any bill before July 1, we will have no option but take it to court," he said.
With the handover just 106 days away, Hong Kong is awash with concerns over the impending end of its elected legislature and Beijing's plans to repeal or amend a string of laws protecting human rights and civil liberties.
China is keen to see a smooth resumption of sovereignty over Hong Kong because it will pave the way eventually for reunification with Taiwan, an expert on Chinese security policy said on Thursday.
Jonathan Pollack, a senior advisor on international policy at the Rand think-tank in the United States, also said he expected the People's Liberation Army (PLA) to gain more clout as the country's new leader Jiang Zemin needed its support.
"After the Hong Kong transition, we're going to see (China) putting some pressure on Taiwan to accelerate some kind of discussions, if not an overt negotiation," said Pollack, a specialist on Chinese political and security affairs.
"The Chinese do believe that it will serve as an example if they are able to effect this transition in an uneventful fashion. It will serve as an example that will help...their seeking more cooperation from Taiwan in the future," he told reporters after presenting a seminar in Hong Kong.
Hong Kong, a British colony of more than 150 years, reverts to China at midnight on June 30. Under Sino-British handover treaties, the territory of 6.4 million people is guaranteed autonomy for 50 years, except in foreign affairs and defence.
The imminent return of Hong Kong to China's fold, in just 103 days, under a "one country, two systems" policy allowing it a high degree of autonomy, is held up by Beijing as a model for Taiwan's eventual reunification with China.
Beijing regards Taiwan as a renegade province since a civil war split them in 1949 and has warned the Nationalist-ruled island against any aspirations for formal state independence.
Pollack also said the death of China's leader Deng Xiaoping in February would result in a higher profile for the PLA, mainly because the country's new leader needed its political backing.
"It will give the PLA more resources...enhanced budgetary clout, only because Jiang Zemin's own position depends to a significant extent on the military support he has," he said.
"Deng was in a position to say no to different people in the PLA. I don't think Jiang is quite in the same position."
Pollack said that how the PLA would use its new leverage remained to be seen, but he thought it was unlikely to flex its muscles in an "assertive or aggressive fashion."
Ominous gray clouds scudded over Hong Kong on Sunday as the British colony marked the 100-day countdown to the handover, but there were few physical signs of gloom and doom in the wealthy community of six million.
More than 7,000 Hong Kong people took to the streets to the din of cymbols and kettle drums in a patriotic fervour to celebrate the impending reunion with China at midnight on June 30, 1997.
A stone's throw away, thousands more, most of them westerners and swelled by an influx of visitors, indulged in the ritualistic orgy that has built up around the annual international Rugby seven-a-side tournament.
The tournament was honoured this year, the last under British rule, when Rugby Authorities made it into the world cup event.
The 28th and last British governor, Chris Patten, described Hong Kong as running as smoothly as a Rolls Royce limousine -- but warned China against tinkering with the finely tuned machinery that is the Hong Kong of 1997.
But for the majority of Hong Kong's hardworking citizenry, it was a normal Sunday. A chance for a lie-in, a family gathering at a restaurant -- a day off from work.
With just 100 days to go, Hong Kong is awash in a sea of differing emotions.
Some, like the street revellers, are delighted that more than 150 years of Chinese humiliation is about to end.
"This is a grand and great occasion. In just 100 days, we will return to the Chinese motherland," said chief organiser Raymond Wu as the revellers gathered in Victoria Park -- named after the queen who reigned when Britain, at the height of its imperial powers, wrested Hong Kong from China's weak and crumbling Qing dynasty in the mid-19th century.
"We welcome the washing away of over a century of humiliation and shame," Wu said to a burst of applause.
Others fret, particularly the pro-democracy camp, about their future under a China that has already put in place plans to dilute civil liberties and dissolve the elected legislative council -- undoing democratic reforms spearheaded by Patten.
A handful of demonstrators, their mouths taped shut in what they said was a symbol of things to come, took up position around the base of Queen Victoria's statue and held up placards condemning China's brutal military crackdown on student-led demonstrators around Beijing's Tiananmen Square in June 1989.
Many people are simply keeping their fingers crossed.
But Hong Kong, as it enters the last leg of its drawn out transition from British colony to Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China, has defied those who forecast a society in chaos, of panic, economic collapse and deserted buildings.
Patten said Hong Kong had reached this moment in its history in first class condition.
He cited a poll conducted earlier this month by the 1997 Transition Project at Hong Kong's Baptist University that found that 90 percent of the people here were happy with life.
Patten said the views that Hong Kong would quickly adjust to the rolling back of freedoms or of more authoritarian government were dubious.
"Hong Kong is, as I said recently, a smoothly functioning community. It's like a Rolls Royce," Patten said.
"All you need to do if you're in charge is to slip into the driving seat, switch on the ignition and away you go.
"I don't quite see the point of lifting the bonnet to tinker with the engine. That only raises worries about whether it will work so well, and whether you may be persuaded by some people to start stripping it down for spare parts."
Thousands of Hong Kong people took to the streets under rain-filled skies on Sunday to celebrate the 100-day countdown to the resumption of Chinese rule over the British colony at midnight on June 30.
The bad weather failed to dampen an outburst of nationalistic pride as dragons, lions and unicorns -- Chinese symbols of luck and joy -- pranced to the deafening clash of cymbals and drums.
More than 7,000 people of all ages from more than 100 pro-Beijing community organisations took part in the parade which wound through busy streets on Hong Kong island.
When Hong Kong, a British colony for more than 150 years, returns to China, it will become a Special Administrative Region (SAR) governed by its own Chief Executive and promised considerable autonomy in running its affairs.
"This is a grand and great occasion. In just 100 days, we will return to the Chinese motherland," said chief organiser Raymond Wu at the start of the rally which gathered in Victoria Park -- named after the British queen who reigned when Britain seized Hong Kong from a weak China in the 19th century.
"We welcome the washing away of over a century of humiliation and shame," Wu said to a burst of applause.
The present Queen's head is disappearing from the territory's coins and stamps. Victoria Park will be renamed Central Park after the handover.
Few of the merry-makers as much as glanced at the massive bronze statute of Victoria in the park as they left for a march through the streets.
Sporting red and white baseball caps and waving little red and gold flags of China interspersed with the red and white flags of the new Hong Kong SAR, the crowds marched through busy streets, laughing and urging bystanders to join in. Few did.
Not everyone was as joyful as those in the parade.
A handful of demonstrators, their mouths taped shut, took up position around the base of Victoria's statue and held up placards condemning China's military crackdown on student-led demonstrators around Beijing's Tiananmen Square in June, 1989.
"People are bleeding, butchers are celebrating, shame on you," the black and white placards read.
But they failed to get much attention.
"They are mad. This is a glorious occasion. The past has been a shame for Hong Kong. I cannot wait for the handover," a bystander, Wu, 65, told Reuters.
