Peter Jarvis, chief executive of brewer to leisure group Whitbread Plc, said the company is seeing fairly strong growth in consumer spending on leisure.
Jarvis said although consumer spending has been positive for the last 12 months, it was masked somewhat by expenditure on the National Lottery which took out 5.0 billion stg from the economy last year, equal to about 5.0 percent of total leisure spending in Britain.
"So all of the natural growth there would have been last year was missing," he told Reuters in an interview.  
"So the feelgood factor was not there and the main reason was the diversion of expenditure into the Lottery. But the comparables now don't have the Lottery effect in and we have got back into quite strong growth in leisure expenditure," he said.
The improvement was evident across all areas of its activity although Jarvis was especially encouraged by the hotels business.
"The hotel market in this country is very buoyant. The growth in expenditure in hotels far outstrips growth in new accomodation. And that is about more travel, more tourism, more retired people, more affluent retired people."  
Whitbread acquired health and sports club group David Lloyd Leisure for about 200 million stg and a chain of 16 Marriot hotels in Britain for about 185 million last August.
"We are making very good progress in our hotel business. Our profits are substantially ahead of last year and our customers are recognising the improvements that have been made to our hotels through joining up with Marriot," he said.
"The performance of the Marriot hotels we bought has improved against last year as well as the performance of Whitbread hotels that have been transferred to Marriot."  
Whitbread opened about 45 new budget hotels called Travel Inns during the year to March 2 and Jarvis said they this part of the hotels arm was performing well. "The occupancy levels we are getting in our budget hotels now are higher than they have ever been since we started out in this business," Jarvis said.
He said the Marriot company would contribute substantially to the earnings of Whitbread, even after interest payments.
"If we paid 185 million for Marriot, and you can work out the interest, I am saying we will make many millions beyond that in the current year. And this is the first full year we have had Marriot," he said.  
"Next year David Lloyd will be in that kind of position and I think that Pelican will be as well," he added.
Whitbread announced an agreed 133 million stg bid for the Pelican Group of cafes in the UK in July.
"This year if you take Marriot and you take our Travel Inns we will make broadly as much money in hotels as we make in beer," Jarvis said.
The beer company reported operating profit of 44.9 million stg in 1995/96, a rise of some 4.5 million on the previous year, but just 15 percent of the company's total operating profit.  
Whitbread's restaurants and inns division, which includes Marriot hotels, reported trading profit of 88.3 million up from 66.0 million.
The company is due to report half-year results on November 5.
Scotch whisky maker Highland Distilleries posted a 14 percent fall in its full year profits on Monday, saying sales of its brand leader The Famous Grouse blend fell in Britain and the home market remained tough.
"The UK continues to be a very competitive market. However there are indications that prices are moving up with more emphasis being given to brand building activities," it said.
Pretax profits fell to 37.1 million pounds ($58.43 million) in the year ended August 31, 1996 down 14 percent. Before reorganisation costs, profits were flat at 36.5 million pounds, below the market forecast range of 39.2 million to 42.5 million. Highland's shares fell 10p to 332p in early trade.
The British market for Scotch whisky fell by four percent, despite a cut in excise duty in the November 1995 Budget, while sales of The Famous Grouse fell by three percent.
"These results illustrate the problem Highland has got; the fact it still makes about 60 percent of its profits out of Famous Grouse sales in the UK where the market continues to be very competitive," said BZW analyst Charles Winston.
In the England and Wales off trade, which represents 65 percent of the home market, the Famous Grouse market share rose 0.5 percent to 9.3 percent.
However, sales in the on-trade or in pubs and restaurants remained tough and The Famous Grouse share fell by one percentage point. But overall market share for The Famous Grouse rose slightly to 13.3 percent.
Overall export sales of The Famous Grouse were up five percent and sales in Europe rose 13 percent, with strong performances in France, Greece and the Netherlands, although conditions were more difficult in Asia.
Single malt whiskies continued to grow both at home and overseas with Highland's key brands, Highland Park from Orkney and Bunnahabhain from Islay, up 12 percent on a global basis.
Profits from associate Robertson &amp; Baxter fell nine percent to about 10 million pounds mainly because of increased advertising behind the Cutty Sark brand.
Sales of new and mature whiskies to blenders have grown considerably with new filling orders for the calendar year 1996 up by 31 percent.
The interest charge rose by 2.8 million pounds mainly due to the cost of carrying a 26 percent shareholding in distiller Macallan-Glenlivet Plc from January 1996.
Highland and Suntory, Japan's leading Whisky distiller, already owned 51 percent of Macallan but decided in July to pay up to 88 million pounds to take control of the remaining 49 percent.
Highland argues that the Macallan malt whisky brand has substantial growth potential.
Highland reported an exceptional charge of 3.0 million pounds in the year to cover reorganisation costs at Macallan and Macallan bid defence costs. ($1=.6350 Sterling)
Britain's Lloyds Chemists said on Friday it was unable to advise shareholders what action to take on a renewed bid offer from UniChem until it had heard from rival suitor Gehe AG.
"What we will now need to do is to see if we can ascertain Gehe's intentions," finance director Johnathan Fellows said in an interview.
Both UniChem's original bid for the pharmacy chain and a rival offer from German pharmaceutical wholesaler Gehe AG lapsed in March after being referred to Britain's Monopolies and Mergers Commission because of competition fears.
"We have no comment at this stage. We need to meet as a board and we clearly need to have some correspondence with our shareholders. We have not yet resolved what recommendations to make," Fellows said.
"I would hope to make an announcement in the next few days."
News of UniChem's renewed offer sent Lloyds shares to a record high of 523p, before slipping back to 518p, up 13-1/2p on the day. UniChem shares fell 6p to 250. Gehe shares trading in Frankfurt were off two marks at 109 marks.
Gehe, whose lapsed offer was an all cash bid pitched at 500 pence per share, said it planned an announcement later in the day.
UniChem, which already owns 9.9 percent of Lloyds, is offering 16 new UniChem shares and 926p in cash for every 10 Lloyds shares. That values the company at 657.6 million pounds ($1.04 billion).
UniChem also said it had identified cost savings and revenue benefits "conservatively" estimated at more than 15 million pounds in the 12 months after an acquisition and in excess of 20 million pounds a year thereafter.
As well as cost-savings UniChem said the acquisition would enable faster development of its retail pharmacy business and be earnings enhancing after 12 months.
"We believe that our extensive retail expertise, together with our unparalleled pharmaceutical wholesale distribution capabilities, will greatly enhance both businesses," said Jeffery Harris, chief executive of UniChem.
The offer was announced shortly after Britain's Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) cleared the way for a takeover of Lloyds, providing UniChem and Gehe fulfill promises to sell off certain parts of Lloyds.
"UniChem and GEHE have each identified a number of potential firm buyers for the businesses they are required to divest. These have been approved by the minister," said the DTI.
If either UniChem or Gehe are successful in acquiring Lloyds, they must sell off specified Lloyds' wholesale businesses within three months of the completed merger, the department said.
Lloyds Chemists, owns the second largest chain of retail pharmacies in Britain with more than 900 outlets. UniChem is one of the two largest wholesalers of pharmaceutical products in Britain and also owns a chaon of some 400 retail pharmacies.
Gehe, Europe's largest drug distributor, is keen to expand its pharmaceutical retail business in Britain which it entered with the acquisition of AAH Plc in April. ($1=.6298 Pound)
Ice cream had a sad time in Europe this summer, adding fresh impetus for the big makers to try to persuade us to eat it in the winter.
"We think for Unilever its meant 125 million pounds ($198.4 million) in lost sales and lost profits of 50 million in the summer months across europe," said David Lang, analyst at Henderson Crosthwaite.
The dull summer has hit impulse purchases of ice creams worst of all, a high-margin sector that makes up one third of all European ice cream sales.
Coca-Cola, sometimes taken as a benchmark for consumer spending behaviour, reported a 10 percent decline in case sales in Germany, 17 percent down in Britain and four percent down in France as a result of the poor summer.
It's no surprise then to find marketing executives at Wall's and Nestle scurrying for new products to sell in the winter months.
Britain's Birds Eye Wall's, owned by Unilever, said it has launched seven new lines across its impulse, take-home and multipack sectors as chocolate indulgences for the winter months.
Nestle is trying to roll out products like its Christmas Log in France to even out the seasonal swing in sales.
Both companies argue if people in Norway and Sweden, where the climate is cooler, can eat twice as much ice cream than in Britain, then there is work to be done.
"The snag is that in summer when people are on holiday that is when impulse sales are always at their highest, people just don't associate having an ice cream with winter," said John Campbell, an analyst at Paribas.
Industry watchers also point out that children, who account for 40 percent of all impulse icecream sales, take their longest holidays in the summer.
Wall's, the largest player in the British icecream market worth about 1.0 billion pounds estimates some 60 million pounds of the market growth in 1995 came from the very hot summer.
Wall's brands account for 17 out of the top 20 selling impulse brands with Wall's Solero heading up the league followed by Magnum White and Magnum Classic.
In terms of total market share Wall's has 43 percent in Britain, Nestle Lyons Maid 12 percent, Mars 7 percent, own label 29 percent and others 9 percent.
In a week of indifferent summer weather Wall's sells about 23 to 25 million portions of icecream whereas in a hot sunny week this figure can rise to around 55 million portions.
The big players in the 15 billion pounds European icecream market have come down with a thud from the summer of 1995.
It was the third hottest summer on record in Europe and August the hottest and sunniest ever -- with long periods of temperatures above 16 degrees centigrade, at which point consumers really switch into buying icecream.
Temperatures soared to an average 17.5 degrees centigrade in Britain with 7.8 hours of sunshine a day compared with 7.2 hours in 1996. Statistics from the MetOffice, Britain's national weather centre, show an average temperature of 15.9 degrees for the summer of 1996. The office says the South of France and Spain had just an average summer this year.
Nestle, who entered the UK market in 1992 with the purchase of the Lyons Maid brand, estimates total sales in Britain are down some 5 percent at 879 million due to the dull summer, of this hand held icecreams accounted for 489 million.
In Britain the all-time Summer record for Wall's still stands at 71 million portions sold during one week in the long, hot summer of 1976 -- the year when Wall's Cornetto first hit the market.
However much the big fridge fillers spend on advertising and dreaming up new products it will be hard to break that record.
($1=.6299 Pound)
British tobacco and insurance conglomerate B.A.T Industries can expect more tough questions about U.S. litigation when it reports third quarter results on Wednesday as scientific evidence continues to mount that smoking and lung cancer are linked.
"It should be another set of solid results but they are nowadays rather secondary to litigation developments which are critical to the company's future growth prospects," said Charles Pick, analyst at Panmure Gordon.
B.A.T shares appear increasingly vulnerable to this issue.  
The growing pace of litigation claims against B.A.T's U.S. tobacco subsidiary Brown &amp; Williamson, and the U.S. industry in general, recently led credit rating agency Standard &amp; Poor's to revise down its outlook for the company to negative.
Meanwhile, analysts expect B.A.T's pretax profits this quarter to range from 650 to 715 million stg, slightly firmer than the 659 million stg last time.
No exceptional items are anticipated and the company pays a dividend only at the half- and full-year stage.
Paradoxically, underlying strength and growth in tobacco is likely to offset a mixed performance from financial services.  
While the group's main life and pension firms Allied Dunbar, Eagle Star overseas and Farmers should report higher sales, Eagle Star's general insurance business is widely forecast to suffer further from a cyclical downturn.
Analysts expect B.A.T's tobacco sales to emerging markets to remain strong, with continued growth in Asia.
Pretax profits for the nine month period, estimated to top the 2.0 billion stg mark, will include 69 million of exceptional gains on sale of two subsidiary businesses in the first half.
Further ahead, a consensus forecast for 1996 full-year earnings per share is 51.10p, rising to 53.40p for 1997.  
However, despite the prospect of firmer earnings and a strong performance by the London stock market in the first 10 months of ths year, B.A.T shares have generally weakened.
They have fallen from a high of 585p on February 2 to 434p on Friday, shedding nearly four billion pounds from the company's total stockmarket value along the way.
The main damage has been done by constant pressure on both B.A.T and its big U.S. rival Philip Morris from a stream of upsets and shifts in the progress of U.S. litigation.
The trend has led some of its big UK shareholders to call for a demerger of B.A.T's two component businesses.  
Analysts are sceptical on the whole about the possibility of demerger, despite the tactic's popularity among other diversified groups with tobacco interests.
"I don't think a demerger is legally possible and I don't think management see it as in the group's interest. In fact it only makes sense to liley-livered UK institutions who are obssessed with the U.S. tobacco litigiation," said Tom Bennet, analyst at Paribas.
Some tobacco litigants also oppose demergers, claiming they would amount to "false conveyance" on the tobacco industry's ability to pay up if it were to lose a major court battle.  
Proponents, on the other hand, argue a demerger would separate U.S. tobacco liabilities and enable the company to put its effort into selling cigarettes in Asia and other emerging markets.
The successful spin-off of Imperial Tobacco from the Hanson group has added more fuel to their cause, along with American Brands Inc's plan to spin off its UK-based Gallaher tobacco operations some time next year.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
British cider group Matthew Clark said on Tuesday fashionable "alcopop" drinks had helped to wipe a third off the sales of its premium brands -- Diamond White, K and Babycham -- in the first five months of the financial year.
Matthew Clark has been hit the hardest by a surge in popularity for so-called alcopops -- alcoholic colas and lemonades -- which have proved a success with younger drinkers. Fierce price wars among rival drinks companies have also had ab affect.
Since Matthew Clark stunned the stock market in September with a profit warning that wiped more than 290 million pounds ($466 million) off its market value, investors have badgered the group to explain how it intends to win back sales.
In the long-awaited statement, Matthew Clark conceded that price wars had continued and that sales of draught cider in June and July, were 10 percent lower than during last year's hot summer. Premium brands saw sales slump 30 percent.
The group's draught cider sales were 15 percent down across the whole summer -- although current trading in cider had since stabilised. "We expect the underlying growth within the cider market as a whole to resume," the company said.
But it said it expected to hold its interim dividend at nine pence when it reported half year results ending October 31.
The company's shares closed a sharp 17.5 pence higher at 317.5 pence, although far short of their year high of 804 pence.
"The thing that's made them bounce is they've said they expect to maintain the dividend. But you've got to be cautious because there's no guide as to underlying profit levels," said one dealer.
The company has launched a review of its marketing strategy in branded drinks, mainly Diamond White and mainstream ciders Dry Blacthorn and Gaymers Olde English. The key findings will be released in January.
In the meantime, the company said it would create the new position of marketing director, a main board appointment, and take on 40 staff in sales and marketing in its branded drinks division.
Alcopops have proved especially popular with young drinkers, forging major inroads into the British drinks market. In May, research body Euromonitor said it would be worth about 170 million pounds this year after 100 million in 1995.
Leading brands include alcoholic lemonade Hooper's Hooch, owned by Bass, and Two Dogs, marketed by Merrydown.
Drinks industry leaders agreed in January to a voluntary code of practice aimed at limiting the promotion of alcopops after the drinks sparked a storm of controversy over whether they encouraged under-age drinking.
In its last budget, the government imposed a heavy duty on ciders with an alcohol content over 7.5 percent from next year but left alcoholic colas and lemonades unaffected.
B.A.T Industries, reporting a nine percent rise in nine-month profits, on Wednesday ruled out a demerger of its tobacco business despite conceding that U.S. tobacco litigation was the main issue affecting its share price.
Chief executive Martin Broughton said the company did not see value in demerging the group into separate tobacco and financial services companies.
A strategy review showed "there was no value we could see that would be generated from a demerger," he told Reuters.
Profits in the nine months rose to 2.04 billion pounds ($3.3 billion) from 1.87 billion last time. Profits in the third quarter rose to 714 million from 680 million pounds.
Trading profit from financial services rose by three percent, and profits from tobacco were seven percent ahead.
Worldwide cigarette sales rose by three percent, although volumes were lower in the United States, a market where total industry sales were flat, the company said.
The growing pace of litigation claims against the company's U.S. cigarette subsidiary Brown &amp; Williamson (B&amp;W), and the U.S. industry in general, continues to unsettle investors and hurt B.A.T's share price.
B.A.T shares have fallen from a high of 585 pence on February 2 to below 430 pence, shedding nearly four billion pounds from the company's stockmarket value along the way.
Broughton said a demerger of Brown &amp; Williamson would be "highly destructive" of shareholder value, adding there was "no question" that the board of directors was united on the issue.
He also played down fears over U.S. litigation. Only a few cases actually get to court although many are filed, and the company was confident of winning its appeal in the high-profile Carter case, Broughton told a meeting of company analysts.
In the case of Grady Carter, of Orange Park, Florida, a jury in Jacksonville ruled in August that B&amp;W was negligent and made a dangerous and defective product. Carter smoked for 50 years until he was diagnosed with lung cancer.
B.A.T shares have fallen sharply since the Florida court decided to award damages of $750,000 to Carter.
Lawyer Woody Wilner, who acted for Carter in the Florida case, had promised to bring one case a month, but three have been postponed until next year and one dismissed, B.A.T said.
B.A.T was also confident of blocking the U.S. Food and Drug Administration's attempts to bring tobacco regulation into line with drugs and pharmaceuticals, said Broughton.
If the FDA proposals become law, cigarettes will be classified as "medical devices" and would have to meet rigorous safety and sales criteria.
Responding to a recent paper in the U.S Science Magazine which claims a direct link between smoking and lung cancer at cell level, Broughton said B.A.T had no internal research which proved smoking caused lung cancer or that smoking was addictive.
"We have not concealed, we do not conceal and we will never conceal," he said. There was still a lack of understanding of the mechanisms of diseases attributed to smoking, he added.
Turning to the business results, B.A.T said the seven percent rise in tobacco trading profit to 1.27 billion pounds was helped by strong sales growth in the Asia Pacific and the African, Middle East and Indian subcontinent regions.
In financial servies, B.A.T said its U.S. unit Farmers continued to have an excellent year. In Britain, the Eagle Star insurance division faced fiercely competitive conditions and profits fell to 162 million pounds from 194 million.
It also suffered a 91 million pounds charge for a surge in asbestos and pollution claims in the United States.
The life insurance and investment business reported a five percent increase in profit.
Shares in the company initially rose after the results, but later fell back to close at 427-1/2p pence, down 8-1/2p. ($1=.6223 Pound)
British tobacco and insurance company B.A.T Industries reported a nine percent rise in nine-month profits on Wednesday but conceded U.S. tobacco litigation was the dominant issue affecting its share price.
Profits in the nine months rose to 2.04 billion pounds ($3.3 billion) from 1.87 billion last time. Profits in the third quarter rose to 714 million from 680 million pounds.
Trading profit from financial services rose by three percent, and profits from tobacco were seven percent ahead.
Overall cigarette sales rose by three percent, although volumes were lower in the United States, a market where total industry sales were flat, the company said.
Chief executive Martin Broughton told a meeting fo share analysts, "...the dominant issue affecting the share price for B.A.T Industries currently is U.S. litigation, regulation and indeed science."
The growing pace of litigation claims against the company's U.S. tocacco subsidiary Brown &amp; Williamson, and the U.S. industry in general, continues to unsettle investors and hurt B.A.T's share price.
B.A.T shares have fallen from a high of 585 pence on February 2 to around 434 pence, shedding nearly four billion pounds from the company's stockmarket value along the way.
But Broughton said the company did not see value in demerging the group into separate tobacco and financial services companies.
He told Reuters that a recent strategy review showed "there was no value we could see that would be generated from a demerger."
Chairman Lord Cairns said in the results statement that the company had never kept from the public any conclusions showing that smoking causes diseases.
Broughton, responding to a recent paper in Science Magazine in the U.S. which claims a direct link between smoking and lung cancer at cell level, told analysts the company had no internal research which proved that smoking caused lung cancer, or that smoking was addictive.
He said there was still a lack of understanding of the mechanisms of diseases attributed to smoking.
Turning to the business results, B.A.T said the seven percent rise in tobacco trading profit to 1.27 billion pounds was helped by strong sales growth in the Asia Pacific and African, Middle East and Indian subcontinent regions.
In financial servies, B.A.T said its U.S. unit Farmers continued to have an excellent year. In Britain, its Eagle Star insurance division faced fiercely competitive conditions and profits fell to 162 million pounds from 194 million.
The life insurance and investment business reported a five percent increase in profit.
Shares in the company initially rose after the results, but later fell back to show a loss of 2-1/2 pence by 1130 GMT.
"The numbers are almost exactly in line with expectations, in fact if anything towards the top end of the range," said BZW analyst Nyren Scott-Malden. ($1=.6223 Pound)
A planned merger between British brewer Bass and Carlsberg-Tetley will create such a dominant force in the industry that it is almost certain to fall foul of Britain's competition authorities, regional brewers said on Tuesday.
"I think it will be referred but what will happen then is anybody's guess. They must think there is a reasonable risk of that happening otherwise why have a plan B in place," said Ralph Findlay, finance director of Wolverhampton &amp; Dudley Breweries.
On Sunday Bass confirmed details of a long-awaited deal to merge with Carlsberg-Tetley, leaving Danish brewer Carlsberg with a 20 percent stake in a merged Carlsberg-Tetley-Bass if British regulators allow the marriage to take place.
Under the terms of the deal, if Bass cannot combine C-T with its own brewing business within 16 months, Bass has the option to put its whole shareholding to Carlsberg and Carlsberg has an option to put 15 percent of C-T to Allied Domecq.
"If it doesn't work it seems plan B comes into operation. But it is by no means clear what will invoke plan B," Findlay said.
Bass was knocked off its perch as Britain's leading brewer last year when Scottish &amp; Newcastle (S&amp;N) acquired Courage from Australian brewer Fosters, giving it a 31 percent share of Britain's beer market.
A merger of Bass and Carlsberg-Tetley would make Bass Britain's largest brewer by far with 35 percent of the market.
Britain's competition authorities will want to find out if the deal would leave Bass and S&amp;N too much control over beer prices and too powerful a grip in the Midlands and Yorkshire.
Roger Young, retail director at Greenalls Group, said: "In common with the rest of the world we are expecting a referral. Anything that takes competition out on the supply side is not good news from the point of view of the purchaser."
Greenalls, owners of some 2,400 pubs, exited brewing at the end of February 1991. "If it becomes too much for Bass to swallow then I suppose plan B swings in -- Carlsberg effectively takes over," he told Reuters.
Many brewing analysts argue that the duopoly that exists in Scotland between Bass and S&amp;N results in much higher margins for the brewers which means higher prices for drinkers.
"I think the supply position in the Midlands and Yorkshire is obviously something that needs to be looked at very carefully," said one senior source at regional brewer.
"Because Bass and Allied have dominated the beer supply in those areas since the Second World War."
"In those areas they are the two biggest brewers and the two biggest brewers getting together in very significant regions like that is something which has never happened before."
A spokesman for the Office of Fair Trading confirmed it would look at the deal but declined to comment on whether the OFT would recommend referring it to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission for a full investigation.
Industry sources say although S&amp;N's purchase of Courage was referred the OFT gave the company much clearer guidance on what concessions would be required to let it through.
S&amp;N was obliged to reduce its tied estate of pubs by 115 to 2,624. It also agreed to the early release of IEL (Intrepreneur Estates Ltd) pub tenants from a supply agreement. It had to release 500 of them by January 1996 and a further 500 by January 1997.
Family-controlled British food and retailing group Associated British Foods should report a sharp rise in full year profits on Monday, as its retail and textile business benefit from a pickup in high street spending.
"The two parts of the business really driving the increase are the retail and clothing side which is benefitting from the feel-good factor," said Michael Bourke, analyst at Panmure Gordon. Analysts forecasts are centred on pretax profits of 415 million stg up from 375 million last time and a dividend increase to 9.5p from 8.8p.  
ABF, a food processor and manufacturer in Britain, Australia and the United States, as well as a food and textile retailer in Britain and Ireland, is also widely expected to yield yet more cash from British Sugar.
"The feature of the figures as ever is the strong cashflow coming out of British sugar. Net cash should rise by about 130 million pounds which always begs the question will they spend it?" said UBS analyst Charlie Mills.
That would bring net cash to 735 million stg at year end.  
On the retail side PriMark, women's clothing chain in Ireland and Britain, as well as the Irish retailing businesses -- Stewarts supermarkets in Northern Ireland and Crazy Prices and Quinnsworth -- are expected to perform much better.
However the mainstream side of the business, British Sugar which contributes about 50 percent of profits, is likely to be slightly weaker after a hot summer in 1995 affected the sugar beet crop and margins came under pressure from the strength of sterling which made European imports look cheaper.  
Aside from British sugar, analysts expect the grocery business, like milling and baking, Rivita and Burton biscuits to show improvements.
On average analysts forecast trading profit from groceries, excluding British Sugar, to rise by 14 million stg to 82 million in the belief that the company has managed to claw back some of the margin on non-packaged food.
Including British Sugar operating profits are predicted to increase to about 265 million from 252 million previously.
ABF shares have risen consistently from 280p in January to 418-1/2p at Friday's close.
Consensus estimates, taken from a Reuter poll of 17 brokers, for 1996 is 30.1, rising to 31.6 in 1997.
The company has a return on equity of 11.5 percent, putting it in 28th slot in the FTSE-All share food manufaturing sector of 57 companies.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
Anglo-Dutch food-to-detergent group Unilever Plc, reporting third quarter results next Friday, is likely to have suffered from restructuring costs for its North American industrial cleaning business Diversey and from weak ice cream sales in a drab European summer, analysts said.
Diversey, acquired in January from Molson for 360 million stg, was merged with Lever Industrial in October to form a combined business with annual turnover of 1.15 billion stg and a workforce of 13,000 in 60 different countries.  
Analysts predict third quarter pretax profits in a range of 760 to 820 million, against 786 million stg last time.
The wide range reflects uncertainty about the size of redundancy payments and closures needed to reshape Diversey.
Charges for Diversey could range from 15-30 million stg, with a further 20 million needed for restructuring other Unilever businesses.
But the half-year dividend, paid in the third quarter, is forecast to rise sharply as a result of changes to dividend policy announced at the full year.  
Analysts expect a 10.3p dividend payout under a new policy whereby 35 percent of the previous year's total dividend would be paid in the stronger of either Dutch guilder or sterling so far this year. A 10.3p payout would represent a 46 percent increase on the previous half-year's 7.05p.
For the nine month period analysts are forecasting pretax profits of about 1.9 billion pounds.
"European ice cream sales are not going to have the special benefit they had in 1995 or 1994," said John Campbell, analyst at Paribas.  
"European economies are generally weak, and German consumption if anyhing lower because of the tough economic climate there," he added.
Michael Bourke at Panmure Gordon saw three factors behind the downturn.
"The exceptional charge will be a bit higher, perhaps about 40 million compared with 20 million the year before, and ice cream sales in the third quarter will have been influenced a lot by the summer weather."
"Last but not least is the currency factor, with the majority of Unilever profits in US dollars and the recent weakness in the dollar clearly having an impact."
The consensus forecast EPS for 1996, taken from 24 brokers polled by Reuters, is 84.40p, rising to 92.30p in 1997. Six brokers downgraded their 1996 EPS forecast in October.
Unilever's return on equity is currently running at 27.3 percent, against 66.57 percent for Unigate, the highest in the FTSE all-share food manufacturing sector.
The company's shares reached a high of 1412 pence for the year in mid-September before closing down at 1283 on Friday.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
Brewer to leisure group Whitbread Plc should report a 10 percent rise in first half earnings on Tuesday, kicking off the reporting season for drinks companies with a rosy picture of consumer spending on the high street this summer.
Analysts estimate pretax profits for the six months to the end of August in a range of 168-175 million, against 155.7 million last time.
Dividend forecasts range from 5.9 to 6.24p, up from 5.75p.  
"It's been a good performance in the summer. Consumer spending has picked up and on the beer side, they moved to higher margin premium beer. And you will see their acquisitions adding some benefit," said Ron Littleboy, analyst at Nomura.
Whitbread acquired health and sports club group David Lloyd Leisure for about 200 million stg and chain of 16 Marriott hotels in Britain for some 185 million in August 1995.
"If there is a surprise, it is probably on the upside and if that is going to come from anywhere, it would be on the hotels side," said John Beaumont, analyst at Merrill Lynch.  
The Whitbread hotel company includes about 130 budget Travel Inns, where new openings are running at a rate of about  one every two weeks, and Marriott hotels.
"The main growth will come on retail and leisure and what will pull them back is their leased pub side," said Littleboy.
WHitbread manages about 2,200 pubs mainly on 20 year leases.
The restaurant and leisure division includes TGI Friday, Pizza Hut, 50 percent owned by Pepsico, Costa Coffee, Thresher and Beefeater. Whitbread Inns, the managed pubs side of the business, includes Brewers Fayre which leads the casual-dining out sector.  
The company announced an agreed 133 million stg bid for Pelican Group of cafes in July -- including Cafe Rouge and Dome urban, French-style bistros -- which the company said would not contribute to earnings this financial year.
"One of the main variables that influences our future profit estimates is how quickly will they be expanding on the leisure and pub side," said Beaumont.
"And provided the company is still fairly sanguine on the roll out programme for these concepts, that will gives us a lot of reassurance."  
Some analysts are also keen to get a view from the company about the impact of a minimum wage for its workforce on its earnings -- the opposition Labour Party widely expected to win the forthcoiming general election has pledged it will introduce a national minimum wage.
Whitbread shares rose 10p to 729p in early trade Friday, as positive notes from analysts reached their clients ahead of the first half results. The stock set a high for the year of 757p in April. The consensus estimate for EPS, taken from 25 brokers polled by Reuters, is 47.40 for 1997, rising  to 52.30 in 1998.  
The company currently shows a 9.84 percent return on equity, against the leader in the FTSE 350 breweries and pub sector Aberdeen Steak with 99.68 percent. Rival Bass has a return on equity of 10.44 percent.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
Family controlled food and retailing group Associated British Foods reported a 15 percent increase in its full year profits on Monday, but chairman Garry Weston sounded a wary note when asked about the year ahead.
"I never play hostage to fortune. I've always been cautious," said Weston in an interview. "It's a very bad time to forecast anything with two elections coming up -- in the United States and Britian. We have no idea how they will impact on us."  
ABF posted pretax profits of 430 million pounds ($704.1 million) for the year ended September 14 whereas most stockmarket forecasts had centred on 415 million.
Worldwide sales were up 17 percent to 5.707 billion. Profits were driven by an especially strong performance from the company's retail operations in Britain and Ireland. Operating profits rose 25 percent to 69 million, with the company's supermarkets in Ireland further increasing their market share.
Primark, the women's textile chain, included results from One Up stores bought from Storehouse last year.  
"We got the fashion right. Primark has been refurbished and that improved its buying power and gave it more notice on the high street." In the second half Primark was more in tune with public demand, said Weston.
ABF's food manufacturing and processing operations in Britain showed an 8.0 percent sales growth to 3.11 billion pounds and a 12 percent profits increase to 282 million.
However, operating profits from British Sugar fell to 183 million. British Sugar sales are limited by European community quotas and the renewed strength of the pound made imports from mainland Europe look cheaper in the second half.  
AFB's profits from its Australia and New Zealand operations increased by 20 percent to 38 million.
AC Humko, acquired from Kraft Foods in September 1995, chipped in its first full year of profits to ABF's north American business to help turn a 3.0 million loss in 1995 to a six million stg profit.
Analysts were surprised by the stronger than expected performance from ABF's milling and baking business where margins improved strongly. ABF owns the Twining group of companies, Burtons Biscuits, Allied Bakeries and an animal feed business.  
"They were good numbers a bit ahead of our figures, but it will be hard to match that in the current year," said Michael Bourke, analyst at Panmure Gordon. "The green pound rate is likely to mean a reduction in British Sugar profits and inflation in food prices looks very subdued," he said.
ABF shares rose 8p to 426p on the news.
Net cash held by the company rose by 196 million to 797 million at September 14, after spending 242 million on its assets and acquisitions during the year.
The company is keen to expand in the Far East and although ABF's history is one of expansion by organic growth if the oppurtunity arises it will make acquisitions, said Weston.
"We have been picking up acquisitions and if opportunities come along for something big then we will take it," he said.
During the year ABF acquired or formed businesses in Norway, Indonesia, China and the United States. ($1=.6107 Pound)
Family controlled food and retailing group Associated British Foods reported a 15 percent incrase in its full year profits on Monday, but chairman Garry Weston sounded a wary note when asked about the year ahead.
"I never play hostage to fortune. I've always been cautious," said Weston in an interview. "It's a very bad time to forecast anything with two elections coming up -- in the United States and Britian. We have no idea how they will impact on us."
ABF posted pretax profits of 430 million pounds ($704.1 million) for the year ended September 14 whereas most stockmarket forecasts had centred on 415 million.
Worldwide sales were up 17 percent to 5.707 billion. Profits were driven by an especially strong performance from the company's retail operations in Britain and Ireland. Operating profits rose 25 percent to 69 million, with the company's supermarkets in Ireland further increasing their market share.
Primark, the women's textile chain, included results from One Up stores bought from Storehouse last year.
"We got the fashion right. Primark has been refurbished and that improved its buying power and gave it more notice on the high street." In the second half Primark was more in tune with public demand, said Weston.
ABF's food manufacturing and processing operations in Britain showed an 8.0 percent sales growth to 3.11 billion pounds and a 12 percent profits increase to 282 million.
However, operating profits from British Sugar fell to 183 million. British Sugar sales are limited by European community quotas and the renewed strength of the pound made imports from mainland Europe look cheaper in the second half.
AFB's profits from its Australia and New Zealand operations increased by 20 percent to 38 million.
AC Humko, acquired from Kraft Foods in September 1995, chipped in its first full year of profits to ABF's north American business to help turn a 3.0 million loss in 1995 to a six million stg profit.
Analysts were surprised by the stronger than expected performance from ABF's milling and baking business where margins improved strongly. ABF owns the Twining group of companies, Burtons Biscuits, Allied Bakeries and an animal feed business.
"They were good numbers a bit ahead of our figures, but it will be hard to match that in the current year," said Michael Bourke, analyst at Panmure Gordon. "The green pound rate is likely to mean a reduction in British Sugar profits and inflation in food prices looks very subdued," he said.
ABF shares rose 8p to 426p on the news.
Net cash held by the company rose by 196 million to 797 million at September 14, after spending 242 million on its assets and acquisitions during the year.
The company is keen to expand in the Far East and although ABF's history is one of expansion by organic growth if the oppurtunity arises it will make acquisitions, said Weston.
"We have been picking up acquisitions and if opportunities come along for something big then we will take it," he said.
During the year ABF acquired or formed businesses in Norway, Indonesia, China and the United States. ($1=.6107 Pound)
Anglo-Dutch food-to-detergent group Unilever Plc , reporting third quarter results next Friday, is likely to have suffered from restructuring costs for its North American industrial cleaning business Diversey and from weak ice cream sales in a drab European summer, analysts said.
Diversey, acquired in January from Molson for 360 million stg, was merged with Lever Industrial in October to form a combined business with annual turnover of 1.15 billion stg and a workforce of 13,000 in 60 different countries.
Analysts predict third quarter pretax profits in a range of 760 to 820 million, against 786 million stg last time.
The wide range reflects uncertainty about the size of redundancy payments and closures needed to reshape Diversey.
Charges for Diversey could range from 15-30 million stg, with a further 20 million needed for restructuring other Unilever businesses.
But the interim dividend, paid in the third quarter, is forecast to rise sharply as a result of changes to dividend policy announced at the full year.
Analysts expect a 10.3p dividend payout under a new policy whereby 35 percent of the previous year's total dividend would be paid in the stronger of either Dutch guilder or sterling so far this year. A 10.3p payout would represent a 46 percent increase on the previous half-year's 7.05p.
For the nine month period analysts are forecasting pretax profits of about 1.9 billion pounds.
"European ice cream sales are not going to have the special benefit they had in 1995 or 1994," said John Campbell, analyst at Paribas.
"European economies are generally weak, and German consumption if anyhing lower because of the tough economic climate there," he added.
Michael Bourke at Panmure Gordon saw three factors behind the downturn. "The exceptional charge will be a bit higher, perhaps about 40 million compared with 20 million the year before, and ice cream sales in the third quarter will have been influenced a lot by the summer weather."
"Last but not least is the currency factor, with the majority of Unilever profits in US dollars and the recent weakness in the dollar clearly having an impact."
The consensus forecast EPS for 1996, taken from 24 brokers polled by Reuters, is 84.40p, rising to 92.30p in 1997. Six brokers downgraded their 1996 EPS forecast in October.
Unilever's return on equity is currently running at 27.3 percent, against 66.57 percent for Unigate, the highest in the FTSE all-share food manufacturing sector.
The company's shares reached a high of 1412 pence for the year in mid-September before closing down at 1283 on Friday.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
British brewer to leisure group Whitbread Plc posted a 14 percent increase in its half year profits on Tuesday to 177.5 million pounds ($290 million) and chairman Sir Michael Angus said he expects recent levels of growth in its markets to continue.
In an interview chief executive Peter Jarvis, in ebullient mood, said British consumers were feeling better, spending much more on leisure and the upward trend was set to roll for at least another two years.
"I think the consumer position in Britain is favourable for at least two or three years. Unless we have some kind of catastrophe, the prospects in Britain are good. All the economic predictions from the banks point to low inflation and growing consumer confidence," said Jarvis.
The company's hotels business doubled profits and sales in the six months to August 31. Like-for-like sales were up by 11 percent with occupancy levels and room rates much higher.
"The number of foreign tourists to Britain is growing very, very fast. They spent 13 to 14 billion pounds last year and half of that in London," he said.
"That's been growing very fast in the last 10 years and its forecast by Henley (forecasting centre) to be the fastest growing sector of the leisure market."
Americans flocked to Whitbread's 16 Marriott hotels during the half year for the first time as a result of a marketing link-up with Marriott in America, adding five percent to occupancy levels at some Marriott hotels.
Whitbread acquired health and sports club group David Lloyd Leisure for 200 million pounds and a chain of 16 Marriott hotels in Britain for some 185 million in August 1995.
The company also owns a chain of about 130 low budget Travel Inns, which Jarvis said will be added at the rate of about one every 10 days to reach 300 by the end of the year 2000. Consumers also spent more eating out during the half year with Pizza Hut, jointly owned with Pepsico, and TGI Friday's sales ahead by about 20 percent.
The Beefeater chain of restaurants increased like-for-like sales three pecent and profit by 7.0 percent. The company's restaurant and leisure division saw pretax profits rise 58 percent to 56.3 million.
Whitbread Inns, which includes casual dining out pub chain Brewers Fayre, saw profits grow by 15 percent to 77.4 million and total sales by 14 percent. But sales from Whitbread's 2,200 leased pub estate were down three percent.
"The main driving force on like-for-like sales is on food pubs and restaurants and we also opened a lot more new places that appeal to people who would not normally go to pubs."
Whitbread's beer company increased profits by 12 percent to 30.8 million pounds on sales which were ahead eight percent pushed higher by the acquisition of the Labatt and Wadworth brands. Heineken Export and Stella Artois produced the strongest brand performances.
However gearing -- the ratio of debt to equity -- more than doubled to 27.3 percent, after a spate of recent acquisitions including the Pelican Group of French-style urban bistros Cafe Rouge and Dome, for 133 million in July.
Whitbread shares rose 7p to 748p on the results, which beat most analysts' forecasts.
John McGrath, chief executive of food and drinks giant Grand Metropolitan Plc said the company will continue to unshackle itself from production in its mission to bear down on costs.
"In many cases we don't need to produce what we sell," McGrath told Reuters. "Whether you own the processing is often academic as long as you control the quality."
The company is looking at further Seneca-type deals in the next year, he said, where a third party takes on the production but GrandMet keeps hold of pricing, marketing and quality.  
Last year, GrandMet contracted out to U.S. company Seneca the processing and packaging of its Green Giant's canned vegetables. Green Giant was acquired as part of Pillsbury, GrandMet's U.S. food arm, in 1989.
Pillsbury currently produces some 75 percent of what it sells and this number will decline in the future.
If a product can be insulated by patent from the competition, then GrandMet would want to continue making it, said McGrath in an interview. But, if it's a bread or biscuit product, for instance, it may make economic sense to allow a third party producer in.  
"We would never get out of distilling whisky or blending... that is a skill which only a few highly skilled people can ensure. They know how to get the right quality, the right taste, the right balance. But, whether you need to bottle it yourself is another matte," McGrath said.
"The best example is Coca-Cola who are brand marketeers, brand owner and controllers of the concentrate. But, whether they own the processing is academic as long as they control the quality."  
McGrath paid tribute to former chairman Lord Sheppard, who stood down as chairman in March, after 21 years with the group, for transforming GrandMet into a leaner, more focused company.
When Sheppard took over in 1987, he found a company with over 30 very different business which he thinned down to three: food, drinks and Burger King retailing.
McGrath, appointed chairman and chief executive of International Distillers and Vintners (IDV), GrandMet's spirits arm, in September 1993, brought a tough, cost-conscious urge to make Sheppard's vision work.  
McGrath, whose management skills stem from the shopfloor and operations rather than boardroom, separates himself from the culture of GrandMet's heady, deal-making days of the last decade when companies were carved up and sold on in droves.
"The view I take which the board strongly supports is concentrating on making those very expensive assets that we have acquired work highly efficiently."
"Now is the time to concentrate on organic growth very strongly supported by new brand development. We will only make minor acquisitions chiefly in emerging markets or food service in the U.S. where we can get some good returns," he said.
"What I am very much concentrating on now is taking all the action we possibly can to as rapidly as possible increase our return on capital," said McGrath.
"We are investing for the medium term and no longer for short term gain," he said.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
John McGrath, chief executive of drinks and food company Grand Metropolitan, said the company should be able to return cash to shareholders in 1998 when its debt will be at least one billion pound lighter.
"By early next year our debt should be down in the low to middle two billion (stg) area and interest cover will be seven times or thereabouts. But we cannot afford buybacks at the moment. They depend entirely on our ability to sweat our assets and our ability to throw off enough cash in the next financial year."  
Market forecasts for 1997 pre-tax profits centre on a range of 1.04-1.06 billion stg for the full year to September 30, 1997 with many brokers cutting their estimates as sterling started its run up against the dollar in May. Estimates for GrandMet's 1996 pretax profits are bunched around the 980 million stg mark.
"We are really being hit by the dollar at the moment. At a rate of 1.60 it will hit us by about 16 million pounds a year, assuming this rate continues into 1997," McGrath said.
The dollar stood at 1.493 against the pound on May 1 before climbing to its 1.638 level today.
Pillsbury, GrandMet's U.S. foods business and Burger King generate about 60 percent of group earnings in dollars.
At GrandMet's spirits arm International Distillers and Vitners price rises have "stuck very well, probably better than they have done in a decade. Volumes are also up and we have had a good year in the U.S."
"I think what will surprise the competition will be our performance in Europe," he said.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
British consumers are feeling better, they are spending more on leisure, and the upward trend is set to roll for at least another two years, said Whitbread chief executive Peter Jarvis.
"The markets in which we operate are better than they have been for many years. People are feeling better. House prices are rising again, the job situation is better and they have seen personal tax decreases this year," Jarvis said in an interview.
Earlier Whitbread posted a 14 percent rise in half year pretax profits to 177.5 million, beating analysts forecasts.  
"I think the consumer position in Britain is favourable for at least two or three years. Unless we have some kind of catastrophe, the prospects in Britain are good. All the economic predictions from the banks point to low inflation and growing consumer confidence," said Jarvis.
He said the outlook was unlikely to be affected by the government's budget statement on November 26 or if the opposition Labour Party wins the next general election. Labour have pledged to introduce a national minimum wage.
"I'm on the record as being in favour of a national minimum wage. I hope and believe it will be set at a reasonable level."  
Whitbread's workforce comprises 42,000 full-time and 33,000 part-time staff, with many working in catering.
The company's hotels business doubled profits and sales in the six months to August 31. Like-for-like sales were up by 11 percent with occupancy levels and room rates much higher.
"The number of foreign tourists to Britain is growing very, very fast. They spent 13 to 14 billion pounds last year and half of that in London."
"That's been growing very fast in the last 10 years and its forecast by Henley (forecasting centre) to be the fastest growing sector of the leisure market."  
Americans stayed at Whitbread's Marriot hotels for the first time in the half year.
"We never had effective marketting in the U.S. for our hotels before. This link up with Marriott in the States gives us a great marketing power. And they are in really attractive places for American visitors like Stratford-upon-Avon and Edinburgh. So we have seen a huge influx of Americans and in many places it has put five extra points on occupancy levels."
Whitbread acquired health and sports club group David Lloyd Leisure for 200 million stg and a chain of 16 Marriott hotels in Britain for some 185 million in August 1995.  
The company also owns a chain of about 130 low budget Travel Inns, which Jarvis said will be added at the rate of about one every 10 days to reach 300 by the end of the year 2000.
Whitbread plans to expand its hotel presence in London by converting County Hall and bringing Travel Inns into the capital. Consumers also spent more eating out during the half year with Pizza Hut, jointly owned with Pepsico, and TGI Friday's sales ahead by about 20 percent. The Beefeater chain of restaurants increased like-for-like sales three pecent and profit by 7 percent.  
Whitbread Inns, which includes casual dining out pub chain Brewers Fayre, saw profits grow by 15 percent to 77.4 million and total sales by 14 percent.
"The main driving force on like-for-like sales is on food pubs and restaurants and we also opened a lot more new places that appeal to people who would not normally go to pubs," said Jarvis.
The group thinks it can add about 40 new Pelican's a year -- the Pelican Group acquired for 133 million in July owns French bistro style cafes the Dome and Cafe Rouge -- bringing the total to about 300.  
"The most satisfying thing for me is the capital we have put into new businesses and invested in them has paid off. They have all performed well."
Whitbread now owns "three to four strong concepts that will give us good growth for the next three to four years."
Whitbread, which confirmed last week it was in talks with BrightReasons about buying its pizza and pasta chains, hopes to agree on terms this month, said Jarvis.
BrightReasons owns a 180-strong chain of restaurants trading as Bella Pasta, Pizza Piazza and Pizzaland.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
Britain's leading discount food retailer Kwik Save Group Plc on Thursday said it was closing 107 shops as part a radical shake-up of its struggling discount chain, which unions said could mean 1,000 job losses.
The group, squeezed between mainstream food superstores and limited range discounters, also reported a 28 percent drop in annual profits to 90.3 million pounds ($148.2 million), before a provision of 87.5 million to pay for the rationalisation.
Sales rose 8.8 percent to 3.5 billion pounds ($5.76 billion) in the year and the company maintained its final dividend at 14.05p, making an unchanged total of 20p.
Chief executive Graeme Bowler said the reorganisation was designed to fend off fierce competition from superstores and continental discount groups, which have robbed Kwik Save of many of its traditional customers.
The restructuring pleased investors and Kwik Save's shares rose to peak 21 pence higher at 325 before settling a few pence bit lower.
A review of the company's operations by outside consultants, initiated in February, showed a need to improve its existing 979 stores and invest in staff and technology.
Kwik Save said it planned to spend some 50 million pounds on its New Generation programme in the next year and 100 million the year after as the new concept is rolled out into its stores.
Finance director Derek Pretty estimated the store closures would involve less than 200 job losses, as 90 percent of the staff would be redeployed in Kwik Save's remaining 900 stores.
There are plans to launch a Kwik Save own-label range to take on the superstores, improve contol over its fresh foods and tighten control of its pricing and quality. The group would have to invest heavily in technology, where it was about two to three years behind the competition.
"Research showed us that what our customers really like is discount values," Pretty said. "What they did not like was our range which was not good enough in some areas and did not match superstores."
Bowler acknowledged the group had failed to invest enough in upgrading the fabric of its existing stores in previous years. The new-style stores will be rolled out over the next three years at a cost of some 300 million pounds.
The chief executive told a news conference the company would introduce a new range of chilled foods, health and beauty products and over-the-counter medicines.
But he said the group was not trying to move away from its roots.
"We are not moving away from discounting prices," he said. "We are not trying to be a mini-version of someone else, we want to be ourselves."
Re-shaping the group was "an enormous task," he said, which would have to be undertaken in stages in order to minimise disruption.
The 107 stores would be closed progressively between now and September 1997. ($1=.6093 Pound)
British clothing retailer Burton on Thursday showed off a 54 percent full year profit rise, breaking all stockmarket forecasts, and said shoppers were happier now than at any time since the early 1990's.
Pretax profits rose to 151.6 million pounds ($249 million) in the year to August 31 from 98.6 million on sales up 7.1 percent to 2.0 billion. The group raised its full-year dividend by 27 percent to 2.8 pence a share.
Chairman Sir John Hoskyns said all the group's divisions had reported an increase in full-year profits.
"This performance reflects the success of the trading strategies and continued brand building in every division," he said in a statement.
The retailer has had a long struggle to boost profit margins in what was until recently a depressed retail market. But the group has achieved a major turnaround.
Finance director Andrew Higginson said there was scope for more improvement in margins, although at a slower pace.
"There is still some scope for margin improvement this year, but be it at a lower pace. It will ease back somewhat from where we are at the moment," he told Reuters.
Higginson described the current trading environment as better than anything seen since the early 1990's, although he said it was certainly not booming.
Burton's Debenhams department store chain produced a 21 percent increase in profits to 102.8 million pounds. Hoskyns said the department store was set for a 20 percent increase in space over the next four years.
All the group's fashion stores, including Top Shop and Dorothy Perkins, made profits. Burton Menswear and Principles both moved back into the black after making losses last year.
Burton's shares rose on the better-than-expected results. The stock stood 1.5 pence higher at 146.5.
"The figures were at the top end of forecasts and we are still positive on the stock," said one senior trader.
Analysts had expected pre-tax profit of between 139.0 million and 149 million pounds.
Burton has just moved into home shopping via the acquisition of mail order group Innovations in August and Racing Green in October. But Higginson said the main focus of the group would remain with its stores.
"At the moment the focus is on the core retail division where the key oppurtunities lie," he said. "Home shopping is a medium-term project which will kick in in two to three years time." ($1=.6093 Pound)
Derek Pretty, finance director of troubled U.K. discount supermarket chain Kwik Save, said on Thursday a radical shake-up of the group, including the closure of 107 stores at a cost of 87.5 million stg, was the best way to ensure its future.
"We researched opportunities in other areas and we reviewed, among other options, mergers. We looked at whether we should go back to being a limited range discounter, with much lower choice, and little in terms of chilled food," he told Reuters.
"But that would have meant losing nine million customers."  
He said the store closure programme would involve less than 200 job losses, as 90 percent of the staff would be redeployed in Kwik Save's remaining 900 stores.
About 1,900 work in the 107 stores to be shut. "Yes, we are confident that the provisioning is solid and appropriate. Anything more than that would have put us in the realms of big baths and contigency buckets."
"We have looked at this particularly carefully, the days of doing big bath provisioning have gone. We have looked very specifically at the stores we plan to close. We are confident it is the proper provision to take us forward." he said.  
At a news conference chief executive Graeme Bowler said the company would introduce a new range of chilled foods, health and beauty products and over the counter medicines as well as widening its existing product range.
"We are going for width rather than depth in brands," he said. Kwik Save will have 100 own-label products in its stores from the spring 1997.
"We are not moving away from discounting prices. It is our core proposition and we will not dilute it," said Bowler. "We are not trying to be a mini-version of someone else, we want to be ourselves."  
"Kwik Save made its reputation because it sold quality products cheaply. We will not engage in selling cheap products cheaply," Bowler told reporters.
Stores will also be upgraded after research conducted by outside consultants Anderson Consulting, initiated in February, showed customers wanted stores to be more welcoming and easy to use, said Bowler.
Kwik Save would need to invest heavily in technology, where it was about two to three years behind the competition, said Bowler, so that, for instance, debit cards could be used at all its tills and stock levels could be better controlled.  
He acknowledged that the group had failed to invest enough in upgrading the fabric of its stores in previous years.
The new-style Kwik Save stores will be rolled out in geographical clusters over the next three years at a cost of some 300 million stg, funded from cost savings.
The 107 stores will be closed progressively next year.
Research had identified the need to beef up the management team and as a result Kwik Save has appointed a group marketing director and a supply chain director, and planned to appoint a new buying director, Bowler said.  
He stressed the underlying performance of the group remained strong, generating sales of seven billion stg over the last two years despite fierce price pressure from superstores, and a return on capital of 20 percent in line with the industry average.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
Shares in Anglo-Dutch consumer group Unilever Plc jumped on Friday after the group posted a better-than-expected five percent rise in third-quarter profits.
The company announced that profits rose to 826 million pounds ($1.4 billion) for the quarter, boosting the share price by 75p to 1,350 by the official close of the London market at 1630 GMT.
"I gritted myself for something rather unpleasant and its turned out very well," said David Lang, an analyst at Henderson Crosthwaite.
The results beat analysts' forecasts which ranged from 760 million pounds to 820 million.
"I think there is quite a lot of momentum in Unilever and that is before the benefits of management reorganisation which began in September," said Lang.
Before an exceptional charge of 32 million pounds, mostly to reshape Diversey, its newly acquired industrial cleaning business, pretax profits rose six percent to 918 million pounds.
"The total charges were clearly lower than we expected," said Richard Newboult, an analyst at Lehman Brothers. He had forecast a total restructuring charge of 74 million pounds with about half of that related to Diversey.
Diversey, acquired in January from Canadian brewer Molson for 360 million pounds, was merged with Lever Industrial in October to form a combined business with annual turnover of 1.15 billion pounds and a workforce of 13,000 in 60 countries.
Unilever owns a range of household brands including Persil and OMO washing detergents, Brooke Bond tea, Ponds cosmetic cream and Walls and Igloo frozen foods.
"Although poor weather had a negative effect on ice-cream sales, other parts of the business in Europe did well," said Unilever press officer Mike Haines.
Analysts and stock market dealers agreed. Despite the impact of a dull summer on ice-cream sales and profits, Unilever still managed to improve its profit by 13 million pounds to 502 million in the three month period from improved profits in detergents, frozen foods and personal products.
"The real strength came from the emerging markets of Latin America and Asia Pacific and the strong underlying performance in North America," added Haines.
The Asia-Pacific region turned in a 20 million pounds increase in profits to 108 million in the third quarter, Latin America was up 14 million pounds at 79 million, while Africa and the Middle East showed a nine million rise to 56 million pounds, reflecting changes made by the group to its Nigerian business.
($1=.6093 Pound)
Spirits, pubs and Dunkin' Donuts group Allied Domecq is likely to post a big drop in full-year profits on Tuesday, hit by a 320 million stg loss on the sale of its 50 percent stake in brewer Carlsberg-Tetley (C-T).
Before this exceptional charge, analysts' forecasts for pretax profits range from 560 to 581 million stg, down from 645 million last time, with most of the damage coming in Allied's spirits arm. Profits have been hit by the weak Mexican peso, tough trading conditions in the mature markets of Europe and America and de-stocking in the United States.  
The consensus forecast for the total dividend is 23.6p.
Allied sold its share in C-T to Bass in August for 200 million in cash together with its beer brands, allowing the group to quit brewing and concentrate entirely on its spirits and retailing businesses.
Allied said at the time it expected a loss on the sale of C-T of about 320 million stg.
After tax the company said it would mean a reduction in reserves of some 200 million stg.  
At Allied Domecq Spirits and Wines, many analysts are predicting a 60 million drop in trading profits from the 488 million stg recorded in 1995. Stock reduction and weak markets dented profits at the division in the first half, too.
In the United States where trade stocks of four major brands -- Kahlua, Beefeater, Courvoisier and Canadian Club -- built up last year, Allied was forced to start reducing stock levels by half a million cases which it expected to complete by the end of August 1996.
Some analysts think this de-stocking will strip 40 million stg off operating profits from the group's spirits arm.  
Trading profits from Allied's spirits and wine division dropped to 258 million stg for the six months ended February 29 from 327 million.
"Spirits will continue to show that things are tough although we are now seeing price increases of two to three percent coming in for the industry as a whole," said Mark Puleikis, an analyst at Merrill Lynch.
Allied's retailing division, which includes managed pubs as well as Baskin-Robbins and Dunkin' Donuts, is expected to post only a slight improvement in profits of some eight million to 223 million.  
"Although the managed pub side will improve, let's say it will add about about 12 million pounds to give 127 million at an operating level, Dunkin' Donuts and Baskin Robbins will drag the division down," said one analyst who declined to be named.
In franchising, poor winter weather held back same-store sales growth particularly in Baskin-Robbins during the first half.
Carlsberg-Tetley is forecast to chip in trading profits of some 65 million at the year-end up from 61 million. In the six months to 29 February 1996 it made trading profits of 25 million, an increase of 14 percent on the same half last year.  
Attention will focus on what management has to say about continued pressure from the investment community for a demerger of Allied's spirits division.
Allied shares touched a five-month high of 492p on Friday. "Obviously people are hoping there will be some news on a demerger," said one analyst who chose not to be named.
"A trading demerger would really add value to the group. The City has obviously done its sums and worked out it is worth about five pounds on a post-demerger basis," said another.
A Reuter poll of 24 brokers shows a consenus forecast for earnings per share of 33.7p rising to 37.4 next year.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
Shares in Anglo-Dutch consumer group Unilever Plc rose sharply on Friday after the group posted a better-than-expected five percent rise in third quarter profits.
"I gritted myself for something rather unpleasant and its turned out very well," said David Lang, an analyst at Henderson Crosthwaite.
The shares jumped 42-1/2p in early London trade to 1,317-1/2p after profits rose to 826 million pounds ($1.36 billion) for the quarter. The results beat analysts' forecasts which ranged from 760 million pounds to 820 million.
"I think there is quite a lot of momentum in Unilever and that is before the benefits of management reorganisation which began in September," said Lang.
Before an exceptional charge of 32 million pounds, mostly to reshape its newly acquired industrial cleaning business Diversey, pretax profits rose six percent to 918 million.
"The total charges were clearly lower than we expected," said Richard Newboult, an analyst at Lehman Brothers who forecast a total restructuring charge of 74 million with about half of that related to Diversey.
Diversey, acquired in January from Canadian brewer Molson for 360 million pounds, was merged with Lever Industrial in October to form a combined business with annual turnover of 1.15 billion and a workforce of 13,000 in 60 countries.
Unilever owns a range of household brands including washing detergent OMO, Brooke Bond tea, Ponds cosmetic cream and several ice-cream products.
"Although poor weather had a negative effect on icecream sales, other parts of the business in Europe did well," said Unilever press officer Mike Haines.
Analysts and stockmarket dealers agreed. Despite the impact of a dull summer on ice-cream sales and profits, Unilever still managed to improve its profit by 13 million pounds to 502 million in the three month period from improved profits in detergents, frozen foods and personal products.
"The real strength came from the emerging markets of Latin America and Asia Pacific and the strong underlying performance in North America," added Haines.
The Asia-Pacific region turned in a 20 million pounds increase in profits to 108 million in the third quarter, Latin America was up 14 million pounds at 79 million, while Africa and the Middle East showed a nine million rise to 56 million pounds, reflecting changes made by the group to its Nigerian business.
($1=.6093 Pound)
British dairy and distribution company Unigate Plc posted better than expected profits at the half year stage on Tuesday and said it was seeking to expand its presence as a distributor in mainland Europe.
"We have now refocused the group into food and distribution. And a lot of pan-European customers of ours are looking for us to come to them with some European capability, so one area we are looking at is distribution," chairman Ian Martin said.
Pretax profits in the half year to September 30 were up 0.3 percent at 60.6 million pounds ($101.1 million), better than stockmarket forecasts of 57 to 59 million. The company held cash of 58 million at September 30, giving it ample resources for acquisitions.
The company raised its interim dividend by 5.3 percent to 7.0 pence. Unigate shares were up four pence at 431p by late in the session.
Martin told a news conference: "We tend to see the duck being thickest in Europe and that is where we are shooting at the moment."
Chief executive Ross Buckland said in an interview that Unigate had between 200 and 300 million pounds to spend on acquisitions. "If our interest cover went down below four times then you would have to question our cautiousness," he said.
He ruled out a special dividend, saying that growth by acquisition represented better value to shareholders.
"We are prepared to expand beyond areas in which we operate, into another food area, but if we did it would have to be a large and meaningful acquisition," said Buckland.
Unigate's European foods division reported profits up 3.1 million at 44.1 million in the first half, with fresh foods increasing profits from 20.5 million to 26.5 million pounds.
This increase was helped by the 77 million pound acquisition of Kraft's European margarines and spreads business in August.
Malton, the bacon and pork processing business, has also benefited from recent acquisitions.
In the half year, a total of 100 million was spent on acquisitions, including 20 million on the Hargrave pork products business to further strengthen Malton. Another 77 million was spect buying Kraft's Vitalite and Golden Churn brands to add to St Ivel's existing brands -- Gold and Utterly Butterly.
"I don't believe we can be accused of unwise investments over the last year," Buckland said.
Unigate's dairy business reported profits down 2.9 million pounds at 17.6 million due to lower prices for butter and milk powders, which Unigate estimated cost it about 4.0 million in the period. But from October, Unigate said it has seen a small reduction in raw milk prices.
Wincanton, Unigate's distribution business reported profits up 1.7 million at 12.3 million.
In August, Unigate completed its exit from the U.S. restaurant business with the sale of Taco Bueno and Casa Bonita for 27 million, enabling the company to focus purely on developing its core European food and distribution business.
The group sold its U.S. restaurant chain Black-eyed Pea for 42 million pounds in July and its minority stake in Dutch food company Nutricia for 360 million in January. Cash at the bank and in hand amounted to 292 million at the half-year stage. ($1=.5994 Pound)
British dairy and distribution company Unigate Plc is keen to acquire food and distribution companies in Europe, said finance director John Worby.
"We are actively seeking acquisitions. We continue to look at acquisitions of all sizes in both the food and distribution area in Western Europe," Worby told Reuters in an interview on Tuesday.
"We talk about small, medium and large. Medium is in the area of 50 to 150 million. We will continue to make small acquisitions of the in-fill, bolt-on type nature," he said.  
Unigate, which acquired Kraft's European margarine and spreads business in August for some 77 million stg, reported net cash held of 57.9 million at September 30.
The cash outflow for the half year of 110.4 million stg includes 71.4 million spent on acquisitions, net of disposals. The group sold its U.S. restaurant business Black-eyed Pea for 42 million stg in July.
The sale of Taco Bueno and Casa Bonita for 27 million since the half-year stage enables the company to focus on developing its core European food and distribution business.  
The company also sold its minority stake in Dutch food company Nutricia for 360 million stg in January.Cash at the bank and in hand amounted to 292 million at the half-year stage. Worby declined to say whether the company was in talks with any third parties nor would he be drawn on the specific type of acquisition Unigate is after.
At an operational level Worby said he expects the dairy side of the business to continue to suffer from weak commodity prices in the second half of the year. Dairy reported profits down 2.9 million stg at 17.6 million due to lower prices for butter and milk powders which cost Unigate about 4.0 million in the period.  
But from October 1 Unigate has seen a small reduction in raw milk prices, said Worby.
"In fresh foods, trading is still reasonably tough in the UK retail environment. We have seen high pig prices in the first half which squeezed margins but we expect some easing in that area," he said.
Unigate's European foods division reported profits up 3.1 million at 44.1 million in the first half, with fresh foods increasing its profits from 20.5 million to 26.5 million stg.
The improvement was especially helped by the contribution from the August acquisition of Kraft's margarines and spreads business.
Malton, the bacon and pork processing business, also benefitted from recent acquisitions.
In the half year a total of 100 million was spent on acquisitions, including 20 million on the Hargrave pork products business to further strengthen Malton and 79 million in buying Kraft's Vitalite and Golden Churn brands to add to St Ivel's existing brands -- Gold and Utterly Butterly.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
British food producer Northern Foods Plc posted virtually flat profits on Wednesday, held back by the collapse of world prices for its dairy products.
"The dairy business continues to be affected by the decline of commodity markets compared with a period of exceptionally high prices last year," said chairman Sir Christopher Haskins.
Profits rose one percent before tax and exceptional items to 57.8 million pounds ($97 million) for the six months ended September 30. Northern Foods shares rose 2-1/2p to 198p.
"There is no immediate prospect of commodity prices improving in the second half. We are also very driven by the strength of sterling against other currencies," Jo Stewart, head of Northern's prepared foods division said in an interview.
At a news conference Haskins repeated his plea for Britain to join a single European currency which would remove one swing factor in its profits. "If there is one company that thinks EMU is a good idea it is us."
Prices on the world commodity markets for butter, skimmed milk and bulk cream were off some 20 percent on last year's levels. Weakening world demand for dairy products and the rise in sterling against the other major European currencies was not offset by a reduction in Northern's cost of milk.
Eden Vale Food Ingredients, which sells milk products on world commodity markets was the hardest hit of Northern's divisions. The company estimated the collapse in commodity prices cost it about 6.0 million pounds.
Its dairy business posted operating profits of 21.6 million pounds, down 27 percent, reflecting a sharp deterioration in dairy commodity prices.
Competition in supplying milk to supermarkets remained intense but the recent erosion in prices should stop soon, said Stewart. "The profitability of that sector is now such that people are losing money and we expect the price erosion to stop," he said.
Northern now supplies about 33 percent of all milk in supermarkets, having lost about two percentage points of market share in the first half. Most British consumers get their milk from supermarkets where it costs about 28p, 10p less than a pint delivered to the doorstep.
On Tuesday rival Unigate said its sales of milk to supermarkets fell 2.4 percent in the first half, while dairy profits fell 2.9 million stg to 17.6 million due to lower prices for butter and milk powders, which Unigate estimated cost it about 4.0 million in the period.
Profits from Northern's prepared foods division were up 24.2 percent at 43.1 million, driven hardest by the grocery sector which benefitted from a full six month contribution from Green Isle which sells the Goodfella pizza brand.
But consumers' concern over a link between mad-cow disease and a similar brain wasting disease in humans hit sales of convenience foods and meat pies. Northern estimated the beef crisis cost it about 3.0 million pounds in the first half.
"We have seen a significant swing in our products offered to M&amp;S (Marks and Spencer Plc). Thirty-three of our thirty-five new lines will have no beef in them," Haskins said.
He said total consumption of beef was off 20 to 30 percent since fears first surfaced over the spread of mad-cow disease.
"We have seen no material recovery in consumer demand for beef, we would be glad if it stabilised," said Haskins.
($1=.5950 Pound)
Britain's Northern Foods sees world dairy commodity prices as unlikely to improve in the second half but the impact of this on earnings should be partly offset by improved margins on prepared foods, said Jo Stewart, managing director of the company's prepared food division.
"There is no immediate prospect of commodity prices improving in the second half. We are also very driven by the strength of sterling aginst other currencies," Stewart said in a telephone interview after the firm reported first half results.  
In the first half prices on the world commodity markets for butter, skimmed milk and bulk cream were off some 20 percent on last year's levels.
Weakening world demand for dairy productes and the rise in sterling against the other marjor European currencies was not offset by a reduction in Northern's cost of milk.
Eden Vale Food Ingredients, which sells by-products of milk production like butter, skimmed milk powder and cream, on world commodity markets was the hardest hit of Northern's divisions.  
Overall, however margins recovered on the company's prepared foods business rising one percentage point to 8.0 percent in the first half and there was room for further improvement in the second half, Stewart said.
"Our markets have been strengthening in general. We have seen stronger consumer demand, a trend we expect to continue at least until the end of our fiscal year."
Northern achieved four percent price inflation on its prepared foods in the first half, compared with zero last year, and so far consumers have not reacted to price increases by curbing their demand, said Stewart.  
A typical pack of Northern's biscuits is now 2p higher at 51p than six months ago.
The impact of the beef crisis on consumers demand for beef and meat pies and in turn on Northern's operating profit should lessen in the second half to 2.0-3.0 million, said Stewart.
Sales of Northern's meat products were off 6.8 percent in the first half as shoppers continued to worry about a link between mad-cow disease and a similar brain wasting disease in humans. Northern estimated the beef crisis cost it about 3.0 million pounds in the first half.  
"The impact of BSE is likely to be a little less in the second half as we have put products in the market that can take the same role. We now use chicken, lamb or pork in a pie."
Before the beef crisis about 55 percent of Northern's hot pies were beef against 40 percent today. Pies are more important to Northern in the winter months of the second half year.
Competition in supplying milk to supermarkets remains intense but the recent erosion in prices should stop soon, said Stewart. "The profitability of that sector is now such that people are losing money and we expect the price erosion to stop," he said.  
Northern now supplies about 33 percent of all milk in supermarkets, haing lost about two percentage points of market share in the first half.
Robert Wiseman and fast-expanding Danish dairy products group MD Foods were especially keen on pricing of milk to supermarkets in the first half.
On Tuesday Unigate said its sales of milk to supermarkets fell 2.4 percent in the first half and dairy profits fell 2.9 million stg to 17.6 million due to lower prices for butter and milk powders, which Unigate estimated cost it about 4.0 million in the period.
Northern reported dairy profits down 27 percent at 21.6 million in the six months ended September 30.
Profits from its prepared foods division were up 24.2 percent at 43.1 million, driven hardest by the grocery sector which benefitted from a full six month contribution from Green Isle which sells the Goodfella pizza brand.
-- London Newsroom +44 71 542 6437
Britain's independent brewers on Thursday pressed for a cut in the excise duty on beer ahead of Chancellor of the Exchequer Kenneth Clarke's budget statement on November 26.
The brewers are lobbying hard this time round, after Clarke's previous budget cut the duty on Scotch whisky for the first time since 1895, while leaving the rates on beer and wine unchanged. The duty on beer was raised by 2p a pint in 1994.
"Increasing excise duty over a period...has inevitably increased the divergence with our European partners. The single market demands a single fiscal policy and a uniform excise duty," said a letter to the Times newspaper from the chairman of the Independent Family Brewers of Britain.
The letter said the group would deliver a petition to the European parliament, asking for the European Commission to take into account the wide differences in excise duty between EU member states on alcoholic drinks and beer in particular.
The Brewers and Licensed Retailers Association (BLRA) are arguing that a 20 percent cut in the beer duty, equivalent to knocking 6p off a pint, would lower inflation, help boost government revenue and discourage illegal cross-border shopping.
Oxford Economic Forecasting researcher Adrian Cooper used the Treasury's own economic model to argue that a 20 percent cut in beer duty would mean lower inflation, more jobs and in the second year of a duty cut more money for the Exchequer.
British duty on a pint of five percent alcohol by volume is 30 pence. In France, it is just four pence, encouraging people to buy their beer in mainland Europe.
The total volume of duty paid beer flooding into the country is estimated by the BLRA to be about 4-1/2 percent of the total beer market. Over half of this is for illegal resale.
The Scotch Whisky Association estimates the government has received 2.0 million stg more in revenue from the industry as a result of the last cut in the whisky duty. It says the reduction has also fed through into lower prices for consumers.
Before last year's budget, a typical bottle of blended whisky costing 10.70 pounds ($18.01) about 67 percent went in tax, with duty at 5.55 pounds a bottle and value added tax at 1.59 pounds.
Since last year's cut in duty, average prices per bottle have fallen to 9.85 pounds for on supermarket own labels, although the price of brands has risen slightly. The Association is pressing for another four percent off duty paid on a bottle.
Britain's tobacco industry wants a freeze on duty, arguing the government is losing revenue because the tax is so high compared with central Europe, that smuggling is rife.
"We would certainly like to see a freeze this year because we are so far out of sight of the rest of Europe that it's causing a major smuggling problem," said Clive Turner, media relations at the Tobacco Council. "The government is currently missing out on 640 million a year in lost revenue," he said.
A 50 gram pack of rolling tobacco normally costs about 7.47 stg in Britain but can be bought in Belguim for slightly under 2.0 stg. The Tobacco Council estimate 68 percent of all hand rolling tobacco sold in Britain comes from mainland Europe and some 62 percent of that is smuggled across.
In his last budget statement Clarke, left the duty paid on hand rolling tabacco unchannged but raised thaty on cigarettes by 15 pence per pack. Cigarettes currently retail for around 2.95 pounds.
In the 1993 budget, Clarke pledged to raise tobacco tax on average by the rate of inflation plus at least three percent in future budgets. Last year's rise was equivalent to the rate of inflation plus seven percent. ($1=.5940 Stg)
British sugar and sweeteners group Tate and Lyle Plc is likely to see a sharp drop in its full year profits on Wednesday, as its U.S. sugar unit Staley suffers a near 50 percent decline in earnings.
"The main swing factor will be Staley which has been squeezed between high raw material costs and poor high-fructrose corn syrup pricing," said Michael Landymore, an analyst at Henderson Crosthwaite. Analysts forecasts for pretax profits range from 270 to 285 million stg, down from 311 million last time. A total dividend for the year of 17.0p is expected, up a penny.  
Staley, which turned in profits of some 150 million stg in 1995, is expected to contribute just 75 million this time round.
But analysts expect the downturn at Staley to be partly offset by an improvement in the company's North American sugar business in the second half and better returns from its investment in emerging markets.
"The key feature is going to be Staley and the re-negotiation of contracts although clearly these figures come a little early for the company to give us much indication of that," said John Elston, an analyst at Panmure Gordon.  
Staley, which produces high fructrose corn syrup used as sweeteners in Coca Cola and Pepsi drinks, re-negotiates supply contracts with soft drinks firms at the beginning of every calender year.
In May, at the half year stage, Tate &amp; Lyle warned on its results for the full year as a result of steep grain prices. For the 26 weeks ended March 30, 1996 profits were up 10.1 percent from a year earlier at 168.2 million stg before tax.
But chairman Sir Neil Shaw said that profits for the full year were expected to be below the level anticipated at the company's annual meeting in January.  
"Trading conditions for Staley, the group's North American subsidiary are difficult, affected by increases in available industry capacity and coinciding with a dramatic increase in the cost of maize," said Shaw at the half year stage.
He said Staley's profits were expected to continue to be affected by the abnormal grain prices and competitive pressures through 1997 but that Tate &amp; Lyle should get more benefit from other investments, especially in new growth areas.
Traditionally Staley has provided about 50 percent of group profits.  
In July, the company said an explosion at its Scottsbluff sugar beet facility in Nebraska would hit 1996 pretax profits by 10 million -- two thirds would be for the insurance loss and one third for the disruption to production.
Domino Sugar, a North American cane refiner, is likely to show an improvement while Tate's Western Sugar Company in Colorado is expected to suffer from a bad sugar beet crop.
Analysts expect Tate's north American business, excluding Staley, to contribute about 110 million to group profits.
An improvement is also expected in earnings from Tate's UK Thames sugar refinery, forecast to chip in about 60 million stg.  
Amylum, a Belgium based cereal sweetener and starch company majority owned by Tate, is forecast to make about 85 million.
Other European sugar businesses should contribute some 22 million. In 1995 Tate's European business made 144.3 million stg in operating profits.
The company's sweeteners and starches busines in the rest of the world, including 100 percent owned Bundaberg Sugar in Australia, should add about 32 million stg to group trading profits up from 25.1 million stg in 1995.  
The group's animal foods and bulk storage business is predicted to contribute some 32 million, slightly down from 35.4 million in 1995. A Reuter poll of 20 brokers produced a consensus estimate for earnings per share of 37.6p for the year ended 28 september 1996, rising to 40.6p the following year.
Since May, Tate &amp; Lyle's shares have underperformed the stock market by about five percent but outperformed its peers in the food manufacturing sector by a similar amount.
The shares were up 3p in early trade on Friday at 466p.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
British sugar and starch producer Tate and Lyle reported an 11 percent fall in full year profits to 276 million pounds ($463 million) on Wednesday after an earnings drop of more than 50 percent at its U.S. subsidiary Staley.
But the company's shares rose 9-1/2 pence to 479-1/2 after touching 482 as company executives made positive noises about the current trading environment for corn miller Staley, with corn prices now at more normal levels and demand rising for ethanol, which is extracted from the corn.
The price of corn now at $2.60 a bushel has settled after a much larger crop this summer of 9.3 billion bushels, Tate chief executive Larry Pillard told Reuters in an interview.
"I would like to think futures prices will stay at about $2.60 a bushel. At this time last year they were up by 33 percent at 3.50 and as high as five dollars a bushel at mid-year. That's unprecedented, the highest price for 120 years," he said.
Staley was severely squeezed last year. On the one hand by very high corn prices, which doubled after a low U.S. corn crop, and increased competition from new producers of high fructose corn syrup and on the other hand by its inability to pass this added cost onto customers.
"Conditions have reversed this year so that corn milling companies can divert some of their excess capacity into ethanol and that could tighten up the market a bit," he added.
Ethanol, a gasoline substitute, can also be made by corn millers but the price of gasoline was so low last year that this option was closed. Gasoline prices have averaged 63 cents a gallon so far this year, reaching a peak of 77.01 in April, up from 56 cents a gallon in 1995.
"I think that obviously the world grain situation getting back to more normal levels is encouraging, the re-emergence of ethanol is quite encouraging and the three percent increase in sugar deliveries in the U.S. is quite encouraging," said Pillard.
Staley, which produces high fructose corn syrup used as sweeteners in Coca Cola and Pepsi drinks, renegotiates supply contracts with soft drinks firms at the beginning of every calender year. Pillard said it was too early to comment on the next round of contracts.
"It looks like Staley has finally hit the bottom of the cycle," said one analyst who declined to be named.
Tate benefited in the last quarter of the year from a recovery in the U.S. sugar market where the selling price of white sugar rose after a low U.S. beet crop reduced supplies.
Cane raw sugar costs declined as supplies of cane raw sugar rose due to increases in the import quota.
North American sweeteners and starches business chipped in 116.2 million pounds in the year ended September 28, down from 170.9 million, as a result of Staley.
European profits rose 8.0 million to 152.5 million pounds, with increased security of supply to Tate's sugars from the new European Union Sugar Regime and progress at Amylum, its European cereal sweetener and starch business.
Trading profit from its emerging markets business was up 6.4 million at 31.5 million. Tate's animal feed and bulk storage business showed a slight profit improvement to 36.8 million.
Tate reported a currency loss of 3.5 million pounds in the year, against a gain of 4.8 million last time, due to sterling's strength against the dollar.
The board recommended a final dividend of 11.7p, bringing the total for the year to 17.0p, an increase of six percent. ($1=.5956 Pound)
Luxury goods maker Vendome on Wednesday blamed poor tourist spending in the Far East for a 4.6 percent drop in first half profits, but hoped this would recover when the yen recovers its strength.
The group, whose exclusive brands include Cartier, Dunhill and Karl Lagerfeld, saw pretax profits fall to 113 million pounds ($190 million) from, 118.5 million, while sales rose to 703.6 million from 699.5 million.
A fall in interest income to 3.2 million pounds from 5.7 million contributed to the profit decline, the company said.
Chairman Joseph Kanoui said he believed the drop in Far East demand was temporary and would pick up when the yen recovered.
"The decrease in tourist spending in the Far East, we believe, is a direct result of the weakening of the yen in the second half of last year," he said in a statement.
"The combination of these two factors has particularly affected those of our brands which have a greater proportion of their sales in the Far East."
Vendome's profits fell short of market expectations which had looked for earnings of between 125 million and 135 million pounds. Its shares were five pence lower at 535.5.
The group, 70 percent owned by South African-controlled Richemont Securities, was set up three years ago as part of a reorganisation of the luxury goods and tobacco businesses of Compagnie Financiere Richemont AG, Dunhill Holdings and Rothmans International.
In Swiss francs, pretax profits fell 2.1 percent to 214.7 million ($166.3 million) in the six months to September 30.
Sales of jewellery in the first half decreased below last year by 17.4 percent and sales of leather goods, whch mostly depend on consumer demand in the Far East, fell by 2.3 percent.
Sales of watches rose by 10.4 percent and writing instrument sales increased by 1.7 percent over last year. Perfume sales showed an increase of 20.4 percent over last year, reflecting the success of the new Cartier fragrance launched in the second half of last year, but menswear sales were slightly down.
Cartier, founded in Paris in 1847, now has 164 retail outlets and provides an estimated 80 percent of group profits. Other Vendome brands include luxury writing goods maker Mont Blanc and Alfred Dunhill.
The group said it had made significant investments in the first half to boost its retail and wholesale network and in advertising major new products.
It is also building a new factory in France for leather goods, due to open next year. The group said this would give better control over production and higher margins. ($1=.5956 Pound) ($1=1.2908 Swiss Franc)
Lord Douro, deputy chairman of Vendome Luxury Goods, whose products are especially popular with Japanese consumers, said he thinks the yen has stabilised against the dollar and may improve.
"Chinese demand continues to increase strongly and the Japanese currency will stabilise if not improve from here and we will benefit from that," said Douro in an interview.
The yen reached a five year low of 82.52 against the dollar in April 1995. This April 1, at the start of Vendome's half year reporting period ending September 30, it stood at 107.17, before rising to around its current 111 level.
Larry Pillard, chief executive of British sugar and starch producer Tate and Lyle, said on Wednesday the company's beleagured North American unit Staley should benefit from improved market conditions this year.
"Conditions have reversed this year so that corn milling companies can divert some of their excess capacity into ethanol and that could tighten up the market a bit," he said.
Wet corn miller Staley posted a 50 percent fall in earnings because of a record increase in maize costs, dragging down group pretax profits for the year by some 35 million to 276.3 million.
Brewer to leisure group Bass Plc is expected to report a strong improvement in full-year earnings on Wednesday, driven by growth at Holiday Inns and its chain of Harvester restaurants.
"The company will benefit from a full year on its acquisition of Harvester, a full year of sales in Caffrey's and Hoopers Hooch and a full year from Robinsons'," said BZW analyst Charles Winston. Bass bought the Harvester chain of 78 pubs for 165 million stg from Forte in July.  
Analysts forecasts for pre-tax profits range from 665 to 675 million stg, up from 599.1 million stg in 1995. A dividend of 24.7p is anticipated. The tight profits range bears testimony to the full and detailed trading statement the company announced in September, covering the first 48 weeks of the year.
Chairman Sir Ian Prosser said at the time revenue per available room in the US franchised hotels increased by six percent. Analysts expect revenue per available room to show an increase of 8.0 percent in Europe at the full year.  
"The growth will come from hotels, up 18 percent and pubs up 16 percent," said Goldman Sachs analyst Colin Davies.
Analysts expect profits from Holiday Inns to come in at about 193 million stg up from 164 million a year ago. The pubs division, which includes Harvester, is anticipated to show trading profits of some 284 million up from 240 million.
However, trading profit from the leisure division is expected to be down about 10 million at 65 million because of the impact of the national lottery and scratch cards on admissions at Gala, Bass owned traditional bingo clubs.  
But betting shops Coral, also part of the company's leisure division, are likely to see the benefit of government changes in June that allowed betting shop operators to have up to two 10 pound all-cash AWPs on the premises.
The company's brewing business should report a near 10 million stg increase in operating profit to 155 million, helped along by strong sales in the markets leading alcopop Hoopers Hooch and creamy ale Caffrey's.
Profits from the soft drinks division, which includes Britvic, should also be slightly higher -- some analysts predict by as much as 10 million up at 56 million -- as a result of the acquisition of Robinsons' soft drinks business.
Bass shares closed 11p down at 783-1/2p on Friday as talk surfaced that its proposed 200 million stg acquisition of Carlsberg-Tetley would only be allowed through with tough conditions imposed by government.
-- London Newsroom +44 71 542 6437
Drinks, food and retail group Grand Metropolitan Plc will post a strong rise in its underlying business performance in its full-year results on Thursday driven by its North American foods business Pillsbury, but it also stands to take a huge 522 million stg loss on disposals.
"The growth will really come through from Pillsbury, particularly on dough and pizza," said Goldman Sachs analyst Colin Davies. Analysts forecasts for pretax profits range from 948 to 999.0 million stg, before the loss on disposals.  
GrandMet posted pre-tax profits of 920 million stg last year. Dividend forecasts are centred on 15.8p, up from 14.9p.
The loss on disposals is made up of 265 million stg of goodwill written off on the sale of its optician business Pearle, a 36 million stg hit on the disposal of William Hill and Mecca to leisure group Brent Walker and a 14 million stg loss on the disposal of its Erasco food business in Germany, to the Campbell Soup Company.
At the time of the Erasco sale GrandMet said it would take a further 207 million stg of goodwill written off on the sale of a batch of European foods businesses.  
The sell-off is designed to enable GrandMet to focus in Europe on its major international brands - Pillsbury,  Green Giant, Haagen-Dazs and Old El Paso.
Aside from the exceptional charges analysts see a 26 percent profit improvement from GrandMet's food business to an estimated 456 million stg.
Pillsbury has achieved prices rises and gained market share since the first half, GrandMet said in September.  
Analysts expect Pillsbury to contribute about 274 million stg of the estimated 456 million while Pet, producer of Old El Paso and Italian foods and soups acquired in January 1995 for some 2.0 billion stg, is expected to chip in about 160 million.
Sector analysts also anticipate a near 15 million stg improvement in profits to 470 million from the company's spirits arm International Distillers and Vintners (IDV). "We expect GrandMet's drinks business to do better than either Allied Domecq or Guinness," said Merrill Lynch, analyst Mark Puleikis.  
"They have been a lot more proactive and aggressive in their advertising expenditure over the last two years and they are more exposed to the vodka category which is standing them in good stead," he said.
Britain's largest brewer Scottish &amp; Newcastle Plc will see more benefit from its Courage brands in its half year results due on Monday, but its holiday village business Center Parcs will hold it back, analysts said.
"The company will see an improvement from a full contribution at Courage, but what is really holding it back is Center Parcs and there could be a worry on the currency with the recent strength in the pound," said Nikko analyst Dermott Carr.
Analysts forecasts for pretax profits range from 178 to 198 million stg up from 154.5 million last time.  
Dividend forecasts centre on 7.0p. Brewing is expected to contribute some 80 million stg, with 45 million of this total anticipated from Courage. Courage made just 9.0 million stg in operating profit, on turnover of 298.9 million stg, to overall group profits in the first half of 1995.
S&amp;N acquired Courage from Australian brewer Foster's in August, 1995 to create Britain's largest brewing group in a deal that cost about 550 million stg. Since then S&amp;N has quickly set about reducing its brewing capacity by some 1.5 million barrels a year, initially by closing two breweries and shedding some 1,600 jobs.  
John Smith's Courage is now Britain's leading ale brand.
The group's Center Parcs holiday resorts are expected to suffer from continued weak consumer leisure spending in Belgium, the Netherlands and Germany. Center Parcs made operating profit of 82.0 million stg in the year to April 28, 1995 down 2.1 percent on turnover of 365.3 million. S&amp;N's new village at Bispinger Heide in Germany was opened against a very weak economic background in July 1995 and the cost of opening was higher than the company expected.  
Pontin's, S&amp;N's other leisure brand, made trading profits of 3.6 million, down from 4.1 million due to the sale of four sites and major refurbishment work at two others.
The performance of its Center Parc villages in the Netherlands and Belgium were adversely affected by a lack of consumer confidence and cut price competition from operators and it responded by investing heavily in those countries.
Analysts expect this trend to have carried on into the first half of the year, forcing the leisure division to report profits down some 5.0 million at 45 million.  
The company has three Center Parcs in Britain at Nottingham in the Midlands, East Anglia and Longleat, in the west of England. It owns two in France, one in Germany, two in Belgium and six in Holland.
However, S&amp;N's retail division, which includes the 1,600 strong chain of Chef &amp; Brewer restaurants, should see trading profits improve by increased investment aimed at rebranding and lifting the image of some outlets.
The company's managed pub estate has been rebranded to include pub-cafe bars like Rat &amp; Parrot and entertainment pubs like Big Hand Mo.  
The consensus of analysts forecasts for profits from the retail division rests at 88 million stg, up some 8.0 million on the first half of 1995. The division includes an estate of 740 tenanted and about 1,850 managed pubs as well as Chef &amp; Brewer.
The company's shares have outperformed its peers by about eight percent since February, but started underperforming the FTSE100 index by some six percent since late September.
The shares were up 142p at 642 on Friday from their 500p close on January 3. Return on equity is currently running at 5.62 percent, half its 11.32 percent level in 1995, against 10.44 percent currently for Bass.  
Operating margins have fallen to 12.27 percent from 15.46 percent in 1995.
A Reuter poll of 23 brokers estimates produced a consensus estimate EPS of 44.8 for the year ended April 28, 1997 rising to 49.5 for year end 1998.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
Britain's largest brewer Scottish and Newcastle Plc announced a 26 percent increase in half-year profits to 195.1 million pounds ($328 million) on Monday and said the second half of the year had started positively.
The company's acquisition of Courage from Australian brewer Fosters last year helped give a 67 percent push to 89.9 million pounds in trading profits from its beer divisions.
"Overall, I think our 10 percent dividend increase, at the top end of the (forecast) range, is a measure of our confidence for the second half of the year," chief executive Brian Stewart told Reuters in an interview.
The dividend rise to 7.21 pence per share beat most analysts' forecasts which were centred on a 7p payout.
"General trading conditions are at least as good as they were this time last year and there has been a bit of an improvement in mainland Europe," he added.
The company's shares rose 7p to 647p. "The results were well ahead of our expectations. The really surprising number was the one that came in from beer. We were very impressed," said James Wheatcroft, an analyst at Panmure Gordon.
A Reuter poll of analysts produced a forecast range of 178 to 198 million pounds for pretax profits.
Beer sales fell by just over one percent compared with the first half of 1995 which was bolstered by outstanding summer weather, said the company. Despite this, S&amp;N said sales of John Smith's, the country's leading ale, were up 17 percent and sales of Foster's lager grew 6.5 percent to its highest ever volume.
Stewart, however, bemoaned the failure of Chancellor Kenneth Clarke to reduce excise duty on beer in his Budget last week.
Profits from its S&amp;N's Center Parcs activity holiday resorts were down 11 percent at about 44 million pounds due to the weak economic background in mainland Europe and the cost of improving its facilities in the Netherlands and Belgium.
The company sold its smallest village at Lommerbergen, Netherlands, and had to close its De Eemhof parc in Belgium while it upgraded the centre.
"We would expect Center Parcs to be much more on the front foot in the second half and we would quite clearly spell out that conditions in Germany are now more positive," said Stewart.
Profits from the company's pubs grew 8.2 percent to 87 million pounds, driven by its managed outlets where like-for-like food sales across the estate grew by 13 percent as the company put more restaurants into its premises.
The company will open 35 new Chef &amp; Brewer pub restaurants by the end of the year and push the Barras &amp; Co community pub brand very strongly, said Stewart.
"We will really be pushing down the accelerator on our community pubs Barras. Our focus has previously been on the high street or city centre and these community pubs really have a great deal of potential," he said.
Profits from S&amp;N's tenanted pubs fell some nine percent to 11.8 million pounds after the company was forced to sell off outlets to comply with a government requirement, imposed as a condition of S&amp;N's acquisition of Courage.
($1=.5953 Pound)
Brian Stewart, chief executive of brewer to leisure group Scottish and Newcastle Plc, said on Monday he expected an improved performance from its Center Parcs holiday resorts in the second half.
"We would expect Center Parcs to be much more on the front foot in the second half and we would quite clearly spell out that conditions in Germany are now more positive," said Stewart in an interview.  
S&amp;N's profits from Center Parcs fell 11.4 percent to 38.9 million stg in the first half due to the weak economic background in mainland Europe and the cost of improving its parcs in Holland and Belgium.
The company sold its smallest village at Lommerbergen, Holland and had to close its De Eemhof parc in the Benelux while it upgraded the centre.  
"There were three hits to profits on Center Parcs. One million from the strength of sterling against the guilder, one million in redundancy for restructuring in the Benelux and 1.3 million from the effective closure of Eemhof while we were restructuring the centre," said Stewart.
He said no more new parcs would be built until consumer demand improves in mainland Europe. However, even in the absence of any pick-up in consumers leisure spending the Center Parcs business will do better in the second half, said Stewart.  
S&amp;N's leisure business, which includes Pontin's holiday camps, represented the one drag on its half-year results, with its other two divisions, beer and pubs, both performing strongly.
The inclusion of Courage, acquired from Australian brewer Foster's last year, for its first full half-year pushed operating profits on the beer side by 67 percent to 89.9 million.
Margins improved on beer sales, both for take-home and in pubs and restaurants, but this meant giving up unprofitable sales, resulting in a small loss of market share for S&amp;N.  
S&amp;N posted trading profits up 8.2 percent at 87 million stg from its pub division, driven by its managed outlets where like- for-like food sales grew by 13 percent as the company developed more restaurants.
S&amp;N will increase its capital expenditure by 25 percent from last year's level to 120 million stg at the end of its current financial year, said Stewart.
The company will open 35 new Chef &amp; Brewer pub restaurants by the year-end and push the Barras &amp; Co community pub brand very strongly, he said.  
"We will really be pushing down the accelerator on our community pubs Barras. Our focus has previously been on the high street or city centre and these community pubs really have a great deal of potential," said Stewart.
However, profits from the company's tenanted pubs fell some 9.0 percent to 11.8 million. The company sold 100 pubs in the first half period, reducing its number of tenanted pubs by 14 percent and managed outlets by 3 percent giving it a total estate of about 2,600 pubs.
The sales mean S&amp;N has now met its obligation to government to reduce the size of its pub estate as a condition of the company being allowed to acquire Courage.
"Overall, I think our 10 percent dividend increase, at the top end of the range, is a measure of our confidence for the second half of the year. General trading conditions are at least as good as they were this time last year and there has been a bit of an improvement in mainland Europe," said Stewart.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
Regional brewer Marston, Thompson &amp; Evershad Plc on Tuesday reported an 8.5 percent decline in sales of its key brand ale Marston Pedigree in the first half of the year due to the rising popularity of so-called nitrokegs.
But the ale increased its market share by one percent as its competitors real ales suffered even more. Overall sales of the company's own brewed beers rose 0.5 percent and it launched its own nitrokeg, Marston's Bitter Smoothbrewed, in the Spring.
"Nitrokeg is having quite an effect in terms of market share," said chief executive David Gordon in an interview.  
The company's shares were 5p lower at 275p. But the country's two largest brewers -- Scottish &amp; Newcastle and Bass -- who boast a huge portfolio of brands, saw their shares rise.
S&amp;N shares were up 6p at 667p after announcing an unexpectedly strong 26 percent rise in its half year profits on Monday. Unlike traditional beers, nitrokegs do not undergo a secondary fermentation in the cask.  
Brewers have scurried to launch their own nitrokegs after the runaway success of Bass-owned Caffrey's, which sold fast in the scorching 1995 summer.
Caffrey's, served chilled, has taken traditional real ale drinkers away from warmer ales and also attracted premium lager drinkers.
Earlier Marston, Thompson reported a 5.3 percent increase in its pretax profits to 14.7 million stg in the half year ended September 28, driven by strong food and liquor sales in its managed estate.  
Food sales were up by 18.9 percent and now account for 30.8 percent of total sales in its managed pub estate. The company's managed estate of 242 pubs made operating profits of 9.4 million up 12.2 percent.
"There is no evidence that demand is dropping. The average spend per head is seven pounds for food and the retired elderly and the young can afford to do that maybe two or three times a week," said Gordon.
"I feel there is a touch more consumer confidence," he said, adding conditions were better now than for six or seven years.
In a separate statement, Belhaven Brewery said it managed to increase sales of Belhaven Best despite tougher competition from other nitrokegs. Belhaven shares were unchanged at 188p.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
British brewer-to-leisure group Bass Plc, said on Wednesday the company planned to spend 670 million pounds ($1.1 billion) on the business next year, creating some 7,000 jobs.
The company plans a 300 million pound ($500 million) investment programme next year on its Bass Taverns, converting many pubs to branded concept bars like the trendy All Bar One or Irish pubs O'Neills and refurbishing community pubs.
This year Bass invested, net of disposals, 568 million in capital projects, which it calculates created at least 6,000 new jobs.
But in an interview chairman Sir Ian Prosser declined to comment on its proposed acquisition of brewer Carlsberg-Tetley (C-T) which is currently being studied by Britain's Board of Trade on competition grounds. Their decision is expected in the next few weeks.
C-T is a joint venture between Allied Domecq and Danish brewer Carlsberg A/S formed in 1992 by the merger of their British brewing and wholesaling businesses.
"I don't make any comment on that. Our discussions with the Office of Fair Trading are obviously confidential. We'll wait and see what the president of the Board of Trade says," he said.
Bass shares were 1p lower at 808p by 1302 GMT.
"To get the share price to move forward, the company needs to resolve the uncertainty surrounding C-T," said Charles Winston, an analyst at BZW. But he added the company's profits for the full year were at the top end of market expectations and showed the strongest cashflow since 1985.
In August Bass announced the acquisition of Allied's 50 percent stake in the venture for 200 million pounds in cash together with some 30 beer brands, among them Tetley Bitter, Skol and Ansell, six breweries and C-T's network of depots.
Bass and Carlsberg agreed at the same time to merge C-T and Bass Brewers, given regulatory approval. If approved, the merger will create Britain's largest brewer by far with at least 35 percent of the market.
Bass currently has a 23 percent market share.
Bass was knocked off its perch as Britain's leading brewer last year when Scottish and Newcastle (S&amp;N) acquired Courage from Australian brewer Fosters, giving it a 31 percent share of Britain's beer market.
Prosser dismissed fears expressed by regional brewers and competitors that a full merger would make Bass too dominant in the Midlands and Yorkshire. "I don't think we are going to have that high a concentration in any region," he said.
He also restated that the acquisition would be good for drinkers and reiterated the company's committment not to close any of C-T's breweries.
Bass anticipates continued buoyancy in UK consumer spending over the next year from which it will benefit, Prosser said.
The company's Holiday Inns profits rose by 18.9 percent to 195 million, while its Bass Taverns' chain of managed pubs increased operating profit by 22.8 percent to 221 million. The brewery division improved profits nine percent to 157 million while the Britvic soft drinks arm improved profits 8.7 percent to 50 million.
But the leisure division, which includes traditional Gala bingo halls and Corals betting shops, continued to be affected by lower admissions after the introduction of scratch cards and the national lottery. Profits were off 10.8 pct at 66 million.
Coral was hit by a one-off cost of 4.0 million pounds on the last Saturday of the financial year when all seven races at Ascot were won by the same jockey. A final dividend payout of 17.3 pence was recommended, making a total 25p for the year. ($1=.6054 Pound)
Sir Ian Prosser, chairman of brewer-to-leisure group Bass Plc, said the company's proposed acquisition of brewer Carlsberg-Tetley would make Britain's beer market more competitive.
"Obviously it would make the market more competitive. We would be looking to lower our cost base which would give us more money to invest in innovation and more money to invest in improving our products," said Prosser in an interview.
The acquisition is being studied by the Board of Trade on competition grounds. Their decision is expected in a few weeks.
Imperial Tobacco Group Plc, demerged from Hanson Plc in October, said on Thursday it's future was bright although British market growth was tough due to escalating taxes on cigarettes.
"In Britain it is difficult to see the market growing given the punitive taxes. We are likely to see continued strong growth, though, in the Asia Pacific area of the world," chief executive Gareth Davis said in an interview.
Imperial posted trading profits of 303 million pounds ($491.8 million) from Britain in the year ended September 28, unchanged from its 1995 level, but profits from overseas grew 55 percent to 70 million.
Overall group profits before tax for the year were up five percent at 366 million pounds. The company's shares rose 5-1/2p to 373-1/2p.
Britain's Finance Minister, Kenneth Clarke, announced an increase of 15p on a packet of 20 cigarettes in his November 26 budget.
After a similar rise in 1995, British cigarette sales fell by 2.5 percent and Davis said he expected the same sort of fall again.
He said the latest tax rise would fuel smuggling by widening further the gap between taxes in Britain and mainland Europe.
The company's profits from overseas, which now make up 19 percent of total group profits, are targeted to reach 25 percent by the end of the decade, said Davis.
"I think we are in a world market which is still in growth, albeit modest, and Imperial is a relatively late entrant to international markets and has tremendous potential to exploit its brands internationally."
In 1995, Imperial's set-up costs in emerging markets were about 9.0 million pounds before falling to around half that in 1996, said Davis, and its overseas investment is likely to remain at around that level each year until 2000.
He said the company was confident of its defence against 12 lawsuits bought in Britain by people who allege their health has been damaged by smoking its products.
"We have very strong defences and great confidence in those defences and we will defend each and any claim aganst us with the upmost vigour."
One case involving 12 plaintiffs is the first in Britain where their lawyers, who have been denied legal aid, are working on a no win, no fee basis, a common practice in the United States. ($1=.6161 Pound)
British food and drinks giant Grand Metropolitan Plc posted a six percent rise in annual profits before tax on Thursday to 965 million pounds ($1.6 billion).
Chairman George Bull said trading in the current year had started "satisfactorily" as the company outlined a strategy of steady organic growth.
Profits grew 30 percent at its North American foods business Pillsbury to 431 million pounds, with both sales and prices up, and its spirits arm International Distillers and Vitners (IDV) posted a four percent increase in trading profit to 471 million.
GrandMet shares fell back 8p to 448p however, as investors and analysts worried about the effects of a strong pound against the dollar on GrandMet's profits next year.
Pillsbury and fast food chain Burger King generate about 60 percent of group earnings in dollars. The pound stood at $1.493 on May 1 and has since risen to $1.6477.
"The main reason is the currency translation which means a lot of analysts will be downgrading their forecasts for next year and earnings growth will remain in single figures," said one analyst who declined to be named.
In an interview, group finance director Gerald Corbett said GrandMet had embarked on an era of steady, organic growth driven by profits from Pillsbury and spirits arm IDV.
"The message is steady as she goes, managing what we have got, building our brands and keeping the ship on a steady course," Corbett said.
The avowed strategy of steady, organic growth from GrandMet contrasts sharply with former chairman Lord Sheppard's era of frenetic acquisitions and disposals.
Corbett said the company is confident it can achieve the same level of profits growth at Pillsbury next year. Sales at Pillsbury were up four percent and prices three percent while margins rose 0.7 of a percentage point to 12.2 percent.
"We are not looking for a sharp improvement in demand in the states and equally we see no evidence of deterioration."
Pillsbury included a full year from Pet, producer of Old El Paso and Italian foods and soups, which was acquired in February 1995. The division was able to cash in on rising raw material costs in the United States by lifting prices on all its major brands like Haagen-Dazs ice cream, Green Giant and Pillsbury.
At IDV GrandMet plans to get price rises through of another two to three percent on average next year, said Corbett.
IDV's spirits sales up five percent and average price rises of two percent in the year ended September 30. Profits growth in Europe was led by drinkers in Britain and Spain. Spirits sales in emerging markets were up 15 percent.
"We think we have done rather better on pricing than our competitors as we started investing on brand equity about two years ago whereas they have yet to really put their foot on the accelerator," said Corbett.
He sited the fact GrandMet got its first price rise for five years through in April on Smirnoff vodka in the United States.
GrandMet plans to spend 30 to 40 million pounds more on marketing its IDV brands this year, said Corbett, after spending 420 million in 1995-96. Again the bulk of its marketing spend will go behind liqueur Bailey's, Smirnoff, and J&amp;B whisky.
Overall marketing expenditure was up 16 percent at 1.2 billion pounds in its year ended September 30.
But operating profits from Burger King fell 29 million to 167 million pounds in the year, hit by difficult trading in Britain and Germany due to the beef crisis and the slowing pace of refranchising outlets. The company opened 756 restaurants in the year to bring its worldwide total to 8,696.
GrandMet plans to ask for shareholder approval at its annual meeting in March to buy back up to 10 percent of its own shares.
Corbett said the company is "reviewing a number of options" but declined to say what they were or talk about the timing or size of any buyback. ($1=.6054 Pound)
Gareth Davies, chief executive of British cigarette maker Imperial Tobacco, which de-merged from conglomerate Hanson in October, said on Thursday it was difficult to see growth in Britain, although it hoped to make this up by expansion in the Asia- Pacific region.
"In Britian it is difficult to see the market growing given the punitive taxes. We are likely to see continued strong growth, though, in the Asia Pacific area of the world," he said.  
Earlier, Imperial posted profits of 303 million stg from Britain in the year ended September 28, unchanged from its 1995 level but profits from overseas grew 55 percent to 70 million.
Britain's Chancellor of the Exchequer, Kenneth Clarke, announced an increase of 15p on a packet of 20 cigarettes in his November Budget. After a similar rise in 1995, British cigarette sales fell by 2.5 percent to 81 billion.
Davies said he expected the same sort of fall again. He said the latest tax rise would fuel smuggling by widening further the gap between taxes in Britain and mainland Europe.
Food to drinks group Grand Metropolitan Plc has embarked on a period of steady growth driven by profits from its American foods business Pillsbury and spirits arm IDV, said group finance director Gerald Corbett.
"We would love to clap our hands and wonderful things to happen. But life is not like that. Life is about steady improvement of one's basic position. Moving the profits forward, managing the costs, generating cash," said Corbett."The message is steady as she goes, managing what we have got, building our brands and keeping the ship on a steady course."  
Earlier the company announced a six percent increase in its pretax profits to 965 million stg for the year ended September 30, 1996. GrandMet shares fell 6p to 451p as the figures came in below the market forecast consensus of 972 million.
The avowed strategy of steady, organic growth from GrandMet contrasts sharply with former chairman Lord Sheppard's era of frenetic acquisitions and disposals.
Corbett said the company is confident it can achieve the same level of 10 percent organic growth at Pillsbury next year.  
In the year ended September 30, 1996 Pillsbury grew operating profit 30 percent to 431 million, sales were up four percent and prices three percent. U.S. operating margins were up 0.7 percentage points at 12.2 percent.
"All our consumer indices show that its steady as she goes. We are not looking for a sharp improvement in demand in the states and equally we see no evidence of deterioration. We have begun the year satisfactorily and we are in good shape for another good year at Pillsbury," said Corbett. Pillsbury has lifted its margins steadily over the last four years and "there is no reason to suppose that upward trend won't continue."  
At its spirits arm, International Distillers and Vintners, (IDV) GrandMet plans to get price rises through of another two to three percent on average next year, said Corbett.
"We think we have done rather better on pricing than our competitors as we started investing on brand equity about two years ago whereas they have yet to really put their foot on the accellerator," said Corbett.
As an example Corbett cited GrandMet's move to impose its first price rise for five years in April on Smirnoff in the U.S. Other spirits companies are finding it tougher getting consumers to accept price increases on their brands.  
GrandMet plans to spend 30 to 40 million more on marketing its brands this year, said Corbett, after spending 420 million in 1995/96. Again the bulk of its marketing spend will go behind liquor Bailey's, vodka Smirnoff and J&amp;B whisky.
Overall marketing expenditure was up 16 percent at 1.2 billion stg in its 1995/96 year.
IDV reported operating profits up four percent at 471 million, sales were up four perecent and prices up two percent. Sales of spirits were up five percent and profits growth in the region was led by Britain and Spain. Spirits sales in emerging markets were up 15 percent.  
At fast food chain Burger King profits were held back by fears over the health risks of eating beef in Britain and Germany as well as the decline in refranchising stores. The company plans to open another 800 new stores next year, up from 756 in 1995/96. It currently has at total 8,696 restaurants. Burger King posted a 29 million stg drop in trading profit to 167 million stg.
Corbett said GrandMet should achieve 30 million stg in cost savings in 1996/97. This comes on top of cost-savings of 120 million stg identified by the company at the time of its restructuring three years ago.
"Our major objective is to improve the return on capital," he said, adding that GrandMet's post tax return on total invested capital is about 8.0 percent which the company hopes to push into double digits in the next three years.
GrandMet should be able to reduce its debt to 2.2 billion stg by the end of its 1996/97 financial year, taking its interest cover to just under eight times, said Corbett.
The company will ask for shareholder approval at its annual meeting in March to buy back up to 10 percent of its own shares.
Corbett said the company is "reviewing a number of options" but declined to say what they were or talk about the timing or size of any buyback.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
British pub to hotels group Greenalls Plc should report a near 20 percent rise in its full year profits on Thursday as its acquisition of Boddington Group feeds through into its managed pub estate, analysts said.
Analysts' forecasts for pretax profits in the year to September 27 range from 145 to 150 million stg excluding an exceptional 30 million stg for the cost of reorganising Boddington's, up from 100.5 million last time. Dividend forecasts are centred on a total payout of 15.4p.  
The acquisition of Boddington for 527 million stg in November 1995 added 458 pubs to the group's portfolio and made Greenalls the largest independent retail pub chain with 2,370 outlets. Some 270 former Boddington's managed pubs were absorbed into Greenalls Inns.
At the time of the acquisition Greenalls identified 18 million stg of cost savings from closing Boddington's offices and wholesale depots.
However, confusion remains among analysts about how former Boddington assets have been absorbed.  
Trading profits from its managed pubs are anticipated to be up some 45 percent at 76 million stg, driven by the inclusion of the Boddington estate for the first full year.
Profits from its hotel and restaurants division should grow about 10 percent to 58 million. The company announced the long-awaited sale of its six hotels in the United States on Friday for 14 million stg in cash with a loss on the disposal of 1.75 million.
"It's definitely a welcome sight to see. Those hotels have rarely been in profit over the last ten years," said one analyst who declined to be named.  
The division also includes De Vere Hotels, Village Leisure -- acquired from Boddington -- and the branded Premier House pub restaurants.
Earnings from the group's tenanted pubs and wholesaling are likely to be up about 25 percent at 50 million. At the end of August, Inn Partnership comprised 1,194 tenanted houses including 145 former Boddington tenanted pubs.
This division also includes 460 off-licenses and a distillery.
Analysts envisage an interest charge of about 38 million.  
Investors and analysts are keen to hear how the brands acquired from Boddington's are fitting in.
"There are a number of retail brands in this vastly enlarged group and it would be interesting to see which ones it considers to be really important for the future, " said Colin Humphreys, analyst at Panmure Gordon.
Greenalls shares were off 6p at 596 on Friday at 1100 GMT, well off their 637p year high. The company improved operating margin to 17.6 percent in 1995 from 16.75 percent a year earlier.  
Its return on equity rose to 13.15 percent from 10.39 over the same period, compared with 9.84 percent for Whitbread.
A Reuter poll of 24 brokers produced a consensus estimate EPS for the full year ending September 27, 1996 of 38.5 rising to 42.5 in 1997.
-- London Newsroom +44 71 542 6437
Britain on Monday referred brewer to leisure group Bass Plc's acquisition of Carlsberg-Tetley (C-T) to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission for investigation but analysts said they believed the deal would go through once certain conditions had been met.
"Mr Lang (British Trade &amp; Industry Minister) considers that the merger gives rise to competition concerns in relation to the significant increase in concentration of production in the UK brewing industry," the Department of Trade &amp; Industry said in a statement.
Bass acquired half of C-T from Allied Domecq for 200 million pounds ($328 million) in August and declared its plan to buy the rest of the company from Danish brewer Carlsberg A/S, in exchange for Carlsberg taking 20 percent in the merged company.
Britain's MMC will investigate whether a full merger of the two companies would operate against the public interest. It will report by March 24, 1997.
If approved, the merger would create Britain's largest brewer by far, with at least 35 percent of the market. Bass now has a 23 percent market share.
Rival brewers and analysts widely expected a referral to the MMC because of the dominance it would give the merged group in setting beer prices in some regions.
Bass shares fell about 6p on the news to 783p but recovered to close 14-1/2p higher at 803-1/2p as analysts said they expected the Bass deal to go through with conditions imposed, given the force of growing competition in the industry and brewing over-capacity.
But they added Lang will be in no rush to approve the deal so close to a general election due before May 1.
"They will probably try to defer the decision until after the election. I don't think they want the negative PR of having a large number of people fired," said Lehman Brothers analyst John Wakeley.
Former Trade and Industry secretary Michael Heseltine, accredited with nodding through Scottish and Newcastle's (S&amp;N) acquisition of Courage from Australian brewer Foster's 18 months ago without an MMC referral, was operating mid-way through the Conservative Party's term in office.
His stance on competition policy was also widely viewed by analysts as more laissez-faire than that of Lang.
"Clearly there is a very strong element of politics. And it is certainly more subject to politics than the last decision on S&amp;N for Courage," said Nikko analyst Dermott Carr.
Analysts expect the MMC to require Bass to sell about 1,000 of its pubs, it currently owns about 4,200, and to cull its brand porfolio. It may be required to sell more pubs in areas where it is especially dominant.
A combination of these two conditions would reduce Bass' market share to around 35 percent from about 40 percent if the deal was allowed to go ahead unconditionally.
Brian Revell, Transport and General Workers Union national secretary for the drinks industry, welcomed the decision to refer the Bass takeover.
"Our main concern is that if the takeover is allowed to proceed, at least 2,000 jobs are likely to be lost," he said.
A spokeswoman for Bass said the company hoped the MMC could make a hasty decision. "We are confident that more jobs will be safer at both companies if the merger goes ahead than would otherwise be the case," she added.
Britain's Secretary of State has the power to refer to the MMC for investigation any proposed merger which creates or intensifies a market share of 25 percent of supply in Britain.
Bass was knocked off its perch as Britain's leading brewer last year when S&amp;N acquired Courage, giving it a 31 percent share of Britain's beer market.
C-T was formed as a joint venture between Allied Domecq and Carlsberg A/S in 1992 by the merger of their British brewing and wholesaling businesses.
Bass announced the acquisition of Allied's 50 percent stake in August along with some 30 beer brands including Tetley Bitter and Skol, six breweries and C-T's network of depots. ($1=.6087 Pound)
An ambitious bid by brewer-to-leisure group Bass to create Britain's largest brewer by merging with Carlsberg-Tetley  may get snagged by a UK government sensitive about bad publicity ahead of a general election, said analysts on Monday.
Ian Lang, president of the Board of Trade, will be reluctant to wave through a merger that could mean large scale job losses, upsetting the ruling Conservative Party's re-election drive in clear view of an election that must be held by May 1997, they said.  
Although analysts expect Britain's competition authority, the Monopolies and Mergers Commission, to approve the merger -- providing Bass agrees to certain conditions -- the final decision to let the deal go through rests with Lang.
"Clearly there is a very strong element of politics. And it is certainly more subject to politics than the last decision on S&amp;N (Scottish &amp; Newcastle ) for Courage," said Nikko analyst Dermott Carr.  
Former Trade and Industry secretary Michael Heseltine, accredited with nodding through S&amp;N's acquisition of Courage from Australian brewer Foster's 18 months ago without an MMC referral, was operating mid-way through the Conservative Party's term in office and his stance on competition policy is widely viewed by analysts as more laissez-faire than Lang's.
Earlier, Britain's Department of Trade and Industry, said it had decided to refer Bass' proposed merger with Carlsberg-Tetley to the MMC for investigation. An MMC report is due by March 24.  
"I think politics will enter into this. They will be very lucky to get a decision by March 24 and the government will be in no hurry to decide before the election," said Stephen Cox, campaigns manager for the Campaign for Real Ale (CAMRA).
CAMRA wants to see the deal blocked because government undertakings imposed on S&amp;N for its acquisition of Courage to go ahead have not improved customer choice in the pubs or led to lower beer prices, said Cox.
Analysts however expect the Bass deal to go through in some form, reflecting growing competition in the industry and brewing over-capacity.  
"We are confident that more jobs will be safer at both companies if the merger goes ahead than would otherwise be the case," said a Bass spokeswoman.
Analysts said they expect the MMC to require Bass to sell about 1,000 of its pubs, it currently owns about 4,200, and to cull its brand porfolio. The requirement to sell pubs may include a selective disposal programme in areas of particular geographic dominance.
A combination of these two requirements would reduce Bass' market share to around 35 percent from about 40 percent if the deal was allowed to go ahead unconditionally.
"How many they will be prepared to sell really does depend on what they (Bass) think the EC is going to come out with," said Carr. The European Commission has yet to decide whether British brewers should be allowed to keep the tie -- in other words brewing beer and requiring its own pubs to sell that beer.
"If the EC says they can't keep the tie then the pubs are clearly worth less. So Bass might get a better price for them now if they believe we are at the top end of the pub cycle," added Carr.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
