The engines have started in the race to succeed Alex Trotman for the top office at Ford Motor Co.
The company on Thursday promoted two longtime Ford executives to positions that will allow them to prove if they are worthy of occupying one or more of the top spots at Detroit's No. 2 automaker.  
Edward Hagenlocker, 56, was promoted to vice chairman from executive vice president, and put in charge of a new auto components organization with 75,000 employees and revenues of $14 billion.
Jacques Nasser, 48, previously group vice president in charge of product development, was named to Hagenlocker's old job of heading up Ford Automotive Operations (FAO), the company's core car and truck business.  
Speculation has swirled for months about how Ford's board of directors plans to handle the succession of Trotman, who currently holds the titles of chairman, chief executive officer and president. Trotman reaches the mandatory retirement age of 65 in July 1998, but the board can ask him to stay on.
Complicating matters is the prospect of a Ford family member returning to a top role for the first time since 1980. Recent reports have said William Clay Ford Jr., 39, a great- grandson of company founder Henry Ford, could be named a non- executive chairman, or chairman, when Trotman leaves.  
Eugene Jennings, a retired professor of management at Michigan State University, said Hagenlocker's assignment at the head of the new parts organization could turn into a high-profile spot, and it should not be read as a demotion.
"It's the one thing that Hagenlocker needs under his belt to give him the experience he needs to run the company," said Jennings, a long-time observer of the Big Three U.S. automakers.  
Nasser has worked at Ford nearly as long as Hagenlocker. Born in Lebanon and raised in Australia, Nasser joined the company in 1968 as a financial analyst. He rose through several international assignments, earning a reputation as a "no- nonsense petrol head."
While Hagenlocker is stiff in front of the media, Nasser moves easily among reporters, entertaining them with colorful stories about cricket and his globe-trotting life abroad.  
Wesley Brown of industry consultant CSM Forecasting in Farmington Hills, Mich., said Nasser's new role also offers him a chance to demonstrate his abilities at running the company.
"It clearly puts Nasser in a position to take over from Trotman when he retires," said Brown.
For his part, Trotman was circumspect about the succession question at a news briefing Thursday, saying it was the board's decision. Asked if the board is actively working on the issue, Trotman responded: "Absolutely, in depth and frequently -- and has been for the last 20 or 30 years."
Ford Motor Co. Thursday announced sweeping organisational changes and a major shake-up of its senior management, replacing the head of its global automotive operations.
The moves include combining Ford's four components divisions into a single organisation with 75,000 employees and $14 billion in revenues, and a consolidation of the automaker's vehicle product development centres to three from five.
As part of the management changes, Ford named group Vice President Jacques Nasser, 48, a personable, fast-rising cost-cutter, to replace Edward Hagenlocker, 56, as president of its global automotive operations.
Hagenlocker, who headed Ford's core car and truck business for nearly three years, was named a vice chairman, overseeing the new components unit, land development, technical affairs and rental car operations.
Hagenlocker, a reserved engineer who came up through Ford's truck operations, has in the past come under fire for the auto unit's lackluster financial performance. For the first half of 1996, the worldwide auto unit's profits were $1.25 billion, down from $2.24 billion a year ago.
Hagenlocker has also been criticised for the slower-than-expected start of the redesigned Taurus and the decision not to offer a fourth door on Ford's minivans.
The moves, which had been rumoured for months, intensify the race to succeed Alex Trotman, who currently holds the titles of chairman, chief executive and president. In 1998, Trotman reaches the mandatory retirement age of 65, but the board could ask him to stay on longer.
Trotman, briefing reporters on the changes at Ford World Headquarters, declined to comment on the succession issue.
Ford said it would reorganize its global product development operations for the second time in two years. The changes, which call for Ford to reduce its vehicle line directors to 11 from 17, come less than two years after the automaker embarked on its ambitious "Ford 2000" global reorganization plan, which combined the U.S. and European development groups into a single unit.
Trotman said formation of the new Automotive Products Operation will help the company streamline its component operations into a single enterprise that will be more competitive with other auto suppliers.
Trotman said Ford wants the unit to increase its sales from non-Ford customers. Currently, the vast majority of the unit's revenues come from internal Ford customers, with non-Ford automakers contributing about 5 percent.
No significant headcount changes are expected. But Trotman said an evaluation under way could result in new acquisitions as well as divestitures of existing product lines.
"We are separating the automotive components business from Ford Automotive Operations to focus senior management attention on making it more competitive in its own right," he said. "I have asked Ed Hagenlocker to take on the crucial assignment of making this happen."
Analysts applauded the move, with one saying changes to Ford 2000 are overdue because the initiative needs a sharper focus.
"What Ford 2000 taught us is that they had too many cooks working on the broth," said Eugene Jennings, a retired professor of management at Michigan State University and long-time Big Three automaker watcher.
He also approved of giving Hagenlocker responsibility for the parts business. "It puts a top officer directly in charge of the major challenge for the next 10 years -- and that's components," Jennings said.
Also named a vice chairman was Executive Vice President Wayne Booker, 62, who remains in charge of the automaker's international operations. Chief Financial Officer and Group Vice President John Devine, 52, also was promoted to executive vice president.
Ford said it promoted Vice President James Englehart, 59, to take Nasser's old job of group vice president responsible for product development. Englehart was previously vice president for the vehicle centre that developed light trucks primarily for personal use.
In the future, Ford will have three vehicle centres for car and truck development: Truck, to be headed by Vice President Jim Donaldson; Small and Medium Car, to be headed by Vice President Richard Parry-Jones; and Large and Luxury Car, to be headed by Vice President Ken Kohrs.
The small and medium-car development centre will continue to be based in Merkenich, Germany and Dunton, England, while both the truck and large/luxury car centres will be based in Dearborn, Mich. Previously, Ford had a development centre in Merkenich and Dunton for small front-drive cars and in Dearborn for large front-drive cars, for rear-drive cars, for light trucks and for commercial trucks.
"We have beeen able to simplify and streamline the organisational structure now that we are reducing our vehicle platforms by 50 percent," Trotman said. "Using the 16 vehicle plaforms and at the same time increasing the number of derivatives, we can provide a broader array of vehicles for customers in many more markets," he said.
The engines have been started in the race to succeed Alex Trotman for the top office at Ford Motor Co.
The company Thursday promoted two long-time Ford executives into positions that will allow them to prove if they are worthy of occupying one or more top spots at Detroit's No. 2 automaker.
Edward Hagenlocker, 56, was promoted to vice chairman from executive vice president, and put in charge of a new auto components organisation with 75,000 employees and revenues of $14 billion.
Jacques Nasser, 48, previously the group vice president in charge of product development, was named to Hagenlocker's old job of heading up Ford Automotive Operations, the company's core car and truck business.
Speculation has swirled for months about how Ford's board of directors plans to handle the succession of Trotman, who currenly holds the titles of chairman, chief executive officer and president. Trotman reaches the mandatory retirement age of 65 in July of 1998, but the board can ask him to stay on.
Complicating matters is the prospect of a Ford family member returning to a top officer's role for the first time since 1980.
Recent reports have said William Clay Ford Jr., 39, a great-grandson of company founder Henry Ford, could be named a non-executive chairman, or chairman, when Trotman leaves.
Because Hagenlocker's nearly three-year tenure at Ford Automotive Operations has been marred by slumping profits and a slow start for the redesigned Taurus, some outsiders have said his chances for higher office have dimmed.
But Hagenlocker, a reserved man who joined the company in 1964 as a research scientist, has also overseen the launch of the hugely successful new F-Series pickup trucks, as well as the new Ford Expedition full-size sport utility, which is expected to be both popular and profitable.
Eugene Jennings, a retired professor of management at Michigan State University, said Hagenlocker's being put in charge of the new parts organisation could turn into a high-profile spot that should not be read as a demotion.
"It's the one thing that Hagenlocker needs under his belt to give him the experience he needs to run the company," said Jennings, a long-time Big Three observer.
Nasser has been at Ford nearly as long as Hagenlocker. Born in Lebanon but raised in Australia, Nasser first joined the company in 1968 as a financial analyst. He rose through several international assignments, earning a reputation as a "no-nonsense petrol head."
While Hagenlocker is stiff in front of the media, Nasser moves easily among reporters, entertaining them with colourful stories about cricket and his globe-trotting life abroad.
Wesley Brown, of industry consultant CSM Forecasting in Farmington Hills, Mich., said Nasser's new role also offers him a chance to further demonstrate his abilities at running the company.
"It clearly puts Nasser in a position to take over from Trotman when he retires," said Brown.
For his part, Trotman was circumspect about the succession question. At a news briefing Thursday, he was asked if the board is actively working on the issue.
Trotman responded, "Absolutely. In depth, and frequently -- and has been for the last 20 or 30 years."
The engines have been started in the race to succeed Alex Trotman for the top office at Ford Motor Co.
The company Thursday promoted two long-time Ford executives into positions that will allow them to prove if they are worthy of occupying one or more top spots at Detroit's No. 2 automaker.
Edward Hagenlocker, 56, was promoted to vice chairman from executive vice president, and put in charge of a new auto components organisation with 75,000 employees and revenues of $14 billion.
Jacques Nasser, 48, previously the group vice president in charge of product development, was named to Hagenlocker's old job of heading up Ford Automotive Operations, the company's core car and truck business.
Speculation has swirled for months about how Ford's board of directors plans to handle the succession of Trotman, who currenly holds the titles of chairman, chief executive officer and president. Trotman reaches the mandatory retirement age of 65 in July of 1998, but the board can ask him to stay on.
Complicating matters is the prospect of a Ford family member returning to a top officer's role for the first time since 1980.
Recent reports have said William Clay Ford Jr., 39, a great-grandson of company founder Henry Ford, could be named a non-executive chairman, or chairman, when Trotman leaves.
Because Hagenlocker's nearly three-year tenure at Ford Automotive Operations has been marred by slumping profits and a slow start for the redesigned Taurus, some outsiders have said his chances for higher office have dimmed.
But Hagenlocker, a reserved man who joined the company in 1964 as a research scientist, has also overseen the launch of the hugely successful new F-Serieswell as the new Ford Expedition full-size sport utility, which is expected to be both popular and profitable.
Eugene Jennings, a retired professor of management at Michigan State University, said Hagenlocker's being put in charge of the new parts organisation could turn into a high-profile spot that should not btion.
"It's the one thing that Hagenlocker needs under his belt to give him the experience he needs to run the company," said Jennings, a long-time Big Three observer.
Nasser has been at Ford nearly as long as Hagenlocker. Born in Lebanon but raised in Australia, Nasser first joined the company in 1968 as a financial analyst. He rose through several international assignments, earning a reputation as a "no-nonsense petrol head."
While Hagenlocker is stiff in front of the media, Nasser moves easily among reporters, entertaining them with colourful stories about cricket and his globe-trotting life abroad.
Wesley Brown, of industry consultant CSM Forecasting in Farmingtills, Mich., said Nasser's new role also offers him a chance to further demonstrate his abilities at running the company.
"It clearly puts Nasser in a position to take over from Trotman when he retires," said Brown.
For his part, Trotman was circumspect about the succession question. At a news briefing Thursday, he was asked if the board is actively working on the issue.
Trotman responded, "Absolutely. In depth, and frequently -- and has been for the last 20 or 30 years."
General Motors Corp., facing a rancorous strike by its Canadian workers, Tuesday reported a $1.3 billion third-quarter profit that was boosted by strong automotive results and an unsually low income tax rate.
The world's largest automaker said the combined net income of its North American Automotive Operations and its Delphi Automotive Systems parts businesses was $515 million. A year ago, the operations had a combined loss of $93 million, while the parent company posted a profit of $396.7 million.
Increased volume and favourable currency exchange rates helped GM to nearly triple its international operations profits to $323 million from $111 million a year ago.
"The third quarter results from continuing operations clearly show momentum as we continue to rebuild our strength in North America and grow our business in key international markets throughout the world," GM Chairman John Smith said in a statement.
The earnings, equal to $1.57 a share, compared with a profit of 39 cents a share from continuing operations. They do not include results from Electronic Data Systems Corp, which GM spun off in June. Revenues climbed to $39.1 billion from $35.3 billion in the 1995 period.
Contributing to profits was $565 million in one-time favourable items. GM recorded a $253 million after-tax gain from a reduction in the reserve to pay for plant closings, thanks to its decision to use its Wilmington, Del., facility to assemble new Saturn vehicles.
Also, GM's effective income tax rate was 2.8 percent, adding another $312 million, as the company took advantage of several tax credits, including a reinstatement of research and experimentation credits for the last half of 1996.
GM Chief Financial Officer Michael Losh told reporters during a conference call that rate is expected to return to the 27 percent range in the fourth quarter.
As it has all year, GM continued to add to its growing cash account in the third period, contributing another $1.5 billion to bring its total cash balance to $14.5 billion at the end of the quarter.
Because GM has previously set its cash goal at $13 billion, Ronald Glantz, an analyst at Dean Witter Reynolds, believes the GM board will return some of that money to shareholders.
"I thought it was a pretty decent quarter," he said. "I have a lot more confidence that they are going to raise the dividend and announce a share repurchase programme."
Glantz said the annual dividend could go to $2.00 a share from the current rate of $1.60 at the next board meeting Nov. 4. By the end of 1997, he said GM may have in place a $3 billion share repurchase programme.
GM's third quarter net profit margin from continuing operations rose to 3.7 percent from 1.3 percent. Smith said that was good news, but noted the company still has a ways to go before it reaches its average annual profit margin goal of 5 percent over an auto business cycle.
"We still have our work cut out to improve margin performance," he said.
GM delivered more vehicles worldwide in the third quarter -- 2,085,000 vs. 2,060,000 -- but its global market share slipped to 16.1 percent from 16.9 percent.
The company also lost share in the U.S. car and truck market, finishing the quarter with 30.4 percent compared with 32.2 percent. GM delivered 1,182,000 vehicles in the United States during the quarter, down from 1,235,000.
But CFO Losh said the overall volume increase represented good news for the company, and was a sign there is demand for the bevy of new models it is launching.
"It's volume that drives earnings, not market share, per say," he said.
Another positive sign was the pace of new-model launches, said Losh. Production of full-size vans at Wentzvile, Mo., and Saturn coupes in Spring Hill, Tenn., have reached full line speed, and other plants are on schedule.
GM is in the midst of launching 15 new cars and trucks. In the third quarter, the company had nine plants actively involved in changeovers. Losh said that is the most it expects to have in a given quarter, adding GM will have seven in changeovers in the fourth quarter.
However, one of those nine plants is a facility in Oshawa, Ontario, which is the target of a strike by Canadian Auto Workers. Losh declined to say how much the strike will set back the new model launch there.
Losh also declined to comment on status of talks between both the CAW and United Auto Workers. About 26,000 CAW members began walking off the job Oct. 3 over the issue of outsourcing -- the use of outside contractors. GM also has yet to reach a new labour pact with the UAW.
On Tuesday, the number of U.S. workers idled by the strike rose to 10,297 from 5,911 on Monday.
New pickup trucks and sport/utility vehicles helped Ford Motor Co.'s third-quarter profits nearly double to $686 million, the company said Wednesday, but it alarmed analysts with growing losses in Europe.
Ford eeked out a $15 million profit from its worldwide automotive operations -- versus a loss of $201 million a year ago -- as U.S. automotive net income of $634 million was offset by a loss of $619 million from non-U.S. regions.
Ford's third-quarter profits, which amounted to 56 cents a share, compared with $357 million, or 27 cents a share, in the year-ago period. The latest results were in line with Wall Street expectations.
Results from Ford finished a strong third quarter for Detroit's Big Three. The companies posted combined net profits of $2.64 billion, more than twice the $1.11 billion they reported a year ago.
Although there were some favourable one-time events, the Big Three have digested heavy launch costs and reaped the benefits of a 10 percent volume increase, said David Healy, an analyst at Burnham Securities Inc.
In the third quarter, Ford's European loss widened substantially to $472 million from a $320 million loss a year ago, surprising many analysts.
"The size of the loss was enormous," Healy said.
Ford blamed new product launches, adverse vehicle mixes and continued high marketing costs. Vice President David McCammon said the automaker is taking steps to cut costs by reviewing product, material, personnel and plant expenses.
In a sign of how seriously it is taking the situation, Ford Chairman Alex Trotman was on his way to visit operations in Europe, and Chief Financial Officer John Devine was scheduled to leave for Europe Wednesday.
"We were unhappy with our European results," McCammon told reporters, adding that he hopes the situation can be turned around by next year.
Although McCammon said the fourth-quarter results will be up from the $660 million Ford earned in the 1995 quarter, analysts indicated they would be trimming their estimates because of a $300 million to $400 million fourth-quarter charge to cover early retirement costs for about 4,000 salaried employees.
Devine told analysts that South America will post a loss similar to the $226 million deficit of the third quarter because of continuing start-up problems in Brazil.
"Brazil is likely to be just as bad" in the fourth quarter, said Nicholas Lobacarro, an analyst at Bear Stearns.
Helping Ford's bottom line was another strong performance from its Financial Services Group. The unit earned $671 million, including a gain of $76 million from the sale of USL Capital assets, compared with a profit of $558 million in the 1995 third quarter.
The Associates, Ford's consumer finance unit, reported third-quarter earnings of $230 million, a record for any quarter. However, Ford Credit's earnings slipped to $299 million from $357 million a year ago, reflecting higher credit losses.
The company's earnings were negatively affected by a $39 million charge to cover the costs of early retirements for U.S. salaried employees.
In the U.S. market, the latest results were spurred by strong acceptance of new light truck products such as the F-Series pickup truck and new Expedition full-size sport/utility vehicle, Trotman said in a statement accompanying the results.
Third-quarter revenues climbed to $34 billion from $31.4 billion. Worldwide vehicle unit sales in the quarter were also up, increasing to 1,452,000 from 1,435,000.
But the automaker lost market share in both the United States and western Europe. Ford ended the quarter with 24.5 percent of the U.S. car and truck market, down from 24.8 percent in both the second quarter of 1996 and the third quarter of 1995.
Ford lost a full point of market share in western Europe, falling to 11.8 percent from 12.8 percent in the year-ago quarter. Ford's share in the second quarter was 12.0 percent.
Trotman said Ford expects U.S. total vehicle sales to be 15.5 million for 1996, about in line with its earlier forecasts. The industry had 15.1 million sales in 1995.
In Western Europe, Ford forecasts industry sales at 14.2 million for 1996, up from 13.4 million in 1995. Ford expects moderate economic growth to continue in its major worldwide markets, providing for stable industry sales volumes.
Ford's stock lost 75 cents to end at $32.375 on the New York Stock Exchange.
New pickup trucks and sport/utility vehicles helped Ford Motor Co.'s third-quarter profits nearly double to $686 million, the company said Wednesday, but it alarmed analysts with growing losses in Europe.
Ford eeked out a $15 million profit from its worldwide automotive operations -- versus a loss of $201 million a year ago --  as U.S. automotove net income of $634 million was offset by a loss of $619 million from non-U.S. regions.
Ford's third-quarter profits, which amounted to 56 cents a share on a fully diluted basis, compared with $357 million, or 27 cents a share, in the year-ago period. The latest results were in line with Wall Street expectations.
Boosting the numbers was another strong performance from Ford's Financial Services Group. The unit earned $671 million, including a gain of $76 million from the sale of USL Capital assets, compared with a profit of $558 million in the 1995 third quarter.
But Ford Credit's earnings slipped to $299 million from $357 million a year ago, reflecting higher credit losses.
"I think there's some real red flags there with overseas operations and Ford Credit," said Bear Stearns analyst Nicholas Lobocarro.
The company's earnings were negatively affected by a $39 million charge to cover the costs of early retirements for U.S. salaried employees. Ford expects to report further charges of $300 million to $400 million in the fourth quarter for more early retirements.
Despite the charges, Ford Chairman Alex Trotman said the company expects its automotive results to be stronger in the fourth quarter from a year ago, with higher sales volumes and improving margins.
In the U.S. market, the latest results were spurred by strong acceptance of new light truck products such as the F-Series pickup truck and new Expedition full-size sport/utility vehicle, Trotman said.
"Outside the U.S., results continue to reflect challenges in several key regions, particularly Europe and South America," Trotman said in a statement, adding, "There's still much to do."
Ford lost $226 million from its South American operations in the third quarter, mostly from Brazil, up from a loss of $102 million in the year-ago period. Ford had said in September that second-half losses in South America would be larger than the first half because of a lower market share and a costly launch process for its new Fiesta.
In Europe, the company's loss grew to $472 million from $320 million. Ford blamed new product launches, adverse vehicle mixes and continued high marketing costs.
However, Ford said its European high-volume vehicle launches were largely completed and that it would focus on cost reductions. It added that new products, such as the recently launched Ka small car that will go on sale next month, will strengthen its European line-up.
Third-quarter revenues climbed to $34 billion from $31.4 billion. Worldwide vehicle unit sales in the third quarter were also up, increasing to 1,452,000 from 1,435,000.
But the automaker lost market share in both the U.S. and western Europe. Ford ended the quarter with 24.5 percent of the U.S. car and truck market. It had 24.8 percent in both the second quarter of 1996 and the third quarter of 1995.
Ford lost a full point of share in western Europe, falling to 11.8 percent from 12.8 percent in the year-ago quarter. Ford's share in the second quarter was 12.0 percent.
The Associates, Ford's consumer finance unit, reported third-quarter earnings of $230 million, a record for any quarter.
Trotman said Ford expects U.S. total vehicle sales to be 15.5 million for 1996, about in line with its earlier forecasts. The industry had 15.1 million sales in 1995.
In Western Europe, Ford forecasts industry sales at 14.2 million for 1996, up from 13.4 million in 1995. Ford expects moderate economic growth to continue in its major worldwide markets, providing for stable industry sales volumes.
The effects of a strike by 26,000 Canadian autoworkers will continue to ripple through General Motors Corp.'s operations even though a tentative deal was reached Tuesday after marathon talks.
GM has told about 2,000 workers at its Lordstown, Ohio, car assembly plant not to report to work when their work week begins on Friday, said company spokesman Tom Klipstine.
"There are still some problems out there in terms of having enough material to keep plants running," he said.
Negotiators for the company and the Canadian Auto Workers union settled disputes over the contracting out of work and reached a tentative agreement on a new contract, putting an end to the 19-day strike.
In addition to the striking CAW members, GM has idled 19,931 workers at dozens of assembly and parts plants in the U.S. and Mexico that depend on the Canadian operations. That figure does not include workers such as the Lordstown employees whose scheduled shifts have yet to start.
If the deal is ratified Wednesday as expected and parts resume shipments, Klipstine said it could take until the end of next week before all of GM's affected plants are operating at pre-strike levels.
One analyst estimated the strike could end up costing the world's largest automaker about 100,000 units of straight-time production in North America.
The calculation, by CSM Forecasting in Farmington Hills, Mich., assumes that all of GM's plants are back in operation by Oct. 28, and does not include over-time production.
"There's still some operations that may go down that we may have not anticipated," said Michael Robinet, managing director of CSM, an industry consulting firm. "There's going to be some ebb and flow."
GM is expected to lose production of about 51,000 units in Canada, and 45,000 to 46,000 units in the United States, Robinet said.
Of the 51,000 units in Canada, about 40 percent are GM's popular full-size C/K pickup trucks, which are made at GM's assembly complex in Oshawa, Ontario, he said.
CAW President Buzz Hargrove told reporters during a press conference after the new pact was reached that GM could restart the Oshawa truck plant as soon as Wednesday night, after the deal is ratified.
Inventories of the trucks have been tight, and the sales effects will start showing up in the October sales numbers, analysts said.
Any market share losses to competitors, however, would be tempered by the fact that Ford Motor Co. is already running at maximum capacity for its new F-Series pickups, said David Healy, an analyst at Burnham Securities Inc.
GM had sufficient inventories of cars that the strike is not expected to crimp those sales too much, analysts said.
Where GM could be hurt most is in new product launches. Production of the new Buick Century was previously scheduled to start at the Oshawa car plant on Nov. 4. But the strike could push that back until the middle or end of November, Robinet said.
GM's Oklahoma City, Okla., assembly plant will also be delayed another two to three weeks in starting production of the new Oldsmobile Cutlass and Chevrolet Malibu cars, because of a parts shortage due to the strike, he said.
Healy, who believes GM has lost production of about 65,000 units, estimated it will bring down the automaker's earnings by about $225 million after taxes. A strike at two Dayton, Ohio, brake plants in March cost GM $900 million.
"It's not a major disaster," Healy said. "It's not of the magnitude of Dayton."
General Motors Corp, still feeling the effects of a 20-day Canadian autoworker strike, told all of its 5,000 Lordstown, Ohio, assembly workers they will be idled for two weeks, company and United Auto Workers officials said Thursday.
The plant, which makes the Chevrolet Cavalier and Pontiac Sunfire small cars, has run out of transmissions supplied by a GM parts plant in Windsor, Ontario.
Workers at another assembly plant, the Buick City complex in Flint, Mich., could also be idled on Friday or early next week, industry sources said. The plant, which employs 5,236 hourly UAW workers, makes LeSabre, Park Avenue, Eighty Eight and Bonneville, mid-sized cars.
"It's a situation we are looking at," said GM spokesman Tom Klipstine, adding the automaker continues to monitor all of its vehicle and parts production operations.
As of Thursday afternoon GM had told 23,801 assembly and parts workers in the United States and Mexico to stay home because of a shortage of parts from its Canadian operations.
The Lordstown shutdown is the second U.S. plant where GM has suspended operations completely since 26,000 Canadian Auto Workers began an escalating strike on Oct. 3. The first plant to go totally down was Detroit/Hamtramck, which makes Cadillacs.
The Lordstown plant has three crews. The first crew was told to report back Nov. 10, the second Nov. 11 and the third Nov. 12, a UAW spokeswoman said.
Losing production of the mid-sized cars is not expected to have a big impact on sales, because the automaker had between 67 and 98 days supply of those vehicles on dealer lots as of the end of September, according to Autodata Corp.
But GM could feel the impact of lost production of its popular Cavalier and Sunfire cars. The Cavalier had a 61 days supply and the Sunfire had 61. The industry generally considers 60-days supply to be ideal.
GM and CAW negotiators reached agreement on a new three-year labour pact Oct. 22. The deal was approved by CAW members Wednesday.
The Canadian operations are being brought up in stages.
General Motors Corp, still feeling the effects of a 20-day Canadian autoworker strike, told all of its 5,000 Lordstown, Ohio, assembly workers they will be idled for two weeks, company and United Auto Workers officials said Thursday.
The plant, which makes the Chevrolet Cavalier and Pontiac Sunfire small cars, has run out of transmissions supplied by a GM parts plant in Windsor, Ontario.
Workers at another assembly plant, the Buick City complex in Flint, Mich., could also be idled on Friday or early next week, industry sources said. The plant, which employs 5,236 hourly UAW workers, makes LeSabre, Park Avenue, Eighty Eight and Bonneville, mid-sized cars.
"It's a situation we are looking at," said GM spokesman Tom Klipstine, adding the automaker continues to monitor all of its vehicle and parts production operations.
As of Thursday afternoon GM had told 23,801 assembly and parts workers in the United States and Mexico to stay home because of a shortage of parts from its Canadian operations.
The Lordstown shutdown is the second U.S. plant where GM has suspended operations completely since 26,000 Canadian Auto Workers began an escalating strike on Oct. 3. The first plant to go totally down was Detroit/Hamtramck, which makes Cadillacs.
The Lordstown plant has three crews. The first crew was told to report back Nov. 10, the second Nov. 11 and the third Nov. 12, a UAW spokeswoman said.
Losing production of the mid-sized cars is not expected to have a big impact on sales, because the automaker had between 67 and 98 days supply of those vehicles on dealer lots as of the end of September, according to Autodata Corp.
But GM could feel the impact of lost production of its popular Cavalier and Sunfire cars. The Cavalier had a 61 days supply and the Sunfire had 61. The industry generally considers 60-days supply to be ideal.
GM and CAW negotiators reached agreement on a new three-year labor pact Oct. 22. The deal was approved by CAW members Wednesday.
The Canadian operations are being brought up in stages.
Bargainers for the United Auto Workers union and General Motors Corp. continued bargaining on Sunday but kept a tight lid on whether any progress was being made toward a new labour pact as a midnight (0500 GMT) deadline loomed.
GM spokesman Ray Deibel said talks resumed at midmorning Sunday after they adjourned Saturday evening. He declined to be more specific, or to say if GM Chairman Jack Smith is taking part in the discussions at the automaker's headquarters in downtown Detroit.
At stake is a new labour agreement for GM's 215,000 hourly UAW workers. GM employs more than half of the 390,000 UAW members who work at Detroit's Big Three automakers. It is the only one of the Big Three not to have a new three-year labour contract.
Analysts speculated that negotiators could be wrangling over contract language that would dictate how many workers to whom GM is obligated to guarantee jobs.
Bowing to UAW concerns over job security, both Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have agreed to new contracts that promise to keep 95 percent of their current UAW hourly workforces, except in the event of a severe industry downturn.
"I think if there's a sticking point that may be it," said Dale Brickner, a labour expert at the Michigan State University. "GM may be pushing to get that figure farther down than the UAW may be comfortable living with."
GM, the least efficient U.S. automaker, is trying to shed 12 unprofitable parts plants, and wants to exclude certain component facilities from the employment guarantee. Those include a door hardware plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich.
In settling a 20-day strike by the Canadian Auto Workers union last week, GM was able to secure a deal that included the selling of two parts plants and flexibility to outsource UAW President Stephen Yokich had not indicated what he would do after the contract extension expires at midnight Sunday. Yokich on Friday set the Sunday deadline, but did not actually threaten a strike .
However, there was speculation Sunday the UAW could mount a plant-specific strike if enough progress has not been met by the deadline Sunday.
By hitting light truck plants, such as the sport/utility facility in Janesville, Wisc., the union could hurt the sale of some of GM's most profitable products at a time when it is trying to bounce back from the Canadian strike.
Brickner said the UAW used that strategy in the mid-1980s to hamper individual sites without shutting down the entire North American production system.
GM's U.S. operations continue to respond to the strike by 26,000 CAW workers.
More than 6,600 UAW members at GM's Buick City complex were told not to report on Monday. At the same time, however, GM was running radio ads telling first-shift workers at its Hamtramck assembly plant to report to work on Monday.
Although General Motors Corp and the United Auto Workers are separated by crucial outsourcing issues, analysts said Monday they do not foresee the union staging a protracted strike against GM.
"I don't think there's any will to have some major explosion," said David Cole, director of the University of Michigan's Center for the Study of Automotive Transportation.
"They've been close for some time," he said.  
David Healy, analyst at Burnham Securites Inc, said the union could still hit GM with "Apache raids" that target individual plants that make high-profit vehicles, however.
Talks for a new three-year labor deal were to resume Tuesday about 8:30 a.m. EST/1330 GMT. Bargainers worked for 17 hours into the early morning Monday before calling a recess, even though a contract extension deadine expired at midnight Sunday.
UAW President Stephen Yokich said earlier Monday he plans to settle the union's differences with the company at the bargaining table, and not resort to selective strikes at profitable light truck plants, as had been speculated Sunday.
The UAW represents 215,000 members at GM, more than half of the 390,000 UAW workers who work at Detroit's Big Three automakers.
Union members had made up picket signs and drafted strike schedules Sunday night in the event they got the word to walk off the job. On Monday, one local union official said members were comfortable working without a contract.
"People understand that things have got to be done the way the negotiators do it," said Ken Summers, administrative assistant to the chairman of Local 594 in Pontiac, Michigan. "Nobody wants a strike."
Summers said Local 594, where members make the popular full-size C/K pickup trucks, has "serious" issues with GM over outsourcing, as well as health and safety issues.
Harley Shaiken, a labor expert at the University of California at Berkeley, said it's possible local disputes will inger even after a national agreement is reached, like they did following the 1993 contract talks.
"Although my sense is if GM gets a pact similar to Ford and Chrysler, which I think is the odds-on favorite, we will see many of the local disputes wrap up relatively quickly," he said.
Yokich said he intends to return to GM's headquarters for more talks Tuesday. GM Chairman Jack Smith, who was present for some of the talks late Sunday, is scheduled to appear in New York at a morning news conference with Hazel O'Leary, secretary of the U.S. Department of Energy, on renewable energy issues.
A GM spokeswoman could not be reached to determine if Smith still plans to attend the event.
Union workers prepared to strike General Motors Corp for the second time this month Sunday night as bargainers for the company and the United Auto Workers struggled to reach a new contract agreement before a midnight deadline.
In a sign the pace of talks could be picking up, GM Chairman Jack Smith arrived at the automaker's headquarters early in the evening.
UAW members at pickup truck and sport/utility vehicle assembly plants in Pontiac, Mich. and Janesville, Wis. said picket signs had been made and strike schedules drafted.
"We don't know if we're going to work in the morning or not," said a woman answering the phone at UAW Local 95 in Janesville, who declined to give her name.
At stake is a new labor agreement for GM's 215,000 hourly UAW workers. GM employs more than half of the approximately 390,000 UAW members who work at Detroit's Big Three automakers. It is the only one of the Big Three to not have a new three-year labor contract.
Last week, the world's largest automaker settled a strike by 26,000 members of the Canadian Auto Workers union that shut down the Canadian operations and idled more than 23,000 workers at dozens of plants in the United States and Mexico.
"GM remains hopeful an agreement can be reached before the UAW's termination of the current 1993 national agreement at 11:59 p.m. tonight," GM spokesman Chuck Licari told reporters gathered at company headquarters late Sunday afternoon.
UAW spokesman Frank Joyce declined to comment on the talks. UAW President Stephen Yokich Friday said he is not optimistic a deal can be reached by the deadline.
Bargainers for UAW and GM resumed at midmorning Sunday after they adjourned Saturday evening. Analysts speculated that negotiators could be wrangling over contract language that would dictate how many workers GM is obligated to guarantee jobs for.
Bowing to UAW concerns over job security, both Ford and Chrysler have agreed to new contracts that promise to keep 95 percent of their current UAW hourly workforces except in the event of a severe industry downturn.
"I think if there's a sticking point that may be it," said Dale Brickner, a labor expert at the Michigan State University. "GM may be pushing to get that figure farther down than the UAW may be comfortable living with."
GM, the least efficient U.S. automaker, is trying to shed 12 unprofitable parts plants, and wants to exclude certain component facilities from the employment guarantee. Those include a door hardware plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich.
In settling a 20-day strike by the Canadian Auto Workers union last week, GM was able to secure a deal that included the selling of two parts plants and flexibility to outsource Yokich has not indicated what he will do after once the contract extension expires at midnight Sunday. Yokich on Friday set the Sunday deadline, but did not actually threaten a strike. Workers have been told to stay on the job until they hear otherwise.
However, there was speculation Sunday the UAW could mount a plant-specific strike if enough progress has not been met by the deadline Sunday. By hitting light truck plants such as the Janesville facility that makes Tahoe and Yukon full size sport/utilities, the union could hurt the sale of some of GM's most profitable products at a time it is trying to bounce back from the Canadian strike.
GM's U.S. operations continue to respond to the 20-day CAW strike. The more than 6,600 UAW members at GM's Buick City complex have been told not to report Monday. At the same time, GM is running radio ads telling first-shift workers at its Hamtramck assembly plant to report to work Monday.
General Motors Corp, battling to avoid a second strike by assembly and parts workers this month, said it was hopeful a new labor contract could be reached before an extension deadline at midnight on Sunday.
Speaking to reporters gathered at GM's headquarters here, GM spokesman Chuck Licari said GM and the United Auto Workers were still working to resolve difficult and complex issues.
"GM remains hopeful an agreement can be reached before the UAW's termination of the current 1993 national agreement at 11:59 p.m. (0459 GMT) tonight," said Licari.
At stake is a new labor agreement for GM's 215,000 hourly UAW workers. GM employs more than half of the approximately 390,000 UAW members who work at Detroit's Big Three automakers. It is the only one of the Big Three to not have a new three-year labor contract.
UAW spokesman Frank Joyce declined to comment on the talks. UAW President Stephen Yokich said on Friday that he was not optimistic a deal could be reached by the deadline. In a sign an agreement might not be reached tonight, Licari said GM Chairman Jack Smith was not at the automaker's headquarters, although he was in touch with negotiators.
Both Ford Motor Co Chairman Alex Trotman and Chrysler Corp Chairman Robert Eaton were present for the final stages of their company's negotiations and appeared at press conferences announcing a deal.
Bargainers for UAW and GM resumed Sunday morning after they adjourned Saturday evening. Analysts speculated that negotiators could be wrangling over contract language that would dictate how many workers GM would have to guarantee jobs.
Bowing to UAW concerns over job security, both Ford and Chrysler have agreed to new contracts that promise to keep 95 percent of their current UAW hourly workforces except in the event of a severe industry downturn.
"I think if there's a sticking point that may be it," said Dale Brickner, a labor expert at the Michigan State University. "GM may be pushing to get that figure farther down than the UAW may be comfortable living with."
GM, the least efficient U.S. automaker, is trying to shed 12 unprofitable parts plants, and wants to exclude certain component facilities from the employment guarantee, including a door hardware plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich.
In settling a 20-day strike by the Canadian Auto Workers union last week, GM was able to secure a deal that included the sale of two parts plants and flexibility to outsource more products.
Yokich has not said what he will do after once the contract extension expires at midnight Sunday. He set the deadline on Friday, but did not actually threaten a strike. Workers have been told to stay on the job until they hear otherwise.
However, there was speculation Sunday the UAW could mount a plant-specific strike if not enough progress had been made by the deadline. By hitting light truck plants such as the sport/utility facility in Janesville, Wis., the union could hurt the sale of some of GM's most profitable products at a time it is trying to bounce back from the Canadian strike.
GM's U.S. operations continue to respond to the strike by 26,000 CAW workers. The more than 6,600 UAW members at GM's Buick City complex have been told not to report Monday. At the same time, GM is running radio ads telling first-shift workers at its Hamtramck assembly plant to report to work Monday.
Nearly one quarter of ITT Automotive Inc's workers around the world will be paid a combined hourly and benefit rate of less than $10 an hour by 2000, the company's top executive said Tuesday.
ITT Automotive, a unit of ITT Industries Inc  paid 15 percent of its 35,000 workers less than $10 an hour in 1995, and 10 percent that amount in 1990, said Timothy Leuliette, president and chief executive officer of ITT Automotive.
The numbers, provided by Leuliette at the Automotive Industries' Executive Management Conference, were offered as another illustration of how auto suppliers need to continue slashing costs if they expect to remain an independent player in the fast-changing industry.
"Do we do that because we're mean?" Leuliette said of the falling rates. "No. We did that because we have to promise our customers a 3-4 percent price reduction."
Leuliette spoke as part of a panel discussion with J.T. Battenberg, president General Motors Corp's Delphi Automotive Systems, and Robert Oswald, chairman, president and chief executive officer of Robert Bosch Corp's U.S. automotive unit.
Asked how much a supplier should expect to pay workers, Leuliette said the global hourly rate for labor-intensive assemblies such as wiring harnesses is $1 to $2. More technical products are made for $10 to $12 an hour.
"If you are regionally competitive but not globally competitive, you will unlikely be a supplier to ITT," he said.
Battenberg had three areas of advice for suppliers: focus on a few product areas; continuously stress quality; and pursue international alliances with other suppliers to expand more efficiently.
"I just don't think you can be all thing to all people. It's a lesson we learned at General Motors the hard way," Battenberg said.
Oswald said suppliers need to be more than good product innovators. "At Bosch, we believe that our performance as a supplier is not based just on innovation, but also that weare meticulous in bringing that innovation to production," he said.
Meantime, Leuliette said in 2000 suppliers to ITT can expect to receive 80 percent of what they are paid now for their products.
He noted the supplier industry is under such pressure to reduce costs that firms need between eight percent and nine percent productivity growth in order to keep their present level of employees.
While General Motors Corp. struggles to overcome labor costs of $43 an hour at its parts plants, the head of one global auto supplier is painting a Darwinian view of the future, in which an increasing number of workers earn less than $10 an hour.
Nearly one-quarter of ITT Automotive Inc.'s workers around the world will be paid a combined hourly wage and benefit rate of less than $10 by 2000, the company's top executive said this week at a conference of suppliers.
That sobering forecast spotlights a long-term problem for GM, which is now in the throes of negotiating a new three-year labor contract with the United Auto Workers union.
"They can't make a buck stamping out taillights and paying people $43 an hour," said David Healy, an analyst at Burnham Securities Inc.
Adds Lehman Brothers analyst Joseph Phillippi: "Their 43 other competitors aren't going to say 'We'll spot you a couple of years.'"
Timothy Leuliette, president and chief executive officer of ITT Automotive, said the company paid 15 percent of its 35,000 workers around the world less than $10 an hour in 1995. That was up from 10 percent of its employees at that pay level in 1990.
"Do we do that because we're mean?" Leuliette said of the falling wage rates. "No. We did that because we have to promise our customers a 3 to 4 percent price reduction."
Facing union demands for greater job security, GM must find a way for its massive Delphi Automotive Systems parts business to stay competitive in the worldwide auto supplier market.
In the current talks, Delphi has said 12 of its U.S. component facilities are underperforming and should not be subject to the job guarantees the UAW has received from other automakers.
Even if it accepts the economic terms already agreed to by Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. , GM and Delphi will pay the average U.S. parts worker a base wage of nearly $19 an hour in the first year of the contract, and more than $21 in 1999, the third year of the agreement.
About 42 percent of Delphi's workers are located in the United States, where the combined hourly wage and benefit cost of a UAW worker under the 1993 national agreement is about $43.
Delphi, with 1995 revenues of $26.4 billion, is in 167 businesses around the world. Global expansion remains a focus for the company, which this year expects 35 percent of its revenues to come from customers outside of GM's North American Operations, Delphi President J.T. Battenberg said Tuesday.
But as Leuliette's comments indicate, the global auto supplier industry is growing increasingly competitive.
The worldwide hourly wage rate for assembling a labor-intensive part such as a wire harness is between $1 and $2, he estimated. More technical parts cost $10-$12 an hour. Leuliette said workers in Vietnam will earn $64 a month working 48 hours a week putting together wiring harnesses for ITT.
"If you are regionally competitive but not globally competitive, you will unlikely be a supplier to ITT," Leuliette told the gathering of suppliers in Detroit.
ITT Automotive, based in Auburn Hills, Mich., is the biggest unit within ITT Industries Inc., and one of the largest independent auto suppliers in the world.
The company, which has annual sales of about $5.5 billion, makes brake and chassis systems, as well as body and electrical components such as motors, actuators and wiper systems. Leuliette estimated the company's average global total wage costs at about $14 an hour.
While General Motors Corp. struggles to overcome labour costs of $43 an hour at its parts plants, the head of one global auto supplier is painting a Darwinian view of the future, in which an increasing number of workers earn less than $10 an hour.
Nearly one-quarter of ITT Automotive Inc.'s workers around the world will be paid a combined hourly wage and benefit rate of less than $10 by 2000, the company's top executive said this week at a conference of suppliers.
That sobering forecast spotlights a long-term problem for GM, which is now in the throes of negotiating a new three-year labour contract with the United Auto Workers union.
"They can't make a buck stamping out taillights and paying people $43 an hour," said David Healy, an analyst at Burnham Securities Inc.
Adds Lehman Brothers analyst Joseph Phillippi: "Their 43 other competitors aren't going to say 'We'll spot you a couple of years.'"
Timothy Leuliette, president and chief executive officer of ITT Automotive, said the company paid 15 percent of its 35,000 workers around the world less than $10 an hour in 1995. That was up from 10 percent of its employees at that pay level in 1990.
"Do we do that because we're mean?" Leuliette said of the falling wage rates. "No. We did that because we have to promise our customers a 3 to 4 percent price reduction."
Facing union demands for greater job security, GM must find a way for its massive Delphi Automotive Systems parts business to stay competitive in the worldwide auto supplier market.
In the current talks, Delphi has said 12 of its U.S. component facilities are underperforming and should not be subject to the job guarantees the UAW has received from other automakers.
Even if it accepts the economic terms already agreed to by Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. , GM and Delphi will pay the average U.S. parts worker a base wage of nearly $19 an hour in the first year of the contract, and more than $21 in 1999, the third year of the agreement.
About 42 percent of Delphi's workers are located in the United States, where the combined hourly wage and benefit cost of a UAW worker under the 1993 national agreement is about $43.
Delphi, with 1995 revenues of $26.4 billion, is in 167 businesses around the world. Global expansion remains a focus for the company, which this year expects 35 percent of its revenues to come from customers outside of GM's North American Operations, Delphi President J.T. Battenberg said Tuesday.
But as Leuliette's comments indicate, the global auto supplier industry is growing increasingly competitive.
The worldwide hourly wage rate for assembling a labour-intensive part such as a wire harness is between $1 and $2, he estimated. More technical parts cost $10-$12 an hour.
Leuliette said workers in Vietnam will earn $64 a month working 48 hours a week putting together wiring harnesses for ITT.
"If you are regionally competitive but not globally competitive, you will unlikely be a supplier to ITT," Leuliette told the gathering of suppliers in Detroit.
ITT Automotive, based in Auburn Hills, Mich., is the biggest unit within ITT Industries Inc., and one of the largest independent auto suppliers in the world.
The company, which has annual sales of about $5.5 billion, makes brake and chassis systems, as well as body and electrical components such as motors, actuators and wiper systems. Leuliette estimated the company's average global total wage costs at about $14 an hour.
General Motors Corp.'s sales slipped nearly 8 percent in October, dragged down by steep declines in car sales, while Chrysler Corp. posted another double-digit jump for the month, the automakers said Friday.
GM's total vehicles were 402,420 in October, off 7.8 percent on a daily sales basis from 420,408 in the year-ago month. October had 27 selling days vs. 26 a year ago.
Passenger car sales at GM were 215,276, a drop of 24 percent. All of GM's car divisions reported declines, including Chevrolet, where sales were 68,934, down 31 percent.
Offsetting the slumping car numbers were total light truck sales of 187,144, which climbed 22 percent on a daily basis from last year.
Three Chevrolet sport utility vehicles -- the Suburban, Tahoe and Blazer -- each had their best-ever sales month in October, with percentage increases ranging from 35 percent for the Blazer to 63 percent for the Suburban.
Production of the Tahoe and its GMC sister, the Yukon, has been halted at GM's Janesville, Wis., assembly plant since Oct. 29, when 4,800 United Auto Workers members walked off the job in a contract dispute. It is the only plant that makes the sport utilities, GM's most profitable vehicles.
As it has for the previous two months, GM blamed the passenger car drop on customers waiting for the introduction of GM's 15 new vehicle lines that will be hitting the market through the next year.
"I think there's a great deal of anticipation for the newer models that will be coming out," said GM spokesman Dean Rotondo.
The 20-day strike by Canadian autoworkers in October had a minimal effect on the month's sales, Rotondo said.
Sales of Chevrolet Cavalier were up 1.5 percent, and were down 12.4 percent for the Pontiac Sunfire, which Rotondo said could be related to the strike.
Meanwhile, Chrysler's total sales rose 18.6 percent to 205,393. Sales of passenger cars were 61,213, an increase of almost 13 percent. Sales of minivans, sport utilities and pickup trucks shot up 22.3 percent to 144,180.
Chrysler said the October total broke a record of 176,339 for the month set in 1972. James Holden, Chrysler executive vice president of sales and marketing, said about 75 percent of the October sales came from 1997 model vehicles, which consumers bought with a minimal amount of incentives.
"I believe that we've got a fundamentally different demand for our products than we've had historically, because it shows strength across the board and month to month," he said.
Holden predicted the U.S. No. 3 automaker will be able to sustain the sales momentum in 1997 because of its increased production plans.
Highlights for Chrysler included a 50 percent increase in sales of the Dodge Dakota Pickup, which was redesigned for the 1997 model year, to 8,722; and a 24 percent increase in all Dodge trucks to 74,860.
Other October sales reported Friday were: Toyota Motor Corp., where sales were 92,918, up 15.7 percent; Honda Motor Co. Ltd., which had an 8.8 percent increase to 74,914; Nissan Motor Co. Ltd., which had sales of 49,121, a decrease of 11.8 percent.
With 17 of 22 automakers reporting, total U.S. light vehicle sales for October were 912,037, a 1.5 percent daily sales rate increase from 865,378.
Ford Motor Co., the last of the Detroit's Big Three to report, is expected to post a slight increase in sales on Nov. 5, according to analysts.
Calling it a crucial change for how it develops new cars and trucks, Ford Motor Co. Wednesday launched a new computer-aided design project based on a computer program from Structural Dynamics Research Corp..
Ford said the new project, called C3P, will cut prototype costs by up to 50 percent; improve investment efficiency by 20 percent to 30 percent; and eliminate half of costly late development changes.
"The new C3P initiative represents the most fundamental change of the engineering computer infrastructure in Ford's history," Paul Blumberg, director of product development systems at Ford's Product Development Center, said in a statement.
Officials did not specify any dollar amount savings. But executives said they fall under previously disclosed product development cost savings. Three new vehicle programs started this year will use C3P.
Once the program is fully implemented in 2000, Ford said it will merge computer-aided design, manufacturing and engineering functions into a seamless, unified system encompassing all stages of vehicle and component development.
Ford's decision to team up with Structural Dynamics Research (SDRC) raised eyebrows at competitors. The Milford, Ohio-based firm is a small player in the market of supplying computer aided design and manufacturing systems (CAD/CAM) to the auto industry, according to both competitors and analysts.
"You just don't hear about SDRC," said Ron Bienkowski, an executive engineer at Chrysler Corp.
Bienkowski also chided Ford for launching a new design program seven years after Chrysler did.
"We made the decision to go to a single system like C3P back in 1989," he said.
Chrysler, as well as several other Japanese and European automakers, use the more popular CATIA program from Paris-based Dassault Systemes and IBM Corp..
Charles Foundyller, president of market research firm Daratech Inc. in Cambridge, Mass., said the SDRC system is an easy-to-use, powerful system that should serve Ford well.
"All in all, I don't think Ford made a bad decision," he said.
Ford made the C3P announcement as part of a half-day presentation to reporters touting the No. 2 U.S. automaker's computer capabilities. Among other news items announced Wednesday, Ford:
-- plans to eliminate 90 percent of its physical prototypes by 2000 in favor of electronic versions. Physical prototypes now constitute about 40 percent to 50 percent today;
-- will be able to conduct a computer-simulated frontal crash for $10 in 2000, compared to the $200 it currently costs;
-- will introduce a production car in Europe in 1997 that was designed almost completely using computer technology.
Ford executives were hard-pressed to assign dollar amounts to all of the new computer design and prototype initiatives.
But Claude Lobo, director of advanced design at Ford, said the new systems dramatically improve quality and free designers and engineers to take more risks.
Calling it a crucial change for how it develops new cars and trucks, Ford Motor Co. Wednesday launched a new computer-aided design project based on a computer programme from Structural Dynamics Research Corp..
Ford said the new project, called C3P, will cut prototype costs by up to 50 percent; improve investment efficiency by 20 percent to 30 percent; and eliminate half of costly late development changes.
"The new C3P initiative represents the most fundamental change of the engineering computer infrastructure in Ford's history," Paul Blumberg, director of product development systems at Ford's Product Development Centre, said in a statement.
Officials did not specify any dollar amount savings. But executives said they fall under previously disclosed product development cost savings. Three new vehicle programmes started this year will use C3P.
Once the programme is fully implemented in 2000, Ford said it will merge computer-aided design, manufacturing and engineering functions into a seamless, unified system encompassing all stages of vehicle and component development.
Ford's decision to team up with Structural Dynamics Research (SDRC) raised eyebrows at competitors. The Milford, Ohio-based firm is a small player in the market of supplying computer aided design and manufacturing systems (CAD/CAM) to the auto industry, according to both competitors and analysts.
"You just don't hear about SDRC," said Ron Bienkowski, an executive engineer at Chrysler Corp.
Bienkowski also chided Ford for launching a new design programme seven years after Chrysler did.
"We made the decision to go to a single system like C3P back in 1989," he said.
Chrysler, as well as several other Japanese and European automakers, use the more popular CATIA programme from Paris-based Dassault Systemes and IBM Corp..
Charles Foundyller, president of market research firm Daratech Inc. in Cambridge, Mass., said the SDRC system is an easy-to-use, powerful system that should serve Ford well.
"All in all, I don't think Ford made a bad decision," he said.
Ford made the C3P announcement as part of a half-day presentation to reporters touting the No. 2 U.S. automaker's computer capabilities. Among other news items announced Wednesday, Ford:
-- plans to eliminate 90 percent of its physical prototypes by 2000 in favour of electronic versions. Physical prototypes now constitute about 40 percent to 50 percent today;
-- will be able to conduct a computer-simulated frontal crash for $10 in 2000, compared to the $200 it currently costs;
-- will introduce a production car in Europe in 1997 that was designed almost completely using computer technology.
Ford executives were hard-pressed to assign dollar amounts to all of the new computer design and prototype initiatives.
But Claude Lobo, director of advanced design at Ford, said the new systems dramatically improve quality and free designers and engineers to take more risks.
General Motors Corp. told employees it has a potential buyer for four of its parts plants, but denied reports Tuesday that it is in discussions to sell the facilities to Canadian auto supplier Magna International Inc.
GM informed workers at its Delphi Interior and Lighting Systems plant in Flint, Mich., on Monday that it has a possible buyer for the facility and three others, union and company representatives said Tuesday.
The 1,200 workers at the Flint plant were not told who the prospective buyer is, said officials at United Auto Workers union Local 326.
"They did tell us that as we spoke the potential buyer was entering into discussions," said Tim Thompson, a district shop committee officer for Local 326.
The Detroit News reported Tuesday that GM is talking with Magna, of Markham, Ontario, and that a deal could be announced soon. Separately, a source with knowledge of the auto supplier industry told Reuters that Atoma International Inc., a division of Magna, won the bidding for the plants, although the deal had not been finalized.
But Delphi spokeswoman Kari Hulsey denied that Magna is a finalist to buy the plants. "It's not Magna, it's not a division of Magna," she said."
One factor that could delay the announcement is the continuing contract talks between the UAW in the United States and Canada and Detroit's Big Three automakers. If Magna does turn out to be the buyer, it may be to GM's advantage to hold off finalizing a deal. Magna has previously had a contentious relationship with the Canadian United Auto Workers union.
The buyer wants to purchase the Flint plant, one in Livonia, Mich., and two in Canada as a group. The plants employ a total of 5,100 hourly workers and make a variety of interior parts, including hinges, door panels and instrument panels, GM said.
The Flint plant, which makes hardware, and the Livonia facility, which makes interior door panels, are both Delphi plants. The fabricating facility in Oshawa, Ontario, and a seat plant in Windsor, Ontario, are managed by GM of Canada but make products for Delphi.
GM spokeswoman Hulsey would not say if the four facilities are among the 14 underperforming Delphi plants that GM has said it wants to divest.
A gunman in military fatigues burst into a Ford Motor Co. assembly plant and opened fire Thursday, killing one and wounding two others before eluding police in a series of draininge tunnels.
Police said they trapped the man and he gave up voluntarily after a tense, four and a half-hour standoff.
Sgt. Clarence Goodlein of the Wixom police said the white male shot and killed one Ford employee and wounded another, then left the plant and shot an Oakland County Sheriff's deputy in the shoulder when police tried to confront him.
Goodlein did not identify the victims, but a Ford worker, Jim Maher, said the man killed was a foreman at the plant.
Deputy Matt Miller, 39, was listed in stable condition and was expected to undergo surgery Thursday afternoon, said Amy Middleton, a spokeswoman for Providence Park Medical Center.
The other worker, Alvin Akers, 43, was treated and released, with a bullet fragment in his arm and glass fragments in his neck.
Goodlein said authorities did not immediately know whether the gunman was a Ford employee.
"This guy came into the plant and with some kind of weapon starting shooting all over the place," said Ford spokesman Bill Carroll.
Police shut down nearby Interstate 96, which runs parallel to the plant. Workers were evacuated from the plant and production of Lincoln Town Cars, Continentals and Mark VIII luxury cars was suspended until Monday.
Carroll said the gunman opened fire in several sections of the plant before before leaving and shooting in the direction of the nearby Interstate.
Witnesses said the gunman was dressed in camouflage, with a dark cap and carried an assault-type rifle. It was not known whether he was an employee at the plant, but several said they thought he may be going on a deer hunting vacation.
One employee at the plant, who identified herself as Christy, told WWJ Radio the gunman told her, "Get out of here" before he started shooting in the plant.
"He knew what he was doing. He just started shooting, and when he ran out of ammo, he just reloaded and kept on shooting," she saiid.
The shooting is the third at a Ford plant in the Detroit area since August 1994. It also falls on the fifth anniversary of a 1991 tragedy in which a fired postal worker went on a shooting rampage at the Royal Oak, Mich., post office, killing himself and four others.
In August of this year, a Ford employee killed a security guard at a Ford climate control plant in Plymouth, Mich., then shot himself. On January 7, 1995, a Ford worker at the same factory wounded his estranged wife, killed her boyfriend, then shot himself to death.
In August 1994, a United Auto Workers official at Ford's Rouge industrial complex in Dearborn, Mich., shot two of his fellow union committeemen to death and wounded two others in a dispute over union policy.
Chrysler Corp, also has had its share of tragedy. In December 1994, a worker upset about a job assignment killed his foreman and wounded a coworker at a metal stamping plant in Sterling Heights, Mich.
With Chairman Jack Smith behind the wheel of a shiny red EV1, General Motors Corp. rolled its first electric vehicle out of the plant Thursday, marking what it dubbed the start of a new era in the auto industry.
The car was loaded on the back of an auto-hauling truck at the Lansing Craft Centre that will take it on the first leg of its journey to the West Coast. The cars will go on sale Dec. 5 at 26 Saturn dealerships in Los Angeles, San Diego, Phoenix and Tucson, Ariz.
"When they look back on the next 100 years of the evolution of the automobile, they will agree that this car was the first in a new generation of vehicles that redefined the limits of technology and efficiency," Smith said during the drive-away ceremony.
GM spent $350 million and more than six years to develop the two-passenger, sleek-looking coupe. The car is the first and only GM vehicle to carry a GM badge, instead of a name from one of its other seven divisions.
While other automakers have developed and are selling electrically powered vehicles, GM says the EV1 is the first vehicle to be designed from the ground up as an electric car.
In his remarks, Smith called the EV1 "the most technologically advanced vehicle platform in the world," incorporating 23 new patents.
The EV1 is powered by 26 12-volt lead-acid batteries. It can travel up to 90 miles before it needs recharging. The fully equipped EV1 comes with standard features, including air conditioning, dual air bags, anti-lock brakes, power windows and door locks. It can go from 0 to 60 mph in less than nine seconds, and has a top speed of 80 mph.
GM announced in October that it will sell the EV1 through a 36-month lease at a sticker price of $33,995. Buyers who receive a $5,000 credit from the state of California will be able to lease an EV1 for $480 a month. Monthly payments without the credit would be $640. The cost does not include a wall-mounted charger, which sells for about $2,000.
Production of the EV1 began at the Lansing Craft Centre in August. GM officials will not discuss how many EV1s they intend to sell or produce annually, although the Lansing facility has the capacity to make about 2,000 of the vehicles annually.
So far, Saturn has received more than 1,000 calls from potential buyers on a toll-free line, said Joe Kennedy, vice president of sales and marketing for the division. Of that, Saturn estimates about 250 are "serious" buyers.
Talking to reporters after the ceremony, Smith said GM viewed the electric vehicle market as a long-term programme. He again would not say when the EV1 will turn a profit for GM.
"Our effort is to make the programme over time to be a business," he said. "The niche is small to start, but it will grow."
Kennedy said the initial focus is not on volume but on generating a positive shopping, buying and ownership experience. He said the company will remain flexible in its production and sales plans to adjust to demand.
"This is a totally new market, and we don't know what the demand will be on any given month of year," he said, noting that Saturn has 13 EV1 specialists who have completed two months of special sales training.
CMS Energy Co should have no trouble meeting or exceeding the $2.40 to $2.45 a share earnings estimates that analysts forecast for all of 1996, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer William McCormick said Friday.
"We feel very comfortable we'll be at or above that range," he said in a telephone interview from the utility's Dearborn, Mich. headquarters. CMS, the parent company for Consumers Power Co, Michigan's largest utility, earned $2.27 a share on total revenues of $3.9 billion in 1995.  
Earlier Friday, CMS announced the Michigan Public Service Commission (MPSC) approved a settlement that removes the final rate uncertainty of its Midland Cogeneration Venture L.P., ending a 10-year regulatory saga involving the embattled plant.
The settlement allows Consumers Power to include the cost of buying the final 325 megawatts of power from the plant in its customer rates. Previously, CMS was granted permission to include in rates the cost of buying 915 megawatts of the plant's total 1240 megawatts of power.  
"The last significant uncertainty related to the whole Midland situation was the recovery of the remaining 325 megawatts," said McCormick, who added he has been dealing with the Midland project since he became CEO of CMS 11 years ago.
McCormick said the settlement removes the possibility of future earnings write-downs related to the project. CMS recorded an after-tax charge of $343 million in the fourth quarter of 1992 from an earlier settlement of Midland Cogeneration issues.  
CMS' stock was up $1 to $32-3/8. Trading volume on the New York Stock Exchange was 206,700, indicating trading for Friday would be more than 300,000 shares, heavier than normal, said McCormick.
CMS' construction of the facility as a nuclear power plant was abandoned in the mid-1980s. CMS finished its conversion to a gas-powered energy plant in 1990.
Midland Cogeneration, the largest cogeneration project in North and South America, is a partnership of CMS; Dow Chemical Co, Coastal Corp, Asea Brown Boveri Inc and Fluor Corp.
Approval of the settlement prompted Standard &amp; Poor's to revise its outlook on Consumers Power and CMS to positive from stable, and re-affirm its ratings on the companies.
McCormick said he believes CMS will be meeting with the debt rating agency to discuss a possible upgrade of its ratings.
A gunman in military fatigues shot his way into a Ford Motor Co. assembly plant and continued firing Thursday, killing one person and wounding two before barricading himself in a network of drainage tunnels.
The suspect, 29-year-old Gerald Atkins of Wixom, fired repeatedly at officers in a 4 1/2-hour standoff but had given up voluntarily by late afternoon, police said.
Authorities said Atkins, armed with a high-powered assault-type rifle, fatally shot Darrell Izzard, 57, the Ford plant's manager of manufacturing planning, and wounded two Oakland County sheriff's deputies. The 18-year Ford veteran killed in the rampage was married and had three children.
Another worker in the factory was injured slightly in the neck by glass fragements from a window that was shot out.
Ford officials said Atkins had never been a Ford employee but had apparently come to the plant to talk to a woman he had been dating. He had had no prior contact with Izzard.
"He more or less shot his way into the plant," Wixom Police Sgt. Richard Howe said, adding that Atkins fired on a security office at the plant's main entrance when unarmed security guards tried to block his way.
One employee, who identified herself as Christy, told WWJ Radio the gunman told her, "Get out of here," before he started shooting.
"He knew what he was doing. He just started shooting, and when he ran out of ammo, he just reloaded and kept on shooting," she said.
Howe, the Wixom police sergeant, said that after firing shots in several parts of the plant, Atkins left the sprawling facility and shot two deputies who tried to apprehend him.
One deputy was hit in the shoulder and the other in the leg as they tried to confront the gunman outside the plant.
One of the wounded officers, Matt Miller, 39, was listed in fair condition but may need shoulder surgery, Amy Middleton, a spokeswoman for Providence Hospital in Southfield, Michigan, said.
Police shut down adjacent Interstate 96 for most of the afternoon. Workers were evacuated from the plant, and production of Lincoln Town Cars, Continentals and Mark VIII luxury cars was suspended until Monday.
Howe said Atkins fired several shots at police from a series of storm drainage tunnels underneath the plant but they managed to close off the tunnels and persuade him to surrender.
They had not established a motive for the rampage.
But a friend of Atkins said he had been having problems in a relationship with a female employee at the plant and "something cracked."
"Gerry's a very intense guy. He was in the military and was very successful in it," Ron Vahanian, a neighbor of Atkins, said. "I think there might have been problems with this girlfriend that he had that worked there."
Several workers said security at the facility, which employs about 3,200 people, was lax and identification cards were rarely checked.
Ford officials pledged to review security measures at all company facilities. "We're going to take a look at everything," Ford Automotive Group President Jacques Nasser said, adding that Thursday's incident "was probably impossible to prevent."
The shooting was the fourth at a Ford plant in the Detroit area since August 1994. It also fell on the fifth anniversary of a shooting rampage at the Royal Oak, Michigan, post office in which a fired postal worker killed himself and four others.
Officials from Ford Motor Co pledged to review security measures Thursday after the fourth fatal shooting in two years at one of their facilities.
But executives from the automaker said there was little that plant security guards, who do not carry guns, could do to defend themselves against armed intruders.
"When somebody blasts their way into a factory, it's very difficult to prevent," said Jacques Nasser, the executive vice president in charge of Ford's automotive operations.
A gunman dressed in military fatigues shot his way into Ford's Wixom Assembly plant about 30 miles west of Detroit Thursday morning, according to police.
The man killed a manufacturing planning manager, 57-year old Darrell Izzard, and fired at people throughout the plant, sending workers fleeing in panic through the sprawling assembly complex.
Before it was over more than four hours later, several people, including two police officers, had been wounded.
The shooting came three months after a Ford worker shot and killed a security guard at Ford's Sheldon Road climate control plant in Plymouth, Mich. In January of 1995, another employee of the plant wounded his estranged wife and killed her boyfriend before killing himself.
In September 1994, a United Auto Worker union official killed two fellow union officials and wounded two others during a shooting at Ford's Rouge Manufacturing centre in Dearborn, Mich.
Throughout Thursday, radio and television stations carried calls they said they received from hourly Ford workers who complained about the stressful work environment at the Wixom plant and other Ford facilities.
But Ford spokesman Jon Harmon pointed out the suspect in the Wixom shooting, identified as Gerald Atkins, 29, was not an employee of any Ford facility. Moreover, he noted it has not been uncommon in recent months for workers at Wixom to be idled because of slow demand for vehicles made at the plant.
The plant produces the Lincoln Town Car, Mark VIII and Continental cars, which have all been experiencing soft sales. About 3,000 hourly workers, members of United Auto Workers union Local 36, work at the facility.
During a news conference, plant manager Jeff Haller described the plant's workforce as dedicated, hard-working and cohesive. He said the plant's security measures would be reviewed. Some workers told reporters they had not had their security badges checked in eight years.
UAW Local 36 President Richard Greenfield said the union was saddened by the event and had set up a counselling line. He declined to comment on the day's events because the investigation had not been completed.
General Motors Corp. said Tuesday it agreed to sell four troubled parts plants to a new company that plans to become a major player in the competitive $22 billion automotive interior supply industry.
The new company, Peregrine Inc., is being funded by the New York investment firm Joseph Littlejohn &amp; Levy and auto industry executive Edward Gulda. No terms were announced for the sale, which has been expected for months.
Peregrine, which will have more than $1 billion in annual revenues, will be based in Southfield, Mich., and pursue contracts with car and truck manufacturers in North America as well as overseas.
"Peregrine will be one of North America's premier automotive supply companies," Gulda said in a statement. "We expect to see signficant growth in the years ahead."
Gulda is a former chief executive officer of Kelsey-Hayes, a brake systems maker that is part of LucasVarity Plc.
Peregrine also said it expected to sign an agreement with GM for future business. The Financial Post newspaper of Canada reported Tuesday that said GM has agreed to provide Peregrine with more that $4 billion in contracts over five years.
Peregrine officials could not be reached to comment.
The four plants make hinges, door and instrument panels and other interior parts, and generate combined revenue of about $1 billion a year. The plants employ about 5,500 hourly and salaried workers.
Two of the plants, in Livonia, Mich., and Flint, Mich., are part of GM's Delphi Interior &amp; Lighting Systems unit. The other two, a fabrication plant in Oshawa, Ontario, and a trim plant in Windsor, Ontario, report to Delphi and GM of Canada.
Peregrine will enter a competitive market facing major companies such as Lear Corp. and Johnson Controls Inc. Some analysts said at least one of the Peregrine plants could have have a difficult time competing. Contracts for most of what the Windsor plant supplies, for example, will run out in about two years, and the plant has not been winning new bids.
Nevertheless, there are some parts segments, such as door panels, where the industry needs all the producers that are out there, said Gregory Janicki, a vice president at industry consultant CSM Corp.
"There is such a need for all of these door panels that five companies couldn't supply them all," he said.
Moreover, companies that have been spun off from GM have a history of performing better than they did under the parent company, said Dennis Virag, managing director of the Automotive Consulting Group Inc. in Ann Arborn, Mich.
Virag cited privately held American Axel Manufacturing, a forging operation that GM sold in 1994, and engine maker Detroit Diesel Corp., which was sold in 1988.
"If you look at history, there's a very good chance that this company will do well," he said.
The Michigan plants had been on a list of 12 domestic operations GM had identified as being troubled facilities.
Sale of the Canadian plants became an issue in the three-week strike by members of the Canadian Auto Workers union in October. In the end, GM won the right to sell the two plants. Workers not kept on by the new owner will be offered jobs at other GM facilities.
Peregrine said hourly workers at the four plants who are retained will be covered by the 1996 master contracts with the United Auto Workers and Canadian Auto Workers unions. Wages, pensions and benefits for salaried and hourly workers will be about the same as they had been under GM, it said.
Peregrine will be financed with equity from Joseph Littlejohn &amp; Levy Fund II, a private partnership formed to invest in consolidating industries and corporate divestitures. Peregrine said it does not expect to incur debt other than for working capital needs.
General Motors Corp. said Tuesday it signed a memorandum of understanding to sell four parts plants to a new company that plans to be major auto industry supplier with more than $1 billion in annual sales.
The new company, Peregrine Inc., was formed by the New York investment firm Joseph Littlejohn &amp; Levy and auto industry executive Edward Gulda. No terms were announced for the deal, which had been expected for months.
"Peregrine will be one of North America's premier automotive supply companies," Gulda said in a statement. "We expect to see signficant growth in the years ahead."
Gulda is a former chief executive officer of Kelsey-Hayes, a brake systems maker that is part of LucasVarity Plc.
The new company, to be based in Southfield, Mich., will pursue business with all car and truck manufacturers in North America and internationally, he said.
Peregrine said that, following a final agreement expected by the end of 1996, it will sign a supply agreement with GM to address "current and future business."
The four plants produce a variety of interior parts, including hinges, door panels and instrument panels, and generate combined revenue of about $1 billion a year. Hourly and salaried workers at the plants total about 5,500.
Two of the plants, in Livonia and Flint, Mich., are part of GM's Delphi Interior &amp; Lighting Systems unit. The other two, a fabrication plant in Oshawa, Ontario, and a trim plant in Windsor, Ontario, report to both Delphi and GM of Canada.
The Michigan plants had been on a list of 12 U.S. Delphi operations GM had identified as being troubled facilities.
Sale of the Canadian plants became an issue in the three-week strike by members of the Canadian Auto Workers union. In the end, GM won the right to sell the two plants.
Workers not kept on by the new owner will be offered jobs at other GM facilities.
Peregrine said in a statement that hourly workers at the four plants who are retained will be covered by the 1996 master contracts with the United Auto Workers and Canadian Auto Workers unions.
Wages, pensions and benefits for salaried and hourly workers will be about the same as they had been under GM, it said.
Peregrine will be financed with equity from Joseph Littlejohn &amp; Levy Fund II, a private partnership formed to make investments in consolidating industries and corporate divestitures.
Peregrine said it does not expect to incur debt other than for working capital needs.
Chrysler Corp minivans have came under fire again from U.S. safety regulators, as federal officials said Tuesday they stepped up two probes involving the vehicles' doors, including an inquiry into several dozen reported collapses of a 90-pound rear hatch.
Nearly two million minivans are involved in the investigations, which also include complaints that side sliding doors on 1996 models flew open at high speeds.  
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) said it has received reports that 39 people have been injured when the rear lift-gate on 1991-1993 Caravan, Voyager and Town &amp; Country minivans dropped unexpectedly.
The problem occurs when retaining bolts holding two cylinders that prop the door open shear, according to NHTSA. The agency has received a total of 477 complaints. The probe, first launched in May and upgraded to an engineering analysis on October 31, covers 1,271,575 minivans.  
NHTSA also upgraded a preliminary investigation into 581,686 1996-model Caravan, Voyager and Town &amp; Country minivans. It has received 19 complaints that either the right or left sliding door can come open while the vehicle is moving.
Owners have reported the doors open anywhere from a few inches to fully open at speeds ranging from 15 mph to 60 mph. No injuries have been reported from the openings. NHTSA said it was not aware of any incidents involving vehicles built during or after January 1996.  
Chrysler was the first automaker to offer a sliding door on the left side of a minivan. The feature has made the U.S. No. 3 automaker's minivans the hottest seller in the popular family segment.
A Chrysler representative could not be reached Tuesday. But the company has told the safety agency the problem may stem from incorrect dealer latch adjustments, which the company attributed to an inaccurate service manual procedure.  
Chrysler also said eight of the complaints involved vehicles that had door repairs made. Chrysler said it has corrected the manual procedure and has made three design changes to various door components.
Still, NHTSA said it has continued to receive complaints about sliding doors opening, including vehicles with no repair history.
In 1995, Chrysler agreed to replace rear liftgate latches on more than four million 1984-95 model minivans, but stopped short of recalling the vehicles. Safety officials said the doors could pop open during low-speed crashes.  
Separately, NHTSA said it upgraded an investigation into 621,000 1995 and 1996 Windstar minivans from Ford Motor Co. Regulators have received 327 complaints about brake problems on the minivans, which have led to 76 accidents and two injuries.
In addition to the incidents reported to NHTSA, Ford said it has received 64,000 warranty claims that could relate to a brake problem resulting in long stopping distances.
Also, NHTSA said it opened an investigation into Land Rover's Discovery sport/utility vehicle. It has received two complaints that the right front door opened on 1996 models.
Rover is a unit of German carmaker Bayerische Motoren-Werke AG.
Chrysler Corp. minivans have came under fire again from safety regulators, who said Tuesday they stepped up probes into two problems, including reports that a 90-pound rear hatch door can close suddenly without warning.
Nearly 2 million minivans are involved in the investigations, which were also sparked by reports that side sliding doors on 1996 models flew open at high speeds.
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) said it received reports that 39 people have been injured when the rear hatch door on 1991-1993 model Caravan, Voyager and Town &amp; Country minivans dropped unexpectedly.
The problem occurs when bolts holding cylinders that prop the door open shear, according to the federal safety agency. The agency has received a total of 477 complaints. The probe, first launched in May and upgraded on Oct. 31, covers almost 1.3 million minivans.
NHTSA also upgraded a preliminary investigation into about 582,000 1996-model Caravan, Voyager and Town &amp; Country minivans. It has received 19 complaints that the right or left sliding door can come open while the vehicle is moving.
Owners have reported doors opening a few inches or flying wide open at speeds from 15 to 60 mph. No injuries have been reported. NHTSA said it is not aware of any incidents involving vehicles built during or after January 1996.
Chrysler was the first automaker to offer a sliding door on the left side of a minivan. The feature has made the No. 3 automaker's minivans the hottest seller in a popular segment.
Chrysler agreed in 1995, under pressure from regulators, to replace the latches on the rear hatch doors on more than 4 million minivans but stopped short of recalling the vehicles, from the 1984 through 1995 model years. Safety officials said the doors could pop open during low-speed crashes.
Chrysler told the safety agency the sliding door problem may stem from incorrect latch adjustments by dealers, which the company attributed to problems with the service manual.
Chrysler also said eight of the complaints about side doors opening involved vehicles that had had door repairs made. Chrysler said it has corrected the manual procedure and has made three design changes to door components.
But NHTSA said it has continued to receive complaints about the doors opening on vehicles with no repair history.
Chrysler spokeswoman Michele Tinson said the automaker was working with the safety agency to resolve the complaints. Injuries reported from sudden closings of rear hatch doors have been minor, she said, noting Chrysler stood behind the safety record of its vehicles.
"Minivans are the safest vehicles on the road today," she said.
Separately, NHTSA said it upgraded an investigation into 621,000 1995 and 1996 Windstar minivans from Ford Motor Co. Regulators have received 327 complaints about brake problems, which have led to 76 accidents and two injuries.
In addition to the incidents reported to NHTSA, Ford said it has received 64,000 warranty claims that could relate to a brake problem causing long stopping distances.
Also, NHTSA said it opened an investigation into Land Rover's Discovery sport/utility vehicle. It has received two complaints that the right front door opened on 1996 models. Rover is a unit of German carmaker BMW.
Chrysler stock fell 25 cents to $34.75 on the New York Stock exchange in afternoon trading.
Chrysler Corp said Tuesday it filed an appeal protesting a California Department of Motor Vehicle (DMV) ban on the company shipping new vehicles to dealers as a penalty for allegedly violating the state's "lemon law."
The move, which was expected, means the U.S No. 3 automaker can delay the 45-day ban taking effect for years as it pursues an appeal through the legal system.  
The ban, issued October 16, came after the DMV determined Chrysler resold 116 vehicles in 1991 and 1992 without properly disclosing to new owners the cars were so-called lemons, a term that refers to vehicles with chronic repair problems.
In its appeal to California's New Motor Vehicle Board, Chrysler called the DMV's actions a "draconian penalty." The company argues it complied with the lemon law as it was written at the time of the vehicle sales.  
Chrysler said the statute in effect at the time was vague about which vehicles repurchased by manufacturers had to be branded as lemons. Specifically, it said the law did not address disclosures relating to the resale of other vehicles bought back by automakers, such as those repurchased after informal dispute resoltions, or as part of a legal settlement.
Chrysler said it made good faith efforts to keep used car buyers informed about the vehicles they were purchasing. The company also complained about the economic ramifications of the penalty on its 240 California dealers.
"The economic harm to the dealers and their employees caused by this action has been well documented but ignored by the DMV," the company said in its appeal.
The New Motor Vehicle Board, which was set up to render an impartial view of regulatory actions, can reverse or amend the DMV's decision.
Chrysler sold nearly 170,000 new cars and trucks in California in 1995, representing close to eight percent of its annual volume, according to R.L. Polk &amp; Co.
The DMV ban, which would have taken effect November 25, was hailed by consumer advocates as the first tough stance aimed at ending the process of "lemon laundering."
Chrysler Corp. minivans have came under fire again from safety regulators, who said Tuesday they stepped up probes into two problems, including reports that a 90-pound rear hatch door can suddenly close without warning.
Nearly 2 million minivans are involved in the investigations, which were also sparked by reports that side sliding doors on 1996 models flew open at high speeds.
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) said it has received reports that 39 people have been injured when the rear hatch door on 1991-1993 model Caravan, Voyager and Town &amp; Country minivans dropped unexpectedly.
The problem occurs when bolts holding cylinders that prop the door open shear, according to the federal safety agency. The agency has received a total of 477 complaints. The probe, first launched in May and upgraded on Oct. 31, covers almost 1.3 million minivans.
NHTSA also upgraded a preliminary investigation into about 582,000 1996-model Caravan, Voyager and Town &amp; Country minivans. It has received 19 complaints that the right or left sliding door can come open while the vehicle is moving.
Owners have reported doors opening a few inches or flying wide open at speeds from 15 to 60 mph. No injuries have been reported. NHTSA said it is not aware of any incidents involving vehicles built during or after January 1996.
Chrysler was the first automaker to offer a sliding door on the left side of a minivan. The feature has made the No. 3 automaker's minivans the hottest seller in a popular segment.
Chrysler agreed in 1995, under pressure from regulators, to replace the latches on the rear hatch doors on more than 4 million minivans but stopped short of recalling the vehicles, from the 1984 through 1995 model years. Safety officials said the doors could pop open during low-speed crashes.
A Chrysler official could not be reached to comment.
But the company has told the safety agency the sliding door problem may stem from incorrect latch adjustments by dealers, which the company attributed to problems with the service manual.
Chrysler also said eight of the complaints about side doors opening involved vehicles that had had door repairs made. Chrysler said it has corrected the manual procedure and has made three design changes to door components.
But NHTSA said it has continued to receive complaints about the doors opening on vehicles with no repair history.
Separately, NHTSA said it upgraded an investigation into 621,000 1995 and 1996 Windstar minivans from Ford Motor Co. Regulators have received 327 complaints about brake problems, which have led to 76 accidents and two injuries.
In addition to the incidents reported to NHTSA, Ford said it has received 64,000 warranty claims that could relate to a brake problem causing long stopping distances.
Also, NHTSA said it opened an investigation into Land Rover's Discovery sport/utility vehicle. It has received two complaints that the right front door opened on 1996 models. Rover is a unit of German carmaker BMW.
Chrysler stock fell 25 cents to $34.75 on the New York Stock exchange in afternoon trading.
Chrysler Corp. said Tuesday it has filed an appeal protesting a California Department of Motor Vehicle (DMV) ban on shipping new vehicles to dealers in the state for allegely violating the state's "lemon law."
The move, which had been expected, means the U.S No. 3 automaker can delay any effect of the 45-day ban for years as it pursues an appeal through the legal system.
The ban, issued Oct. 16, came after the DMV determined Chrysler resold 116 vehicles in 1991 and 1992 without properly disclosing their so-called lemon status to the new owners.
Under California's lemon law, an automaker must buy back a car from a first owner if the vehicle spends 30 days in a repair shop during the first year of ownership or if a specific problem has not been fixed after three attempts.
Once the cars are repaired, automakers must notify used car customers that the vehicles were repurchased under the lemon law because of chronic problems.
In its appeal to California's New Motor Vehicle Board, Chrysler called the DMV's actions a "Draconian penalty." The company argued that it complied with the lemon law as it was written at the time of the vehicle sales.
Chrysler said the statute in effect at the time was vague about which vehicles repurchased by manufacturers had to be branded as lemons.
Specifically, it said the law did not address disclosures relating to the resale of other vehicles bought back by automakers, such as those repurchased after informal dispute resolutions, or as part of a legal settlement.
Chrysler said it made good-faith efforts to keep used-car buyers informed about the vehicles they were purchasing. The company also complained about the economic ramifications of the penalty on its 240 California dealers.
"The economic harm to the dealers and their employees caused by this action has been well documented but ignored by the DMV," the company said in its appeal.
The New Motor Vehicle Board, which was set up to render an impartial view on regulatory actions, can reverse or amend the DMV's decision.
Chrysler sold nearly 170,000 new cars and trucks in California in 1995, representing close to 8 percent of its annual volume, according to R.L. Polk &amp; Co.
The DMV ban, which would have taken effect Monday, was hailed by consumer advocates as the first tough stance aimed at ending the process of so-called "lemon laundering."
Chrysler Corp. Monday said sales rose a scant 1.4 percent in November, a dramatic slowdown for the nation's third-largest automaker and a sign of what analysts said would be a weak month for Detroit's Big Three.
November sales of 179,628, up from 177,073 in November 1995, set a record for the month, and Chrysler's year-to-date sales of 2,271,022 surpassed its previous full-year record of 2,208,057 set in 1988. But the 1.4 percent increase was one of the smallest for Chrysler so far this year.
Chrysler said car sales fell 11 percent based on daily selling rates last month while sales of pickup trucks, sport/utility vehicles and minivans rose 7 percent.
Chrysler credited a strong performance from its Dodge and Jeep divisions. Dodge sales were 95,022 and Jeep sales reached 42,835, both records for November.
"Our new 1997 lineup continues to generate healthy traffic at our dealerships," James Holden, executive vice president of sales and marketing, said in a statement.
But Burnham Securities Inc. analyst David Healy said sales to fleet dealers such as car rental agencies fell in November, contributing to the weak performance.
Both General Motors Corp. and Ford Motor Co. are expected to post lower car sales for November, leading to weak overall sales for the No. 1 and No. 2 automakers.
That is expected to drag down the industry's sales by 2 percent to 3 percent, according to Michael Luckey, president of Luckey Consulting Group.
"The car market from what I'm hearing is going to be lousy for just about everybody," he said.
Luckey said annual sales based on November's expected performance and government seasonal data would be 14.7 million to 14.8 million units. The rate for October was 14.9 million, and the rate for November 1995 was 14.8 million.
But the actual november sales rate could be 300,000 units below that, he said, because of fluctuations in government data used to compute the rate.
Analysts noted that slower sales were expected for the second half of 1996, but Healy said it was too early to declare a recession for car sales because monthly sales rates can be volatile.
GM, set to report sales on Tuesday, is seen posting a 15 percent drop in overall sales, with car sales down more than 20 percent and light truck sales unchanged.
Car sales were hurt by the three-week Canadian autoworkers' strike in October, which caused a production loss of some 100,000 GM cars. Contributing to the weak numbers were customers who chose to wait for GM's 15 new models instead of buying older versions.
"Certainly for quite awhile their car sales are going to be hurt by these painfully slow transitions to the new models," said Luckey, noting it could be next spring before GM has full availability of its new cars.
Healy estimated Ford sales will slide 4 percent to 5 percent. Sales of pickups, minivans and sport/utilities are expected to rise 2 percent, with car sales off 12 percent, he said. Ford is scheduled to announce its sales on Wednesday.
Subaru of America Inc. reported a 21 percent jump in sales to 11,072 from the previous month. Year-to-date sales from Subaru, a unit of Fuji Heavy Industries Ltd of Japan, were 108,533, also up 21 percent from a year ago.
Volvo AB said U.S. sales fell 3.6 percent to 6,582 for November.
The president of Ford Motor Co.'s automotive operations denied Thursday that the company is mulling plant closures in North America, but added that Ford is pressing employees to chop an additional $2.5 billion from its 1997 spending plans.
Jacques Nasser, president of Ford Automotive Operations, told reporters the nation's second-largest automaker is always studying alternatives for its manufacturing facilities.
"But we have no plans and we've made no decisions on plant closings," he said.
The Wall Street Journal reported Thursday that Ford was considering closing its Lorain, Ohio, car plant and consolidating its Explorer production into a single plant, at Louisville, Ky.
Nasser said Ford has no plans to reduce capacity for its Explorer sport utility vehicle. He noted that the Explorer had strong sales over the last two to three months despite increased competition.
Asked about the newspaper report, Nasser said: "I view that whole story as surprising and lacking substance."
An industry source, however, said Ford has considered closing the Lorain plant to boost profits in its core North American automotive business.
Ford might build a new, smaller sport utility vehicle previously earmarked for Lorain at a St. Louis plant that also builds Explorers, the source said.
Nasser spoke to reporters at a ceremony at Ford's Wayne, Mich., truck plant where Ford announced it has become the first major automaker to achieve the industry's top quality certification on a global basis.
Nasser, who has a reputation as an aggressive cost-cutter, has wasted no time shaking things up at the automaker's core vehicle unit since he was promoted to his current post Oct. 10.
He said Thursday that units throughout Ford have "internal stretch" targets for 1997 that combined amount to $2.5 billion. He said the targets are cost-cutting and other initiatives that would push savings beyond the regular goals for 1997.
"These are internal targets -- they're stretch targets. They're meant to provide improved customer value and shareholder value. They're what we're about," he said.
Nasser, who previously headed Ford's product development operations, said in February that it plans to cut $11 billion out of its new product spending between 1996 and 2000.
Wide-spread cost-cutting efforts are also in full swing in Europe, Nasser said Thursday. Ford's European operations, which lost $472 million in the third quarter, are looking in all areas for excess costs, but Nasser said he is not aware of any hiring freezes.
"Europe is a very sophisticated market, " he said. "We're in the midst of some very heavy launches there and extremely tough market conditions."
Chrysler Corp. said Monday it was exploring the possibilty of extending its car production agreement with Mitsubishi Motors Corp., reversing a trend toward cutting ties with the Japanese automaker.
"We are discussing the possibility with them, but we haven't reached any conclusions or any decisions yet," said Chrysler spokeswoman Shawn Williams.
Mitsubishi Motor Manufacturing of America Inc., the company's U.S. subsidiary, currently builds the Dodge Avenger, Chrysler Sebring and Eagle Talon coupes at its assembly plant in Normal, Ill.
That agreement is set to expire after the 1999 model year. Chrysler executives have suggested in the past they want to phase out the automaker's production arrangement with Mitsubishi.
Richard Recchia, chief operating officer of Mitsubishi's U.S. unit, said in October 1995 the future relationship between the two companies would likely be based more on a partnership of components and engineering exchanges instead of complete products.
That is apparently changing.
Automotive News, a weekly trade publication, reported Monday that Chrysler Executive Vice President Thomas Gale took a team of executives to Tokyo in November to meet with Mitsubishi officials about extending the current contract through 2004.
Williams would not comment on the meeting. Gail O'Brien, a spokeswoman for Mitsubishi's Normal plant, said discussions with Chrysler have been continuing, with Mitsubishi considering numerous options.
"Talks have been ongoing, which is totally understandable based on the fact that the contract is coming up," she said. Analysts said it would make sense for Chrysler to continue to use Mitsubishi as a production partner.
Since coupe sales have fallen off in recent years, Chrysler could use its own manufacturing resources to build products where it has a greater competitive edge, such as sport utility vehicles and pickup trucks, said Michael Robinet, managing director of CSM Forecasting, an industry consultant in Farmington Hills, Mich.
"This way they can steer development dollars to some of their other platforms," he said.
Moreover, if Chrysler were to move Avenger and Sebring coupe production out of the Normal plant, it would most likely have to convert its plant in Toluca, Mexico, which currently builds the popular Sebring convertible, Neon, Cirrus and Stratus cars, analysts have said.
Robinet also noted that Mitsubishi would benfit from keeping Chrysler as a production customer. Although the Normal plant has capacity to make at least 240,000 vehicles a year, this year it is only expected to make 184,000 units, he said. Next year, the plant is forecast to produce 175,000 units.
In addition to the Avenger, Sebring and Talon, the plant makes the Galant sedan and Eclipse coupes for Mitsubishi.
According to Automotive News, Chrysler's products have accounted for 45 percent of the 177,707 units produced through November.
Chrysler was a 50-50 partner with Mitsubishi when the Normal plant, originally called Diamond Star Motors, was founded in 1985. In 1993, Chrysler sold its ownership stake back to Mitsubishi.
Last year, Chrysler said it would drop the Dodge Stealth sports car from its 1996 model year line up because of slumping sales. Mitsubishi made the Stealth and imported it from Japan. The two companies continue to supply each other with engines.
Ford Motor Co. said Tuesday it will move 2,500 sales, marketing and customer service workers out of the Renaissance Centre over the next two years, ending a downtown Detroit office presence that dates back to 1978.
The move was prompted by General Motors Corp.'s May purchase of the landmark complex located on the Detroit River for use as its new headquarters.
Included in the deal announced Tuesday were 26 acres of land next to the centre now used for employee parking that Ford agreed to sell to GM.
No financial terms were released. Robert Rewey, Ford's group vice president of marketing and sales, said at a press conference both sides were "happy" with the deal, which has been completed.
Rewey said Ford, which occupies about 650,000 square feet in two of the center's four towers, had planned to stay in its location through 2005 when its leases expire.
"Our plans got changed -- by the new landlord," he said.
Most of the employees, who work in the Ford, Lincoln-Mercury and Customer Service Divisions, will be relocated to Ford's existing Regent Court building near the automaker's headquarters in Dearborn, Mich.
Rewey said Ford was not pressured by GM to leave early, but decided to do so because it now has space to relocate workers as a result of its ongoing Ford 2000 reorganization.
Rewey declined to say if GM will pay any of Ford's relocation costs. Those expenses could be substantial because Ford's customer assistance and business assistance centres are computer-intensive, technically sophisticated operations.
Employees will begin moving by mid-1997 and should be out of the Renaissance Centre by the end of 1998.
Fearing his urban revitalisation efforts could be hurt, Detroit Mayor Dennis Archer had encouraged Ford to stay in downtown Detroit. But Rewey said Ford could not find a suitable downtown location that would allow it to replicate the efficiencies it now enjoys at the Renaissance Centre.
He noted Ford is encouraging its outside advertising agencies and accounting suppliers to remain in Detroit.
Ford officials took pains Tuesday to point out the company remains committed to the resurgence of Detroit. Included in that is a $25 million renovation of the former Veterans Memorial Building late next summer that will serve as the new UAW-Ford Training Centre.
In October, Ford agreed to pay $40 million for naming rights to a new downtown stadium for the Detroit Lions professional football team.
But some local real estate observers said Ford's decision to leave Detroit does not bode well for the city, which is losing a long-time and prominent tenant. Even though GM will fill the space Ford is vacating, there is still a surplus of class A office space, said Joel Feldman, a broker and market analyst at Friedman Real Estate Group Inc. in Farmington Hills, Mich.
"It lessens the possibility that current vacant class A space will be able to fill up, and the spill-over effect on class B office space is diminished because of this," he said.
Ford's history with the Renaissance Centre dates back to 1972 when then Chairman Henry Ford II announced the Renaissance Centre development project, which was designed to attract business and employment that would lead to the revitalisation of downtown Detroit.
Ford said its 35,000-square-foot World of Ford exhibition and display area at Renaissance Centre will be discontinued in June 1997. Company officials said they are not sure where or how the exhibit, which is popular with marketing and sales workers, will be reconstructed.
While the U.S. auto industry celebrated its 100th birthday in 1996 with higher sales and a new labor accord, it expects its 101st year to feature a flat environment and tougher competition from foreign shores.
Forecasts for 1997 project sales of total vehicles will be roughly the same as the 15.4 million seen for 1996. But that's not all that bad, industry executives say. It means the four-year upswing of car, sport/utilty and pickup truck sales could continue for yet another year.  
"We see moderate inflation. We see a steady continuation of economic expansion in the United States," Ford Motor Co Chairman Alex Trotman said recently.
"We're looking for the car and truck industry to fall somewhere in the 15 to 15.5 million range for 1997, which we would describe as a pretty good year," he said.
But clouds loom on the horizon, namely from Detroit's old nemisis -- Japan.
Japanese automakers, which have introduced hot new car and sport/utility vehicles this year, are set to unleash more new products in 1997.  
Honda Motor Co Ltd will soon introduce its CR-V compact sport/utility, and is scheduled to bring out new versions of its Accord sedan and Odyssey minivan.
Toyota Motor Corp, building on the momentum of its new Camry sedan, will unveil a front-wheel drive minivan called the Sienna next fall.
Meantime, the relatively weak value of the Japanese yen promises to give cost-conscious Big Three executives headaches. A weaker yen makes it cheaper for Japanese firms to produce vehicles in Japan and sell them in the U.S.  
Since April 1995, when the yen exchange value hit a high of 80 to the dollar, the yen has weakened. The rate is now about 114, meaning it takes more yen to buy one dollar.
Van Bussman, Chrysler Corp's top economist, sees the yen staying in the 110-115 range for the first three to six months of 1997, then strengthen to about 100 yen per dollar.
"I think it will be a substantial issue in 1997," Bussman said. "The yen having weakened from 80 to 110 has given them tremendous profit potential in North America."
Adds Ford's Trotman: "It's going to be tough next year because we have the weaker yen," Trotman said.  
General Motors Corp will try to reverse a slide in both sales and market share next year as it introduces 15 new cars and light trucks, including a new line of minivans.
GM will also look to improve overall competitiveness with a new three-year contract with the United Auto Workers that could allow it to shed 30,000 workers. But that deal did not come cheaply. GM endured several strikes through the year that will cost it more than $1.6 billion in 1996.
At Ford Motor Co, cost-cutting will remain a top priority next year.  
Ford, the U.S. No. 2 automaker, has scored big in the market place with its new F-Series pickup trucks and Expedition full-size sport/utility.
But car sales have lagged, with Ford being forced to slap incentives on its redesigned Taurus to push them out of dealer showrooms. Ford, which replaced the head of its core automotive operations in October, will also lose hundreds of millions from European and South American operations.
The U.S. auto industry celebrated its 100th birthday in 1996 with higher sales and a new labour accord, but it can expect tough competition from foreign shores in the coming year.
Clouds loom on the horizon, namely from Detroit's old nemesis -- Japan.
The relatively weak Japanese yen promises to give cost-conscious Big Three executives headaches. A weaker yen makes it cheaper for Japanese firms to produce vehicles in Japan and sell them in the United States.
Since April 1995, when the yen hit a high of 80 to the dollar, the Japanese currency has weakened. The rate is now about 114, meaning it takes more yen to buy one dollar.
Van Bussman, Chrysler Corp.'s top economist, believes the yen will continue in the 110-115 range for the first three to six months of 1997, then strengthen to about 100.
"I think it will be a substantial issue in 1997," Bussman said. "The yen having weakened from 80 to 110 has given them tremendous profit potential in North America."
A look back through 1996 shows that Japanese automakers have already turned the weaker yen to their advantage through lower prices.
Industry trade publication Automotive News reported the average 1997 model year price increase at Detroit's Big Three was $386, while the average price hike for Japanese automakers was a mere $8.
"It's going to be tough next year because we have the weaker yen," Ford Motor Co. Chairman Alex Trotman said recently.
Forecasts for 1997 project total vehicle sales will be roughly the same as the 15.4 million expected for 1996. But that's not all that bad, industry executives say.
It means the four-year upswing of car, sport utilty and pickup truck sales could continue for yet another year.
"We see moderate inflation. We see a steady continuation of economic expansion in the United States," Trotman said. "We're looking for the car and truck industry to fall somewhere in the 15 to 15.5 million range for 1997, which we would describe as a pretty good year."
Japanese automakers, which have introduced hot new car and sport utility vehicles this year, are set to unleash more new products in 1997.
Honda Motor Co. Ltd. will soon introduce its CR-V compact sport utility and is scheduled to bring out new versions of its Accord sedan and Odyssey minivan. Building on the momentum of its new Camry sedan, Toyota Motor Corp. will unveil a front-wheel drive minivan called the Sienna next fall.
Among the Big Three, 1996 proved to be the year that Chrysler's raft of stylised new products took off, outshining its two domestic rivals. The No. 3 automaker has boosted U.S. market share nearly two points to 16 percent, and its calendar year sales will post their best results since 1988.
General Motors Corp. will try to reverse a slide in both sales and market share next year as it continues with the introduction of 15 new cars and light trucks, including a new line of minivans.
GM will also look to improve its overall competitiveness with a new three-year contract with the United Auto Workers that could allow it to shed 30,000 workers. But that deal did not come cheaply. GM endured several strikes through the year that will cost it more than $1.6 billion.
At Ford, cost-cutting will remain a top priority next year. The No. 2 automaker has scored big in the market place with its new F-Series pickup trucks and Expedition full-size sport utility vehicle.
But its car sales have lagged, and Ford has been forced to slap incentives on its redesigned Taurus to push them out of dealer showrooms. Ford, which replaced the head of its core automotive operations in October, will also lose hundreds of millions from European and South American operations in 1996, but sees improvements in those areas for 1997.
Seven years after General Motors Corp created the Geo brand to entice more import buyers, the automaker is dropping the name, though it will continue to sell the Metro, Prizm and Tracker models as Chevrolet vehicles.
Chevrolet General Manager John Middlebrook said the Chevrolet image and its products have improved to the point where it no longer needed the Geo badge to attract new buyers.
Middlebrook said the move also fitted in with GM's efforts to unclutter its numerous brand images among consumers.  
GM created the Geo brand in 1989 as a sub-category of Chevrolet by renaming several Chevrolet vehicles. The name Geo, created under the direction of former GM Chairman Roger Smith, was meant to signify a world car.
GM plans no changes to the joint venture agreements that produce the Geo vehicles. The Prizm, essentially the same car as the Corolla from Toyota Motor Corp, is made by NUMMI, a Fremont, Calif.-based venture with Toyota.
Both the Metro and Tracker are produced in Ingersoll, Ontario, at CAMI, GM's joint venture with Suzuki Motor Corp.  
Middlebrook, who took over as general manager of Chevrolet in early 1996, said the move has been under consideration for some time, following the renewed strength of the Chevrolet brand.
Chevrolet, which currently has 16 different products, has introduced 18 new models since 1989. Consumer research has shown that awareness levels and purchase consideration jump between 30 percent and 40 percent when target buyers compare Chevrolet with Geo, the company said.
"It's the strength of the Chevrolet brand that's driving this," Middlebrook said.  
In a sign that GM still has an image problem with import buyers, Prizm sales lag those of its Corolla sister by a wide margin. The Prizm sold about 77,000 units through November of this year, compared with 188,000 for the Corolla.
Sales for all three Geo vehicles have fallen since reaching a high of 325,000 in the 1990 calendar year. Sales for the first 11 months of 1996 totaled 206,491. Although that was an increase of eight percent over a year ago, the vehicles carried rebates ranging from $300 to $1,000.  
In selling the Prizm as a Chevrolet, the division's 4,400 U.S. dealers will have a car similar in price and features to the Cavalier sedan.
However, Richard Scheidt, Geo brand manager, said GM did not anticipate too much duplication because traditional Geo buyers are different from typical Chevrolet buyers. For instance, he said the Prizm outsells the Cavalier in Texas.
Analysts reacted favorably to the move, saying it demonstrates another step by GM to use its marketing and advertising resources more efficiently.  
Joseph Phillippi, an analyst at Lehman Brothers, said it was also not out of the question that GM would eventually drop some of the current Geo models.
"I would guess at some point in time they would do some additional pruning," he said.
Chevrolet, which will gain some marketing efficiencies through the move, will pay for the new signs that dealers will be required to put up, Middlebrook said.
Gerald Seiner, a Chevrolet-Geo dealer in Salt Lake City, Utah, said dealers were in favor of the move because it would bring a simpler image to the Chevrolet brand.  
"Frankly, I haven't had anybody walk through the door and say they want to buy a Geo," he said.
Labour lawyer James Hoffa, refusing to concede defeat in the Teamsters union presidential election nearly a week after his opponent claimed victory, called Thursday for a congressional investigation into the vote.
Hoffa on Tuesday formally asked U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno to impound the ballots and initiate an FBI investigation into "serious irregularities" in the election.
"We really have what I call Teamstergate," Hoffa told reporters at a news conference Thursday at the Teamsters' Detroit offices, where his legendary father, the late Jimmy Hoffa, ruled the union in the 1950s and '60s.
Incumbent Teamsters President Ron Carey on Saturday claimed victory in the hard-fought election, winning by an apparent margin of about 17,000 votes. But 41,002 ballots were set aside for further eligibility checks, and Hoffa says more than 25,000 other ballots may have disappeared.
After all eligible votes were tallied late Saturday, court-appointed Election Officer Barbara Zack Quindel accounted for 485,605 ballots returned. But last week she reported that the total number of mail-in ballots received was 511,268, an estimate based on receipts from the U.S. Postal Service.
Hoffa said he wants an explanation for the discrepancy between the ballots counted and the ballots received.
"If I lost, I lost. I just want a fair election," Hoffa said.
Carey, 60, was first elected president of the 1.4 million-member International Brotherhood of Teamsters as a reformer in 1991. His apparent re-election was lauded by AFL-CIO President John Sweeney, who had remained neutral during the campaign.
Meanwhile, Quindel decided Wednesday to void 120 Hoffa votes after finding that a Hoffa backer and former officer of Teamsters Local 743 in Chicago violated election rules by collecting and mailing ballots for other members, according to her spokesman, Jeff O'Mara.
Acting on a protest filed by Carey's campaign last week, O'Mara said Quindel decided it would be too extreme a remedy to void all of the local's ballots, estimated by the Carey campaign at more than 2,800.
The ballots were among 41,002 so-called challenged ballots that are still being checked for eligibility and have yet to be counted. Although there are enough of them to erase Carey's lead, Hoffa would need to carry the challenged ballots by a better than three-to-one margin for that to happen.
The election officer has not disclosed any interim results of the tabulation of the challenge ballots. O'Mara said he did not know when the tabulation would be completed.
Hoffa said Thursday, however, that initial tabulations of the challenged ballots have cut Carey's lead by as much as 2,400 votes. He did not disclose how many votes had been counted.
Labor lawyer James Hoffa, refusing to concede defeat in the Teamsters union presidential election nearly a week after his opponent claimed victory, called Thursday for a congressional investigation into the vote.
Hoffa on Tuesday formally asked U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno to impound the ballots and initiate an FBI investigation into "serious irregularities" in the election.
"We really have what I call Teamstergate," Hoffa told reporters at a news conference Thursday at the Teamsters' Detroit offices, where his legendary father, the late Jimmy Hoffa, ruled the union in the 1950s and '60s.
Incumbent Teamsters President Ron Carey on Saturday claimed victory in the hard-fought election, winning by an apparent margin of about 17,000 votes. But 41,002 ballots were set aside for further eligibility checks, and Hoffa says more than 25,000 other ballots may have disappeared.
After all eligible votes were tallied late Saturday, court-appointed Election Officer Barbara Zack Quindel accounted for 485,605 mail-in ballots returned. But last week she reported that the total number of ballots received was 511,268, an estimate based on receipts from the U.S. Postal Service.
Hoffa said he wants an explanation for the discrepancy between the ballots counted and the ballots received.
"If I lost, I lost. I just want a fair election," Hoffa said.
Carey, 60, was first elected president of the 1.4 million-member International Brotherhood of Teamsters as a reformer in 1991. His apparent re-election was lauded by AFL-CIO President John Sweeney, who had remained neutral during the campaign.
Meanwhile, Quindel decided Wednesday to void 120 Hoffa votes after finding that a Hoffa backer and former officer of Teamsters Local 743 in Chicago violated election rules by collecting and mailing ballots for other members, according to her spokesman, Jeff O'Mara.
Acting on a protest filed by Carey's campaign last week, O'Mara said Quindel decided it would be too extreme a remedy to void all of the local's ballots.
The ballots from Local 743 were among the 41,002 ballots that were being checked for eligibility.
The election officer has not disclosed interim results of the tabulation of those ballots and O'Mara said he did not know when the final tally would be completed.
But Hoffa said Thursday that initial tabulations of the so-called challenged ballots have cut Carey's lead by as much as 2,400 votes.
The Carey campaign, however, said the lead was cut only by about 1,500 votes. The latest count which included the strongly pro-Hoffa Local 743, showed Carey with 230,111 and Hoffa with 214,906 with about 30,000 of the challenged ballots remaining to be processed and counted if found to be eligible, the Carey campaign said.
Peregrine Inc. may let go up to half of the 5,500 hourly employees at the four former General Motors Corp. component plants it purchased last month, the new company's top executive said Thursday.
Peregrine Chief Executive Officer Edward Gulda, in a briefing with reporters, said workers not needed at Peregrine would be able to transfer back to GM.
People who stay with Peregrine will be paid according to the terms of the new United Auto Worker and Canadian Auto Worker contracts worked out with GM in November and October.
Peregrine was formed by the New York investment firm Joseph Littlejohn &amp; Levy to purchase the four plants from GM's Delphi Automotive Systems unit. Peregrine formally takes over the plants Jan. 1.
The plants, two of them in Michigan and two located in Ontario, make a variety of parts, including window regulators, door hardware, interior trim, structural plastics and metal stampings.
Gulda outlined several steps the new management has mapped out to streamline cost structures and expand the company's operations from the current annual revenue base of about $1 billion. He said three of the four plants are expected to turn a profit in 1997, with the fourth breaking even.
Peregrine, which will be based in Southfield, Mich., will make annual capital investments of at least $20 million a year into the four facilities, he said. Funds will come from cash generated by the operations and initial investor capital.
UAW parts workers earn about $43 an hour, including benefits -- substantially more than non-union companies pay for their workforce. But Gulda said the plants can still be competitive at those wage rates.
"Those people who say they can't be competitive with that just aren't very imaginative," he said. "It isn't a question of what individual people make in the company, it's a question of being worth what you make."
Peregrine expects its overall business to decline over the next two years as a result of past sourcing actions from GM, the company's major customer. But Gulda said future acquisitions, new GM business and internal growth will more than offset that decline.
Three to four years from now, Gulda said he expected Peregrine to generate roughly half of its revenue from non-GM customers as it expands from a regional structure to a global one. He said he would be disappointed if the firm had not doubled its revenues in five years.
Future acquisitions, which could come as soon as early next year, would complement Peregrine's existing business lines, Gulda said. He said the firm may be interested in purchasing other plants from GM's Delphi unit. He also said Peregrine might sell stock to the public, although that is at least two years away.
One of the first facilities to be upgraded will be the door hinge and hardware plant in Flint, Mich., which will receive an immediate overhaul of its stamping operations.
The plant in Livonia, Mich., which makes interior door panels and other trim components, has the most serious structural problems and will require the most significant upgrades, he said.
Gulda said the seat plant in Windsor, Ontario, is an "excellent facility." Key to its future is extending capacity and finding new business as soon as possible, he said.
Peregrine also plans to expand the mold and pain capacity at the faciltiy in Oshawa, Ontario, and improving its cost structure.
Ford Motor Co. on Friday became the second of the U.S. Big Three automakers to align itself with the emerging auto superstore trend by announcing a new agreement with Republic Industries Inc., the parent company of AutoNation USA.
Under the agreement, AutoNation can submit proposals to acquire existing Ford or Lincoln-Mercury dealerships. The pact also covers areas Ford may want a dealership where it does not currently have one.
The move could have implications for the future of Ohio-based Mullinax Management, one of the largest dealer groups in the country, which is reported to be in merger talks with AutoNation.
Ford spokesman John Ochs said Ford has not sold any dealerships to AutoNation. A spokesman for Mullinax, based in Amherst, Ohio, could not be reached for comment.
Mullinax, which owns several large Ford dealerships, was the 11th largest dealer group in the country, based on its 1995 retail unit sales of 20,374 cars and trucks, according to industry trade publication Automotive News.
Last month, published reports began to surface on talks between Mullinax and AutoNation. The growing auto superstore chain was founded by Wayne Huizenga, who transformed Blockbuster Video into a multibillion-dollar business and owns the Miami Dolphins professional football team.
Ford's deal with Republic is a "framework agreement" that opens the door for AutoNation to submit individual proposals, Ochs said. In a statement, Robert Rewey, Ford's group vice president of marketing and sales, said the automaker believed private entrepreneurs with local community ties will continue to be the "backbone" of its franchise system.
"However, there will continue to be developments in the industry relating to other types of dealership ownership and distribution methods," he said. "We are working diligently to ensure that the new operators fit into our franchise system."
That is a change from last February, when Ford Chairman Alex Trotman told the National Automotible Dealers Association it had no plans to offer a new-car franchise to an auto superstore.
A year ago, Chrysler Corp. announced it would grant a new-car franchise to CarMax Auto Superstore in Norcross, Ga. CarMax is owned by consumer electronics giant Circuit City Stores Inc..
The move sent a shockwave through the traditional auto dealer industry, which had already been warily watching the growth of chains such as CarMax and AutoNation in the used-car segment of the business.
The new superstores quickly have become popular with consumers because they offer large numbers of newer used cars at haggle-free prices in a pressure-free environment.
The Ford announcement signals the superstores will continue to build a presence in the new-car business, analysts said. "That's big news," said William Sawyer, vice president of sales in the Detroit office of Polk, a marketing research firm. "It's definitely a change for Ford."
The move is also noteworthy, he said, because Ford has traditionally been opposed to publicly traded companies owning its franchises.
General Motors Corp. is the last of the Big Three to not have any franchise agreements with an auto superstore. GM spokesman Edward Lechtzin said the automaker was not opposed to the concept and has held talks with those groups in the past.
"We've held discussions. We'll continue to hold discussions. If one of them wants to purchase a GM dealership, we'll review it," he said.
Haworth Inc. said Monday it received a $211.5 million payment for a patent infringement award against Steelcase Inc., ending a 17-year battle between the two Michigan office furniture giants over electrified office panels.
Of the total $211.5 million, Steelcase, the largest office furniture maker in the world, paid Haworth $96.8 million in damages and interest worth $114.7 million.
"While we don't agree with this ruling, we respect that the courts have the final word and it's time to move on," Steelcase President James Hackett said in a statement.
The two companies began warring over the issue in 1979. Haworth sued Steelcase in November 1985, alleging Steelcase infringed on its patents for pre-wired modular panel systems, which are used to build office cubicles.
Developed during the early 1970s, the technology provides a safe way for electricity to be routed through office panels, eliminating the need for extension cords and helping satisfy the growing demand for electronic office equipment, Haworth said.
The decision and damage award, which are binding and cannot be appealed, were entered Dec. 23 by a special judge appointed to determine damages in U.S. District Court in Kalamazoo, Mich.
In related rulings, the court denied Steelcase's allegations in a 1989 suit that Haworth infringed on two patents for prewired panels. It also upheld Haworth's position on a lawsuit it filed relating to computer keyboard shelves.
Steelcase won the first round of the original 1985 lawsuit when a federal court found Steelcase did not infringe Haworth's patent. Haworth appealed that decision and the U.S. Court of Appeals reversed the lower court ruling in 1989.
The case then went to a second trial that was an alternative dispute resolution before the special judge in Washington. That trial determined damages and resolved Steelcase's 1989 patent lawsuit against Haworth.
In a news release, Haworth said the award provides vindication for its role in developing the first safe method of routing electricity through movable office panels.
"But no monetary award can make things right," said President Jerry Johanneson. "No montary award can erase the gains our competitors made when they infringed our patents and used the technology that was rightfully ours."
In addition to Steelcase, eight other companies have paid more than $75 million to settle patent infringement cases brought by Haworth, it said.
Based in Grand Rapids, Mich., with a total of 19,000 workers worldwide, Steelcase had total revenues of $2.6 billion for its 1996 fiscal year, which ended in February.
Haworth, based in Holland, Mich., with more than 9,000 employees around the world, had 1995 sales of about $1.2 billion.
Sales of light vehicle in December are expected to be down as much as 6 percent from an unusually strong month a year ago, but analysts say the pace was robust enough for 1996's total to match industry projections of 15.1 million units.
General Motors Corp. will endure the largest drop of the Big Three, with the daily sales rate off by an estimated 16 percent from December 1995, according to David Healy, an analyst at Burnham Securities Inc.
GM's sales of pickup trucks, sport/utility vehicles and minivans -- the light truck category -- will be down significantly, in large part because the automaker is up against a tough comparison from a year ago.
However, car sales will also plunge by as much as 20 percent, estimates Michael Luckey, of Luckey Consulting Group. He attributes the decline largely to the continued aftershocks of GM's labor strife this fall, which cost the automaker about 120,000 units of mostly car production.
"They're still being hurt by the strikes," he said. "I think that's still a legitimate reason for one more month here in December."
GM is scheduled to report its sales on Friday, Jan. 3. Also reporting Friday is Chrysler Corp., whose sales will be flat or up slightly from December a year ago.
Light truck sales, which have been accounting for about 70 percent of Chrysler's total, are projected to rise 8 percent, offsetting an expected 9 percent slide in passenger car sales, said Healy.
Ford Motor Co., scheduled to release its results Jan. 6, will enjoy one of its best year-to-year comparisons since March 1994, said Luckey, with sales rising between 8 percent and 9 percent against a somewhat weak performance in December 1995.
Ford's car sales are forecast to dip 3 percent to 4 percent. Last week, Ford added another $500 to the $500 rebate it was already offering on the 1997 Taurus, indicating its determination to hang on the title of the best-selling car in America. Taurus sales through November were about 10,000 units over the rival Honda Accord.
"If Taurus sales spurt up, cars might be a little bit better than that," said Luckey.
Ford's light truck sales are seen rising a sharp 20 percent, he said, thanks to the strength of its pickup trucks and popular Expedition full-size sport/utility.
Imports and transplants continued to take market share from the Big Three in December, Healy said, climbing to a combined share of 28.6 percent, up from 28.1 percent in November.
"The strong dollar and the weak yen are resulting in aggressive pricing by the Japanese makers, particuarly in intermediate and small passenger cars," he said.
For December 1996, the light vehicle seasonally adjusted annual sales rate is expected to be in the mid-14 million range, analysts said, a precipitous drop from 15.9 million a year ago, the strongest month of 1995.
However, Luckey said the U.S. Commerce Department factors used to compute the rate penalize the total by 800,000 units, meaning the real rate is stronger than it would appear.
Most analysts expect the industry to finish the year at 15.1 million units.
"It should be 15.1 million," said Luckey. "That's almost certain unless something very strange happens in December."
That total would bring the average for the last three years to an unusually stable 15 million mark. In 1995, total light vehicle sales were 14.7 million, down from 15.1 million for all of 1994.
Sales of light vehicles in December are expected to be down as much as 6 percent from an unusually strong month a year ago, but analysts say the pace was robust enough for 1996's total to match industry projections of 15.1 million units.
General Motors Corp. will endure the largest drop of the Big Three, with the daily sales rate off by an estimated 16 percent from December 1995, according to David Healy, an analyst at Burnham Securities Inc.
GM's sales of pickup trucks, sport/utility vehicles and minivans -- the light truck category -- will be down significantly, in large part because the automaker is up against a tough comparison from a year ago.
However, car sales will also plunge by as much as 20 percent, estimates Michael Luckey, of Luckey Consulting Group. He attributes the decline largely to the continued aftershocks of GM's labour strife this fall, which cost the automaker about 120,000 units of mostly car production.
"They're still being hurt by the strikes," he said. "I think that's still a legitimate reason for one more month here in December."
GM is scheduled to report its sales on Friday, Jan. 3. Also reporting Friday is Chrysler Corp., whose sales will be flat or up slightly from December a year ago.
Light truck sales, which have been accounting for about 70 percent of Chrysler's total, are projected to rise 8 percent, offsetting an expected 9 percent slide in passenger car sales, said Healy.
Ford Motor Co., scheduled to release its results Jan. 6, will enjoy one of its best year-to-year comparisons since March 1994, said Luckey, with sales rising between 8 percent and 9 percent against a somewhat weak performance in December 1995.
Ford's car sales are forecast to dip 3 percent to 4 percent. Last week, Ford added another $500 to the $500 rebate it was already offering on the 1997 Taurus, indicating its determination to hang on the title of the best-selling car in America. Taurus sales through November were about 10,000 units over the rival Honda Accord.
"If Taurus sales spurt up, cars might be a little bit better than that," said Luckey.
Ford's light truck sales are seen rising a sharp 20 percent, he said, thanks to the strength of its pickup trucks and popular Expedition full-size sport/utility.
Imports and transplants continued to take market share from the Big Three in December, Healy said, climbing to a combined share of 28.6 percent, up from 28.1 percent in November.
"The strong dollar and the weak yen are resulting in aggressive pricing by the Japanese makers, particuarly in intermediate and small passenger cars," he said.
For December 1996, the light vehicle seasonally adjusted annual sales rate is expected to be in the mid-14 million range, analysts said, a precipitous drop from 15.9 million a year ago, the strongest month of 1995.
However, Luckey said the U.S. Commerce Department factors used to compute the rate penalise the total by 800,000 units, meaning the real rate is stronger than it would appear.
Most analysts expect the industry to finish the year at 15.1 million units.
"It should be 15.1 million," said Luckey. "That's almost certain unless something very strange happens in December."
That total would bring the average for the last three years to an unusually stable 15 million mark. In 1995, total light vehicle sales were 14.7 million, down from 15.1 million for all of 1994.
Chrysler Corp. Tuesday reported brisk sales of minivans and pickup trucks for August, pushing total U.S. sales for the automaker up 9 percent on a daily selling basis to 186,306.
The August total broke a company record for the month of 176,184 set in 1989.
Sales of light trucks, including popular Ram pickups and four-door minivans were 127,870, a 16.7 percent jump that marked the 11th consecutive month of rising light truck sales.
Domestically produced car sales came in weaker than some analysts had expected, falling 2 percent to 58,255 units.
Chrysler's strong light truck sales were helped by incentives on some Jeep sport utility models. Grand Cherokee sales rose 42 percent; Cherokee was up 52 percent; and Wrangler sales shot up 59 percent.
Total pickup sales were held back somewhat by low supplies of the Dakota, which is undergoing a model changeover. Dealers have a 35-day supply of the compact pickups -- about half of what the industry considers to be ideal.
Chrysler executives said they did not expect significant volumes of the new Dakotas to be available until October.
Steven Torok, executive director of sales and marketing operations, said Chrysler was not concerned about the slide in car sales. Total car sales were down 4 percent from August 1995, and off 24 percent from July.
August is often a seasonally weaker month than July, Torok said. Also, declines in the Dodge Stratus and Neon were partly attributable to model-year changeovers.
"Frankly, we saw our cars starting to firm up as the month went on, and we think we'll have a pretty good month in September," said Torok, adding September car sales will likely surpass those of August.
Torok said the No. 3 automaker was pleased with the breadth of its sales performance.
"What we see is a very even, consistent demand pattern," he said. "Consumer sentiment seems to be not euphoric but consistent."
Although car sales were slightly weaker, PaineWebber analyst Michael Ward said Chrysler's total numbers were still respectable because it was up against a strong year-ago performance.
Chrysler was the only one of the major automakers to report monthly sales on Tuesday. General Motors Corp. is scheduled to repoort sales Wednesday. Ward predicted it will post sales that are 4 percent to 5 percent below last year, with light trucks again offsetting weak car numbers.
Also on Tuesday, Subaru of America, a unit of Fuji Heavy Industries, reported U.S. sales up 18 percent to 10,361. Volvo Cars of North America, a unit of AB Volvo had August sales of 7,349, down almost 1 percent.
Chrysler Corp. said Thursday it expected strong December sales results to cap off a record year for the automaker, with total 1996 car and truck deliveries exceeding 2.4 million units.
Chrysler's year-end sales report, to be released Friday, is expected to be one of the few bright spots for December, a month in which analysts predict industry volume will fall as much as 6 percent from strong year-ago levels.
Despite an expected drop in General Motors Corp.'s December sales by as much as 16 percent from year-ago levels, analysts say automakers sold enough cars and trucks during the month to enable the full year totals to match U.S. industry sales projections of 15.1 million light vehicles.
Chrysler Vice Chairman Robert Lutz told reporters at the Los Angeles International Auto Show that he expected the automaker's total December vehicle sales to be "several percentage points" ahead of last year's sales of 177,803 cars and trucks, which was a record for the month of December.
For the full 1996 year, Chrysler's sales of more than 2.4 million units exceeded their 1988 record of 2,208,057 cars and trucks.
Light truck sales, which have been accounting for about 70 percent of Chrysler's total, are projected to rise 8 percent, offsetting an expected 9 percent slide in passenger car sales, said Burnham Securities analyst David Healy.
Healy said GM's sales of pickup trucks, sport utility vehicles and minivans -- the light truck category -- will be down significantly, in large part because the automaker was up against a tough comparison from a year ago.
Car sales also will plunge by as much as 20 percent, estimates Michael Luckey, of Luckey Consulting Group. He attributes the decline largely to the continued aftershocks of GM's labour strife this fall, which cost the automaker about 120,000 units of mostly car production.
"They're still being hurt by the strikes," he said. "I think that's still a legitimate reason for one more month here in December."
GM is scheduled to report its sales on Friday, Jan. 3.
Ford Motor Co., scheduled to release its results Jan. 6, will enjoy one of its best year-to-year comparisons since March 1994, said Luckey, with sales rising between 8 percent and 9 percent against a somewhat weak performance in December 1995.
Robert Rewey, Ford group vice president of sales and marketing, said at the Los Angeles International Auto Show that he expected December car sales to be flat with the year-ago level, but truck sales were "fantastic" and should be up sharply.
Last week, Ford added another $500 to the $500 rebate it was already offering on the 1997 Taurus, indicating its determination to hang on the title of the best-selling car in America. Taurus sales through November were about 10,000 units over the rival Honda Accord.
"If Taurus sales spurt up, cars might be a little bit better than that," said Luckey.
Ford's light truck sales are seen rising a sharp 20 percent, Luckey said, thanks to the strength of its pickup trucks and popular Expedition full-size sport utility vehicle.
Imports and transplants continued to take market share from the Big Three in December, Healy said, climbing to a combined share of 28.6 percent, up from 28.1 percent in November.
"The strong dollar and the weak yen are resulting in aggressive pricing by the Japanese makers, particuarly in intermediate and small passenger cars," he said.
For December, the light vehicle seasonally adjusted annual sales rate is expected to be in the mid-14 million range, analysts said, a precipitous drop from 15.9 million a year ago, the strongest month of 1995.
However, Luckey said the Commerce Department factors used to compute the rate penalise the total by 800,000 units, meaning the real rate is stronger than it would appear.
Most analysts expect the industry to finish the year at 15.1 million units.
"It should be 15.1 million," said Luckey. "That's almost certain unless something very strange happens in December."
That total would bring the average for the last three years to an unusually stable 15 million mark. In 1995, total light vehicle sales were 14.7 million, down from 15.1 million for all of 1994.
General Motors Corp. took the wraps off its much awaited 1997 Chevrolet Corvette amid a shower of sparks and blaring music Monday, rounding out a day of coupe introductions at the North American International Auto Show.
The new Corvette is the fifth generation of the classic Detroit muscle car, and the first redesign since the 1984 model year vehicle. The manufacturer's suggested retail prices for the car, which starts arriving at dealerships in February, is $38,060, an increase of $270 over the previous model.
General Motors Chairman Jack Smith said the new Corvette will continue its long-time tradition as Chevrolet's signature sports car.
"It's the image car for Chevrolet. Always has been and always will be," he said.
Although its looks are similar to the old one, Chevrolet touts the new Corvette as all new from "rubber to roof."
The 1997 version carries a new 5.7 litre, small block engine that produces 345 horsepower from a smaller unit. The car also features a stiffer frame, all-new suspension, a larger interior, 70 percent more cargo room, and is easier to get in and out of.
Some critics have said the design of the new model, which has been under development for almost a decade, is too close to the current model. But Chevrolet General Manager John Middlebrook said Corvette buyers, some of the most loyal in the industry, did not want a radical design change.
"We did a lot of research and testing and the customer wanted Corvette cues," he told reporters following the introduction.
The fifth generation 'Vette, a closely guarded secret, was GM's highest profile scheduled introduction at the Detroit auto show. The company made the most of it by posting sheriff's deputies outside of the press conference who turned away executives from other auto companies who wanted to watch the introduction.
Annual production at its Bowling Green, Ky., plant is expected to be about 28,000 units, Middlebrook said. However, production for calendar 1997 will be about 20,000 because the company will not get a full year of straight-time production.
Also introduced Monday was the Mercedes-Benz CLK, a four-seat coupe that will sell for about $40,000. The new coupe shares the round front headlights of the Mercedes C-Class sedan.
Mercedes said it will offer two versions of the new coupe and three engine choices. The car will begin hitting dealer showrooms in the United States in June.
Ford Motor Co. unveiled its new ZX2 Escort coupe. Pricing was not set, but Ford officials said it would be similar to current Escort prices. Ford is aiming the vehicle at younger buyers who want performance. The new car, which goes on sale in April, will come with a 130 horsepower, 16-valve engine with a dual overhead camshaft.
Earlier, the North American Car and Truck of the Year Awards were announced. The new Mercedes SLK roadster edged out the Jaguar XK8 for the car award. Ford's new Expedition full-size sport utility won the truck award.
