Officials with Volkswagen-First Automotive Works in northeastern China on Monday dismissed a report that the joint venture faced possible closure.
"This report is incorrect," said a spokeswoman of the joint venture, referring to a report by the German news magazine Der Spiegel.
"Production is still continuing," she said in a telephone interview from Changchun.
"We have a 25-year agreement. If the German side withdrew unilaterally, they would have to pay compensation," she said. She added that the two sides would soon hold a ceremony marking the full implementation of the joint venture project.
A spokesman for Volkswagen AG's Volkswagen Asia-Pacific arm in Hong Kong also said production at the joint venture would continue.
"There is no reason to leave Changchun," he said.
Der Spiegel said the Changchun plant was losing money and production of the Jetta car had practically ceased.
The Hong Kong-based official said the factory had produced 14,700 Jetta cars in the first eight months of this year, up 10 percent from a year ago.
The Jetta was not selling as well as the Volkswagen Santana produced at Volkswagen's Shanghai joint venture, but that operation had taken the lion's share of the domestic passenger car market, he said.
However, some changes in the joint venture agreement were being negotiated, including the introduction of new car models as well as the possibility of Volkswagen taking over sales and after-sales service, the official added.
First Automotive Works had been producing Audi 100s at its own production line in Changchun under a seven-year licensing agreement that expired in June. The Audi 200 was now being built at the joint venture, and 400 have been produced since June.
A total of 7,445 Audi 100s were built from January to June this year, the Volkswagen official said.
First Automotive has also sold 4,120 of its Red Flag cars, an Audi-based car that the Chinese company produces separately from the joint venture using a Chrysler Corp engine, according to Volkswagen.
A Chinese appeals court, in a rare move, sharply reduced on Friday to five years a prison sentence for an International Monetary Fund (IMF) employee accused of corruption.
The court's decision followed a brief suspension of technical assistance by the IMF and a Beijing visit by IMF Managing Director Michel Camdessus to voice concern over what he described as judicial shortcomings in the case.
The Beijing Municipal Higher People's Court sentenced Hong Yang, 44, a Chinese national, to five years in prison for accepting bribes totalling 100,000 yuan ($12,000) in 1993, before he joined the IMF, the Xinhua news agency said.
"The sentence was dealt with leniently... and according to law," Xinhua quoting the court as saying on Friday.
Hong, a former employee of the People's Bank of China, or central bank, was arrested in December while on an IMF mission to China. He was found guilty on June 28.
Beijing sources said the original sentence was for 10 years, although statements by the IMF in Washington put it at 11 years. Hong appealed.
Chinese courts rarely cut sentences on appeal, though an admission of guilt may lead to more lenient treatment.
Camdessus has confirmed reports that Chinese authorities pressured the IMF to include Hong, who had been working at the international organisation's headquarters in Washington, on a mission to China.
The Chinese actions created a furore at the IMF and Camdessus said in a letter to the organisation's staff he would closely monitor a second trial.
"I also urged that the second open trial be transparent and complete and remedy the shortcomings of the first trial," Camdessus said after he visited Beijing last month.
Xinhua did not mention the original trial but it highlighted the legality and openness of the second.
It said the case was put on open trial on August 9 and that Hong, his two defence lawyers and four witnesses appeared in court and were involved in the proceedings.
It also said that 200 people, including Hong's relatives and IMF officials, were present.
It added that the man accused of offering the bribe, Fan Honggen, and other individuals from the Agricultural Bank would be dealt with in a separate case. It did not give further details.
China has tightened safety measures after a fatal rocket explosion early this year and has found the cause of another launch failure in August, Chinese space officials said on Wednesday.
Further testing was needed for the Long March 3 rocket and that could delay China's launch schedule, they said.
"Launch vehicles will now self-destruct if there is a failure," said Zhang Qingwei, vice president of the China Academy of Launch Vehicle Technology.
"We will also ensure that people (living in the area of space centres) will be moved away when we conduct a launch," he told an international conference on space technology.
A Long March 3B rocket exploded shortly after launch in February, killing six people and injuring 57, according to official reports.
Unofficial sources have put the casualty toll much higher.
China's commercial space drive suffered another setback in August when a communications satellite failed to reach proper orbit after launch aboard a Long March 3 rocket.
"We have determined the cause of the August 18 failure and have taken corrective measures," said Zhang, adding that the problem stemmed from a faulty hydrogen valve on the third stage of the booster rocket.
"We are still conducting ground testing," he said. "There will be delays (in the Long March 3) programme this year but this will not affect other Long March vehicles."
An official of the China Aerospace Corporation, which oversees commercial satellite launches, said a Long March 3 rocket could be launched by the end of the year or early next year.
Two other launches using the Long March 2D and Long March 3A rockets were also expected to be made by the end of the year.
In January 1995, a Long March rocket blew up, killing six people and destroying the Apstar 2 satellite it was carrying.
China once enjoyed a reputation of being a cheap and reliable provider of satellite launch services but the string of failures has shaken its hopes of playing a bigger role in the commercial space business.
China's recent string of satellite launch failures may help Russia's commercial space drive, a senior Russian space official said on Wednesday.
Russia should benefit from its strong space technology, despite lagging behind China in turning technical expertise into commercial success, said Vladimir Oumnikov of the Russian Space Agency.
"We have good prospects," Oumnikov told Reuters at an international conference on astronautics in Beijing.
Asked if Chinese setbacks had helped the Russian programme, he said: "We think so."
Although China once had a reputation for providing cheap and reliable launch services, it has been stung by a series of launch failures.
China's commercial space drive suffered a setback in August when a communications satellite failed to reach its orbit after launch aboard a Long March 3 rocket.
Last February, an Intelsat satellite was destroyed in a spectacular explosion as a Long March 3B rocket veered wildly seconds after launch from China's Xichang space centre in the western province of Sichuan.
At least six people were killed and 57 injured in the incident, which also destroyed 80 homes near the launch site.
In January 1995, a Long March rocket exploded, destroying the Apstar 2 satellite it was carrying.
Last month, a Russian Proton rocket booster successfully launched a U.S.-built satellite for the international telecommunications organisation Inmarsat and a Proton-K booster rocket launched a satellite for domestic telephone and television use.
"We think we have a good system for ensuring reliability," said Oumnikov, who is deputy director for economic issues in the Russian Space Agency's division of space projects.
Failures were common in the space industry and China was not the only supplier of launch services to have such problems, the Russian official said.
He added that Russia needed to catch up with China, which has moved ahead with economic reforms that have reduced the reliance on central planning and expanded the role of the marketplace.
"We do not have enough experience in commercialisation," he said. "China had a head start in this area."
Russia's parliament was expected to discuss by the end of this year a law that would give a legal basis to the commercial space business, he said.
That would remove some of the legal obstacles to Russia's efforts to make a profit from space technology, he added.
China plans to develop bigger rockets to carry heavier payloads into space and expand its role in the commercial satellite market, Chinese aerospace officials said on Thursday.
The ambitious, long-term goal was to build rockets that could carry 20-tonne payloads -- more than twice the current capacity of the nation's most powerful launch vehicles, they said.
"This is a long-term goal that could stretch into the second decade of the next century," said a spokeswoman for China Aerospace Corp, which coordinates China's satellite launch business.
"China needs rockets to put multiple satellites into orbit -- both for its own domestic use and to help its position in the commercial space market," she told Reuters.
China's existing rockets have the capacity to carry payloads of 9.2 tonnes for lower earth orbits and 3.4-5.0 tonnes for geosynchronous orbits.
It has already launched multiple satellites on a single launch but officials say more development is needed.
"We will begin a development programme as soon as possible to lay a firm foundation for the new development of Chinese launch vehicle technology in the 21st century," said Li Jianzhong, president of the China Academy of Launch Vehicle Technology.
"We will develop technologies, especially some key technologies for a heavy lift launch vehicle with a payload of 20 tonnes," he said in a paper delivered at an international conference on space technology.
He also said China would continue to study reusable space transport systems such as the U.S. space shuttle and manned flights -- although officials said these plans were unlikely to be taken into the development stage anytime soon.
China, which put its first satellite in orbit in 1970, has been trying to expand its role in the commercial space market, despite a series of recent setbacks.
A Chinese Long March 3 rocket, considered one of the nation's more reliable launch vehicles, failed to put a U.S.-built satellite into proper orbit in August.
"It was due to a tiny problem with a valve leakage," a scientist who worked on the rocket told Reuters.
"But that small error meant the whole launch was a failure."
In February, technical flaws had even more disastrous results when a Long March 3B rocket exploded shortly after lift-off, killing at least six people and injuring 57.
China says it still has a high success rate for its satellite launches but the latest setbacks have tarnished its reputation.
Beijing also sees a need to step up its satellite production technology.
"We are behind the West in rocket technology but we are even farther behind in satellites," said the China Aerospace spokeswoman. "We need to be able to build more sophisticated satellites with more transponders."
The development plans will require a lot of funding, and although senior Communist Party officials are backing the space campaign, there are plenty of other government projects that demand a share of the budget.
Chinese officials declined to say how much money would be committed to the rocket development project or the space sector overall.
"I can say that our space budget is merely a fraction of what the United States spends on its space programme," said a senior aerospace official.
China needs to extend bank credits to help boost its flagging export sector, a top trade official was quoted as saying on Sunday.
Minister of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation Wu Yi wanted commercial and subsidised bank credits, particularly for machinery and electrical equipment makers, the Financial Daily reported.
"First of all, I believe that the state should expand the size of its export lending," Wu said.
"It should maximize its use of domestic credits, finding new sources of credit, and expand use of foreign loans to boost exports of complete plants and equipment."
China's exports for the first eight months of the year were $90.61 billion, down 4.2 percent over the previous year, according to official figures.
Exports in July and August showed an improvement, however, after the government speeded up long delayed payments of export rebates.
Wu said commercial banks should be encouraged to make policy loans that might not be commercially attractive, and that state subsidies would be required.
"We want to encourage commercial banks to take on policy loans. With the assistance of the Export-Import Bank, the state will implement necessary financial subsidies," she said.
The minister said that big, turnkey projects required large amounts of capital and lengthy periods before they were completed.
While the projects were in progress, exporters had to deal with inflationary cost pressures, exchange rate fluctuations and tax rebate delays.
"In order to expand exports of complete plants and equipment we need an overall system to provide financial security for these companies," she said.
"This will effectively encourage exports of machinery and complete plants and equipment."
Wu said she was confident China could reach its total trade goal of $281 billion this year, though she gave no figure for exports.
China is preparing to tap overseas capital markets by listing shares of one or two of its chemical companies abroad, a senior Chinese official was quoted as saying on Sunday.
But as Beijing looks for foreign capital to upgrade its technology it plans to tighten foreign access to its own chemicals market by adding new restrictions on joint ventures.
Chemical Industry Minister Gu Xiulian told the Business Weekly that one or two chemical companies were getting ready for share offerings abroad, though she did not name the companies or the exchanges.
She also said that one or two Chinese companies would issue convertible bonds -- bonds convertible into stock -- on a trial basis, though regulatory guidelines were not yet in place.
China securities regulators are known to be preparing another batch of companies for share offers outside the country. It was unclear from Gu's remarks whether the chemical firms would be among those companies.
Tianjin Bohai Chemical Group already has a listing on the Hong Kong stock market as well as on the Shanghai exchange while Jilin Chemical Industrial trades in Hong Kong and New York as well as on China's southern bourse in Shenzhen.
Gu said that China's chemical industry needed to raise funds to make technical upgradings and that stock and bond offerings would help reach these goals.
"We are trying to achieve the shift to a quality, intensive mode (of production) from the quantity, extensive model with the aid of foreign capital," she said.
China will bar foreign companies from holding controlling stakes in joint ventures with big state enterprises in priority areas such as in soda ash and "sensitive materials".
There was no indication of when the move might go into effect, and the policy "does not mean we are totally opposed to stock control by foreign businesses", Gu said.
Gu had previously told reporters that China was planning to review its policies towards joint ventures in the chemical industry.
She had suggested that areas where new technology was vital to the development of domestic industry, foreign companies would be allowed to control joint ventures.
But other areas where China had already developed sufficient expertise would be closed to more than 50 percent foreign ownership.
China is particularly encouraging direct foreign investment in fertilisers, ethylene, synthetic materials as well as fine chemical products -- either as wholly owned or jointly owned operations, Gu told the newspaper.
She also criticised the "westernisation" of well known domestic products, saying that China needed an integration of foreign brands and domestic products.
China needs $20 billion in foreign investment for its power expansion projects through 2000 and its investment climate is strong enough to attract this amount, Chinese power officials said on Monday.
They also denied that there was a firm cap on investment returns in the power industry though they conceded that the best rate on key projects was slightly below 17 percent.
"We will need about $100 billion in investment in power during the ninth five-year plan (1996-2000)," said Zhao Xizheng, vice minister of Electric Power.
"About 20 percent of the total will be from foreign investment," he told reporters at an energy conference sponsored by China and the European Union, adding that the rest would be shared equally by the central and local governments.
"We think we can reach this goal," he said.
Some foreign businessmen have complained that China was setting a ceiling of 15 percent returns on investment and that this was too low.
Asked whether there was a 15 percent ceiling on investment returns for foreigners, Zhao replied: "We have never said there was a 15 percent cap on investment."
Foreign businessmen have said that India and Pakistan offered better returns in the power sector.
"You must look at the level of risk," said another Chinese official. "China is more reliable."
Other Chinese power officials said that the investment return was set on a case by case basis, taking into account financing costs, risk controls and budgetary considerations.
"We don't cap investment returns," said Tan Aixing, director general of the Ministry of Electric Power's department of international cooperation.
He told reporters that the highest return on a central government-approved project -- nearly 17 percent -- was for a power station in Zhuhai in south China.
A Hong Kong consortium including Hutchison Whampoa Ltd and Cheung Kong (Holdings) Ltd, has a 45 percent stake in the plant.
Foreign investors can obtain higher returns than this on smaller projects that do not have to be reviewed by central government authorities.
Projects for less than $30 million can be approved by local governments and often offer more attractive terms, officials said.
China is planning to issue rules to speed development of its key power sector with an expanded role for foreign companies, a Chinese planning official said on Tuesday.
Beijing was reviewing rules governing build-operate-transfer (BOT) projects, which so far have been off limits for foreign companies on major power projects, said Wang Hong of the State Planning Commission.
"The State Council (cabinet) is considering temporary regulations," said Wang, director of the commission's department of foreign finance utilisation.
China has said it needs $20 billion in foreign capital through the year 2000 to meet its targets for power industry development.
Wang said the BOT rules would not be ready in time for the award of the nation's first such power sector project which is expected soon and could cost $600 million to $700 million.
China is now evaluating tenders for the Laibin power project in Guangxi province in southern China, which calls for construction and operation of two 350-megawatt power units.
Beijing says it is using the BOT method on a trial basis.
The winner could be announced within the next month, Wang told Reuters at an energy conference.
Major bidders include industrial giant ABB Asea Brown Boveri AG of Switzerland and a group including Germany's Siemens AG and Hong Kong's China Light &amp; Power Co Ltd.
The winner would construct and operate the plant for a period of time before turning the plant over to China. Its bid would include a plan for domestic electric power rates.
The rules under review would define BOT projects and state when they are acceptable.
They would also specify the approval process, require the use of international tenders and determine the apportioning of risk between China and foreign companies, Wang said.
China generally does not allow foreign entities to hold than a 30 percent stake in key power projects, which are those with a capacity of about 250 megawatts.
Western bankers at the conference said the lack of a clear legal framework for BOT projects coupled with problems in setting domestic electric power rates made it difficult for foreign commercial banks to finance the Laibin project.
China's leaders have agreed on a need to stimulate the economy but the central bank is trying to keep the policy low-key, a senior Chinese economist said on Thursday.
"There is a broad consensus on a need to stimulate the economy," said Fan Gang, an economist and director of the China Reform Foundation, an authoritative think-tank.
"But the central bank wants to keep this low-key," he told reporters in a broad-ranging discussion of China's economic policy.
China has largely relaxed its three-year programme of economic austerity aimed at wringing inflation out of the economy.
Retail price inflation had reached a worrisome 21.7 percent in 1994 but was brought down to 14.8 percent last year.
In September this year it fell to 5.0 percent, well within the government target of 10 percent for the full year.
At the same time, economic growth has managed to reach about 9.0 percent, though Fan said that a build-up of inventories -- some of that unsaleable -- probably accounted for about 1.5 percentage points of economic growth.
The central bank, the People's Bank of China, has cut interest rates twice this year, partly as a response to the marked gains in bringing inflation under control.
The People's Bank was also trying to lend a helping hand to ailing state industry, which has been saddled with heavy interest payments on its huge debts.
Central bank officials have said that the interest rate cuts did not mean a loosening of monetary policy, and that they would keep policy "appropriately tight".
"Central bank officials want to keep the word 'tight' in the policy," said Fan, adding that they did not want to see a renewed surge of government spending that would once again pump up inflation.
He said, however, that there still were controls on fixed investment that could be eased somewhat.
"The central government needs to accelerate growth without overheating," he said. "We need the highest growth possible."
The economist said there was still plenty of idle capacity in the state sector with many of the employees of state industry on leave from their jobs on partial pay because of a lack of orders.
Much of that was concentrated in the nation's "rust bowl" in the northeast, a bastion of heavy industry that has relied on central planning and been unable to upgrade its antiquated equipment and shed its huge payrolls of excess workers.
"From the point of view of reform, higher growth makes (reform of state industry) easier," he said
Much of China's creaking state industry needed to cut surplus labour to become more efficient, Fan said, although he conceded that this was still a politically sensitive issue.
"Social stability is still a big factor," he said.
China's Communist leaders may be fretting about the erosion of the ailing state sector at the expense of more nimble private firms.
But for one of the nation's newest banks -- the China Minsheng Banking Corporation -- this is an opportunity.
Formally inaugurated in January, the bank is aiming to lend the bulk of its funds to China's non-state sector, a rapidly expanding area of the economy.
"We are focusing our business on the non-state sector," chairman Jing Shuping said in an interview. "Many banks are not looking at this area or are unwilling to lend to it."
Much of China's creaking state industry is losing money and unable to compete in domestic or export markets. But for now, Communist leaders are unable to shed an ideological albatross, insisting the state retain the leading role in the economy.
"The state sector will still play the dominant role but there will be a growing non-state sector," said Jing. "This will be good for the economy and good for us."
China Minsheng is a non-state entity, founded with the backing of the All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce.
It has 59 shareholders, most federation members. Two of the biggest stakes, worth 90 million yuan ($10.8 million) each, are held by diversified Guangzhou Yitong Group and Xiamen Fuxun Group that has interests from real estate to pharmaceuticals.
The bank is relatively small by Chinese standards with total capital of 1.38 billion yuan and assets of 5 billion yuan.
Jing says it may not be profitable in its first year due to start-up costs but it aims for a 50 percent return on shareholder capital by the third year of operation.
By then, it hopes to have assets of over 10 billion yuan.
It differs from many of China's state-run banks that are unable to recover their loans -- made as policy decisions in support of struggling, government-run enterprises.
"We have no policy loans," said Jing.
China Minsheng has extended over 1.0 billion yuan in loans this year -- all on commercial terms.
"Most loans are for working capital and not for more than one year," he said. "All have collateral or a guarantee."
The bank's headquarters are a short walk from the Beijing city government, but Jing said officials do not stroll over to ask for special favours for hard-hit local companies.
"They go to the other banks," he said. "The state banks are trying to become commercial banks but they still have to make some policy loans."
Besides its headquarters and an office for international business, China Minsheng has three branches in Beijing. One is in the Haidian district where many high-technology, non-state companies have sprung up -- just the type of customer it wants.
The bank cannot lure deposits with higher interest rates since all deposit rates are fixed by the central bank.
Instead, it must compete in terms of service, staying open longer hours and pumping funds into improving technology by installing computer and automated teller equipment.
It has some flexibility on the interest it charges borrowers, though, with a range of 10 percent above or below levels set by the central bank.
In the future, China Minsheng will face more competition from foreign banks -- now barred from taking deposits or making loans in Chinese currency.
"At the moment, they cannot do local currency business," said Jing. "But that will change."
The bank is already looking at new areas of business, such as home mortgages, to meet expected demand as China develops a real estate market.
It may also want to tap domestic or foreign capital markets to ensure it has the financial muscle to stay competitive.
"There could be a movement in this direction in the future," Jing said. "But first we need a good performance over the next three years."
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
China's oil and chemical trading giant Sinochem hopes to list shares in Singapore as a first step in its plan to become a world-class conglomerate, a top official said on Friday.
"Our objective is to build our company into a transnational conglomerate," President Zheng Dunxun said.
"We are looking at big Korean and Japanese conglomerates as models," he said.
Zheng, speaking to reporters and security analysts at Sinochem's Beijing headquarters, did not say how many shares would be offered or who much money would be raised.
Timing would depend on the Singapore stock exchange, which was now reviewing Sinochem's plan.
However, company officials said the review period might be longer than usual because the firm was a trading operation and had no production in Singapore.
The company had said last June it was confident of the success of its application and expected to be listed in two months.
Sinochem would retain 60 percent control of the listed company, Zhang said.
Sinochem, whose full name is China National Chemicals Import and Export Corporation, had net assets of more than $1.0 billion at the end of last year. Besides oil and chemical trading, its operations range from oil refining to shipping, warehousing and finance.
Sinochem officials said the company accounted for 40 percent of all of China's oil imports and the remaining 60 percent went through a joint venture in which it had a 50 percent stake.
Company officials said Sinochem had net profits of $75 million last year, down from $100 million in 1994. Turnover rose to $18.21 billion from $14.98 billion in 1994.
Asked why profits slid when revenues rose, officials said market conditions were to blame. They did not elaborate.
The Singapore listed unit would be Sinochem Asia Holdings (Company) Ltd and would include oil and other commodities trading operations in Singapore as well as trading vehicles in Thailand and South Korea.
Sinochem Asia Chairman Fu Yong declined to give the value of the assets of the Singapore listed company, but said they would not include Sinochem's big Hong Kong arm.
"Sinochem Hong Kong would be too big to be put into Sinochem Asia," he said.
Asked if this suggested another listing, for the Hong Kong operations, Fu said: "If the Singarpoe listing goes smoothly we might try other centres."
If the offer gains clearance form the Singapore stock exchange, Singapore's United Overseas Bank Ltd is expected to be the lead underwriter.
China has tried to put new pressure on Taiwan to boost economic ties, courting the island's businessmen with an announcement of rules on direct shipping links, analysts said on Sunday.
But they said Beijing remained far from its goal of securing direct shipping, banned by the rival Nationalist government of Taiwan.
"From what we have seen, this already has put some pressure on the Taiwan authorities," said Fan Xizhou, head of the Taiwan Research Institute at Xiamen University.
"This could help stabilise economic ties but more practical steps are needed," he said, speaking by telephone from the southeastern port city that would likely benefit from any direct shipping links.
Beijing, which views the island as a renegade province, unilaterally announced last week a series of regulations on direct shipping links, giving its blue print for future trade.
Taiwan's Nationalist government has banned direct air and shipping links with China since 1949 when Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist troops lost the Chinese civil war to the communists and fled to the island.
With tensions easing since the late 1980s, civilian aircraft and vessels have skirted the ban by stopping over in a third country or territory such as the British colony of Hong Kong or Portuguese-run Macau.
Taiwanese businessmen, who have poured over $20 billion into China, are eager for direct transport links, but Taiwanese authorities have been reluctant to lift the ban.
The latest news fuelled hopes among many of Taiwan's businessmen that some of the restrictions might be eased, and it briefly buoyed shipping stocks on the Taipei bourse.
The Nationalists, who say they are committed to eventual reunification with China, see direct transport links as their last bargaining chip in talks with the communists.
China said that direct shipping would be purely a domestic matter, specifying that only Taiwanese or Chinese companies -- or joint ventures including one side or the other -- would be allowed to conduct business on the routes.
"The documents define clearly that direct cargo transport between harbours on the Chinese mainland and Taiwan is regarded as domestic transportation under special management," the official Xinhua news agency said.
They also make no mention of the role that Taiwan authorities would play, saying only that all companies engaged in the trade would need Beijing's permission.
Taiwan has set its own formula for future links but it wants to limit the trade to foreign registered companies through a so-called "offshore" southern port.
Beijing's tactics echo those applied to the British colony of Hong Kong, where it has tried to lure companies with substantial business interests in China to do its bidding politically while it engages in political arm-wrestling with the British administration.
In Hong Kong, at least, those tactics have been highly successful as many of the same tycoons who once courted the British administration have turned to Beijing to look for economic favours in return for their political support.
Whether that works with Taiwan remains to be seen.
"The new shipping rules were clearly designed to step up the pressure on Taiwan," said a Western diplomat.
"But if Taiwan doesn't agree, it's all empty talk."
The choice of Singapore for the listing of China's big oil and chemicals trader was at least partly a political decision, Chinese officials and foreign securities analysts said.
They said that close ties between China and Singapore helped in the choice of the island state for the proposed offer of Sinochem's shares.
"The decision to list in Singapore was partly due to good relations between China and Singapore," said Fu Yong, chairman of Sinochem Asia Holdings, the Sinochem arm which could be listed in Singapore.
"Singapore is also a stable and prosperous environment," he told securities analysts and reporters invited to the company's headquarters.
So far, Hong Kong has attracted the bulk of the foreign listings of Chinese companies.
Sinochem, whose full name is China National Chemicals Import and Export Corp, is a major state trading company that has used some of the cash from its lucrative trading operations to expand into numerous new businesses.
Under the proposed stock offer, currently under review by the Singapore bourse, Sinochem would place only some of its Asian trading operations -- including those in Singapore -- into the listed company.
It has not said how many shares would be offered or how much money might be raised.
Securities analysts said they were unsure how much profit could be expected from the operations in the listed company. But they added that the parent firm clearly had the financial clout to list assets on any of a number of foreign stock exchanges.
Sinochem's trading turnover swelled to $18.21 billion last year from $14.98 billion in 1994.
Company officials said the firm controls 40 percent of all of China's crude oil imports and has a 50 percent share of the company that accounts for the remainder.
It owns a share of a big joint venture oil refinery in the northeast city of Dalian, has a newly formed insurance joint venture with Manufacturers Life of Canada and has taken a stake in China's fledgling second telephone network.
It is now a major real estate holder, having splashed out with 700 million yuan ($84 million) to build its Beijing headquarters, and it is part owner of an 88-storey commercial tower being built in Shanghai.
Company officials hinted strongly that further stock offerings were to be expected -- most likely in Hong Kong -- if the Singapore listing went smoothly.
Singapore has become a model of sorts for China's vision of the future, according to Western diplomats.
It has raised living standards through rapid economic development while keeping tight political controls, they said.
Singapore has carefully cultivated political and economic ties with China since diplomatic links were forged in 1990. It has pushed hard to make a success of its flagship project in China -- a big industrial park in the eastern city of Suzhou.
If Sinochem's listing proposal obtains final approval, it would not be the only such Chinese state company to offer shares in Singapore as several China-linked firms have already listed.
Fellow Chinese company Guangzhou Investment -- the Hong Kong-listed investment arm of the southern city of Guangzhou -- is also looking to Singapore.
Sinochem said that Singapore's key role in the Asian oil refining and trading business was also a factor in its choice as the place of listing.
Securities analysts said that Sinochem probably would get a better price for the shares in Singapore than in Hong Kong.
But the analysts noted that strong political ties helped gain support from Beijing.
"In this case, politics clearly played a role," said a Singapore-based analyst.
China has begun a national drive to test all blood products since the discovery of HIV contamination earlier this year, a health official said on Friday.
"We have requested all local health authorities to inspect blood products and report the results to us," said an official at the Ministry of Public Health.
The official, who declined to be named, said the testing followed the discovery in April of some samples of a HIV contaminated product manufactured and sold in the southern province of Guangdong.
The product was known as "Wolongsong" brand blood albumin, a protein.
HIV -- Human Immunodeficiency Virus -- is the virus that can lead to Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS).
"Following the incident we instituted a national inspection of blood products," the official told Reuters.
Asked how the tainted product had been uncovered, she said: "I can't tell you that. This is a very sensitive question."
Results of the tests from several provinces had been turned over to central authorities, she said without giving any further details.
An official at the Foreign Ministry said public health authorities in Guangdong had called for government agencies around the country to stop the sale and use of the 50- millilitre "Wolongsong" albumin.
Guangdong health officials, contacted by telephone, declined to give any information on the manufacturer or say how much of the product had been on the market when the action was taken.
They also declined to say how the item became contaminated, what conditions it was used to treat or how serious the risk was to people who used the product.
Officials in Beijing said that an order had been sent to have the Wolongsong product destroyed.
Official figures show China has 4,305 reported HIV cases and the total is expected to reach 5,000 by the end of this year.
Chinese officials quote health experts as saying they believe the actual number is anywhere from 50,000 to 100,000, as many cases go unreported.
A total of 131 people have been infected with AIDS in China, according to the official media.
China has been grappling with growing drug use and prostitution and experts warn these two problems could increase the number of AIDS cases across the country.
Heavy losses in metals trading by a young employee at big Chinese conglomerate CITIC showed striking similarities to Nick Leeson's deals that humbled Barings Bank, a top CITIC official said.
CITIC -- the China International Trust and Investment Corp -- had learned a bitter lesson from the 1994 losses and had stepped up its internal controls, group executive director Chang Zhenming said in an interview.
"There were a lot of similarities," Chang said of the CITIC and Barings episodes.
"We realised the seriousness of risk," he said.
CITIC has gained a reputation of being one of China's best run companies, expanding its operations to power, telecommunications, banking and real estate. It is probably best known for its Hong Kong-listed unit, CITIC Pacific.
Its big losses in 1994 were all the more surprising to many foreign businessmen.
The key figure in CITIC's trading was Chen Tongsheng, in his early 30's, who worked at the CITIC Shanghai office.
Like Leeson, who was 28 when his big losses on Singapore's SIMEX exchange emerged, Chen was not a university graduate.
He had worked his way through to his trading position, taking a post as a bank clerk after finishing high school.
Also like Leeson, he is now in jail -- along with his supervisor, the former president of the Shanghai operation.
"Not only was the background of the trader similar (to Leeson) but so were the trading methods as well."
Chang said that losses stemmed from unauthorised trades on the London Metals Exchange, and that broker credits compounded the problem.
"He didn't have any money. He used LME broker credits," said Chang of the Shanghai trader.
Asked if special accounts were used to hide losses -- as in the Barings case - Chang said: "You could say it was exactly the same."
Auditors were also unable to make sense of the trading accounts, he added.
But unlike Barings, CITIC managed to survive the losses, which were about $40 million compared to Leeson's, which neared $1.4 billion.
Chang said the losses still nearly bankrupted the CITIC Shanghai operations.
"We have stepped up our internal controls," he said, adding that other prominent cases - such as Sumitomo's copper trading losses -- had been instructive in reducing future risk.
CITIC's subsidiaries are no longer allowed to conduct operations unrelated to their core activities.
CITIC has also stopped all commodities trading on foreign markets, in line with a central government directive.
Asked if the company might return to the market, Chang said this was unlikely in the near future.
China International Trust and Investment Corp, one of China's major conglomerates, is focusing its domestic operations on the financial sector where it hopes to see 70 percent of its profits, a top executive said.
"We are making money in the financial sector though manufacturing is having a hard time now," said Chang Zhenming, group executive director.
"We see finance contributing about 70 percent of our domestic net profit in the near term," he said in a recent interview.
Chang chose his words carefully, saying that the finance business would be used "to serve the conglomerate's commercial and industrial operations".
But company officials said that CITIC had been disappointed, with some of its early industrial investments -- such as in the machinery and garment sectors -- and it would like to remould itself as a financial services company.
CITIC reported profit of 2.05 billion yuan ($247 million) last year, up from 1.67 billion yuan in 1994.
Most of CITIC's income is from its huge Hong Kong arm, which includes listed CITIC Pacific Ltd.
But for the group's domestic operations, CITIC Industrial Bank is the main contributor, accounting for net profits of about 1.0 billion yuan last year, up 20 percent over 1994.
Profits from the bank were likely to climb another 20 percent this year, despite the impact on interest income from two cuts in interest rates this year, Chang said.
"We have a good base of corporate clients," said Chang.
He added that this gave the bank a reliable source of low-cost call-money deposits from major companies.
Chang said the bank had also been able to hold the line on bad debts -- a key problem for many of China's banks -- though no figure was given.
"We are a bit more conservative than some of the other banks so we've had fewer bad loans," he said.
The group expected to earn more than 100 million yuan this year from its securities operations, though commodities trading would be break-even at best, the executive said.
CITIC still has diversified domestic interests ranging from power projects and telecommunications to automotive production and real estate.
Finance probably acounts for more than 70 percent of domestic profits at the moment, largely because of poor results from several industrial investments while other more promising projects are still in their early stages.
But Chang said reforms that had created so-called joint stock companies probably would spur the company's development in the financial sector, as more companies would seek loans on commercial terms rather than rely on state funding.
Chang also said the company wanted to expand its financial operations to include property insurance. It was seeking to form a joint venture with other domestic partners though this project still required regulatory approval.
China's foreign debts reached $109.5 billion at the end of June but the governor of the central bank said the country was confident of paying its bills.
Governor of the People's Bank of China Dai Xianglong said the nation's foreign exchange reserves of about $96 billion -- among the biggest in the world -- were comfortable, but not excessive.
"We are very prudent in our borrowing," he said, adding that the level of debt measured against exports -- or the debt service ratio -- was well within international warning levels.
"On the whole the repayment situation is good," Dai told Reuters in an interview.
"It is hard to say exactly where the debt level will be next year, but every year an additional $10 billion is possible," he said.
He said $10 billion had been the average annual addition to the debt level over the past five years.
"For a country of China's size, (the level of foreign exchange reserves) is not a big sum," he said. "We can only say it is comfortable."
Most of Beijing's debt was long term, but China needed reserves sufficient to maintain repayments as well as to finance four months' worth of imports, he said.
Beijing also had new needs for foreign currency following the recent move to make the renminbi -- China's currency -- convertible on the current account.
He described China's repayment status as good, although he conceded there were repayment problems with enterprises under the direction of local governments.
"There are some local government-run enterprises that are overdue," he said.
But Dai also said foreign banks had a responsibility to ensure that credit went to deserving enterprises.
"Foreign creditors of Chinese enterprises must be selective in their lending," he said.
The central banker said he expected the renminbi to remain stable though he saw upward pressure on the Chinese currency, partly due to an expected trade surplus of more than $10 billion this year.
That would be down from the $16.7 billion surplus China recorded last year and much better than initial forecasts for 1996.
Economists say faster payments of export tax rebates have encouraged many companies to turn to the export market, thereby helping the trade picture.
The renminbi currently trades at about 8.3 to one dollar.
China could list more railway companies and is studying a plan to create a fund to boost foreign investment in the sector, a railway official said on Monday.
The moves would be aimed at bringing in cash to help modernise the nation's huge rail system and fend off competition from planes and buses, Ministry of Railways senior engineer Zhang Yanzhao said.
China's first railway stock offer -- the Guangshen Railway Co Ltd -- was being watched for its performance as a possible model for future offerings, Zhang told Reuters in an interview.
"If Guangshen is seen as successful, we could use the same method again," said Zhang, assistant director-general of the department for cooperation with foreign countries.
The Guangshen Railway links Guangzhou -- capital of fast growing Guangdong province -- with Shenzhen, which borders Hong Kong.
In May, the company's shares were listed in Hong Kong and in New York as American Depositary Receipts.  
The offer was only a modest success, managing to hold just above its offer price. The Hong Kong shares were now trading at HK$2.925 ($0.38) each compared with an offer price of HK$2.91.
"Any operations listed in the future would have to be making money and would probably be along the east coast," Zhang said.
The key was corporatising the regional railway bureaus under the ministry's supervision. So far, only Guangzhou and Dalian in the northeast have taken this step.
Another form of financing under study is the creation of a fund that could offer fixed income to foreign investors.
"This is still far off," Zhang said without giving details.
The railways have long been the backbone of China's transport sector, but are now facing new competitive pressure for both freight and passenger markets.
Guangshen Railway had to cut ticket prices as of November to compete with bus traffic. The move was expected to hurt revenue and has already pressured the company's share price.
China's railways carried 448 million passengers in the first half of the year, down 14 percent from a year ago, according to official media reports.  
Zhang said that overall China's railways were profitable, although some routes were losing money. And overall, profits were not keeping up with past performances.
"As of last year, we have not been doing as well," he said without giving any figures.
Overstaffing was a key problem because the railway system has 3.3 million workers on its payrolls. But shedding jobs requires tough political decisions because unemployment is seen as a source of potential social unrest.
Government control over rail rates is also a problem. The ministry would like to raise rates but has little room to do so.
"This is a sensitive area," said Zhang.
The ministry is trying to speed up its trains, increase capacity and provide more comfortable passenger cars. It plans to expand electrified rail service to 28 percent of its capacity by 2000 from 19 percent now.
New plans for electric locomotive production are under discussion, and Switzerland's ABB AG and Germany's Siemens AG are among the top contenders.
Discussions are under way with Canada's Bombardier for joint production of modern passenger cars, and plans are moving ahead for a computerised, nationwide ticketing service.  
"If we don't compete we will lose market share," said Zhang.
(US$1 = HK$7.73)
China has vowed to wind up the lengthy probe of the disgraced former boss of Beijing, saying the case had seriously damaged the Communist Party in the nation's capital.
Beijing party chief Chen Xitong stepped down in April last year, only weeks after his protege and vice-mayor Wang Baosen was targeted in a probe of economic crimes and committed suicide.
"The cases of Chen and Wang absolutely will not just fade away," the Outlook magazine quoted Beijing's current party chief, Wei Jianxing, as saying.
"These cases have had a very bad effect on municipal affairs.. and have destroyed a number of comrades in the party," it quoted Wei -- the Communist Party's top graft fighter -- as saying.
The weekly magazine, published by the official Xinhua news agency, carried the remarks in its latest edition, seen in Beijing on Wednesday.
The 66-year-old Chen has been out of the public eye since his fall from grace, becoming the most prominent victim of a campaign against corruption.
He was deprived of his seat on the party's powerful Politburo and was officially said to be under investigation for "serious mistakes".
Unpublished party documents say that Chen, who ran Beijing for 12 years, first as mayor and then as party chief, had abused his office by amassing $24 million in unauthorised funds and lavishing favours on friends, associates and a long-time mistress.
Vice-mayor Wang was found to have used his position to obtain 116 houses illegally and built himself a villa on the outskirts of the city. He also masterminded a $37 million embezzlement and graft scam, officials have said.
The inability of investigators to announce a conclusion to their investigation had triggered much speculation, particularly in the case of Chen who was said to be refusing to cooperate and was threatening to implicate others.
It also contrasted sharply with the speedy trial and sentencing last week of dissident Wang Dan, who was jailed for 11 years on subversion charges after less than four hours in a Beijing courtroom.
The magazine also said that 22 people had been linked to the probe of the late vice-mayor, including Zhou Beifang, the former chairman of Hong Kong listed affiliates of a major Chinese steel company, and Chen Xitong's secretary, Chen Jian.
Earlier this month, prosecutors filed corruption charges against 30 people, including Zhou, who was detained in February last year.
The magazine also said that a former senior member of the Beijing city assembly, Tie Ying, had been arrested and expelled from the party earlier this year for accepting a large bribe from a Hong Kong businessman. It did not give further details.
The city government had been virtually paralysed since the disgrace of Chen and Wang, Chinese sources have said.
The campaign to clean up the Beijing administration was widely believed to have been a factor in the departure last week of Li Qiyan as mayor.
Corruption was virtually eliminated in the years after the communists came to power in 1949, but has staged a comeback along with economic reforms in the past 17 years.
Communist Party chief and state president Jiang Zemin has declared war on corruption, warning that the scourge was a virus that threatened the party.
Courts frequently impose the death penalty in major corruption cases.
China gave U.S. President Bill Clinton a signal on Sunday that the election had not cleared away nagging trade disputes, saying it planned tit-for-tat curbs on American imports.
Beijing said it would suspend temporarily its imports of some U.S. textiles, farm goods and alcoholic drinks in retaliation for Washington's imposition of punitive charges on American purchases of Chinese textiles.
The announcement came only days after Clinton's re-election triumph and ahead of a planned visit to Beijing this month by U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher.
Sino-U.S. relations have been strained over the last year by a range of issues from Taiwan to arms proliferation to trade and human rights.
China and the U.S. have said they saw an improvement in relations since the two sides narrowly averted a trade war over copyright piracy and exchanged diplomatic fire over Beijing's political rival, Taiwan, earlier this year.
Beijing said last week that it saw Clinton's re-election as a good opportunity for better ties in a "somewhat improved atmosphere".
The temporary import ban, which would take effect on December 10, was in retaliation for what China called severe violations by the U.S. of a bilateral textile accord.
"The decision was made in response to the U.S. unilateral cut of import quotas of Chinese textiles, which severely violated the bilateral textile agreement," the official Xinhua news agency said.
In September, Washington announced punitive charges against 1996 import quotas for Chinese textile goods, accusing China of using transshipments to avoid U.S. quota restrictions.
The action -- which was expected to cost China about $19 million -- marked the first time Washington had imposed so-called triple charges against repeated violations of a bilateral textile accord.
The U.S. move was made without full consultation and clear supporting evidence, Xinhua said.
Beijing accused Washington of imposing a series of barriers that had seriously affected Chinese textile export to the U.S. as well as China's ability to pay for American imports.
China said it had urged the U.S. to withdraw the penalties but its pleas had been ignored, leaving it no choice but to take action.
China's import suspension would also apply to U.S. fruits and animal husbandry products, though there was no indication of which specific items would be barred within the broad product categories.
The Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation and the General Administration of Customs would have a detailed list ready before December 10, according to Xinhua.
China also said it opposed any attempt to impose the will of one side upon others in trade matters, and called on the U.S. to avoid such measures in future.
"Once again, we wish to urge the United States to handle trade disputes in the spirit of advancing bilateral trade, and refrain from taking any actions harmful to bilateral trade in the future," it said.
China said Monday it expected talks with the United States soon on a dispute over U.S. sanctions on its textiles and its own threat to retaliate.
Beijing also said it was still too soon to say which U.S. imports would be banned if Washington failed to withdraw penalties on imported Chinese textiles.
"We expect to see working level talks with the U.S. in the near future," an official of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation told Reuters. "The two sides will exchange views," he said.
Beijing said Sunday it would suspend temporarily its imports of some U.S. textiles, farm goods, animal husbandry products, fruits and alcoholic drinks in retaliation for Washington's imposition of punitive charges on American purchases of Chinese textiles.
The temporary import ban is to take effect on Dec. 10.
In September, Washington announced punitive charges against import quotas for Chinese textile goods, accusing China of using shipments through other countries to avoid U.S. quota restrictions.
China said the action was taken without consultation and with no clear supporting evidence, adding that it had no choice but to impose retaliatory sanctions.
"We are still seeking the views of Chinese enterprises about which products should be included under the ban," the Chinese official said. "That will be determined in another 30 days."
The total of trade affected by Washington's action was estimated at $19 million -- only a fraction of Sino-U.S. trade, which is now heavily in China's favour. The United States says its trade deficit with China last year was more than $35 billion.
China's threatened trade ban, made ahead of a planned visit to Beijing this month by U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher, meant yet another face-off in the frequently testy Sino-U.S. ties.
Relations have been strained over the last year by a range of issues, from Taiwan to arms proliferation to trade and human rights.
China and the United States have said they saw an improvement in relations since they narrowly averted a trade war over copyright piracy and exchanged diplomatic fire over Beijing's political rival Taiwan earlier this year.
The two sides are preparing for high-level exchanges next year, including a possible visit to China by Vice President Al Gore and a summit between Chinese President Jiang Zemin and President Clinton.
Christopher's visit was expected to pave the way for these meetings.
China said on Monday it expected talks with the United States soon on a dispute over U.S. sanctions on its textiles and its own threat to retaliate.
Beijing also said it was still too soon to say which U.S. imports would be banned if Washington failed to withdraw penalties on imported Chinese textiles.
"We expect to see working level talks with the U.S. in the near future," an official of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation told Reuters.
"The two sides will exchange views," he said.
Beijing said on Sunday it would suspend temporarily its imports of some U.S. textiles, farm goods, animal husbandry products, fruits and alcoholic drinks in retaliation for Washington's imposition of punitive charges on American purchases of Chinese textiles.
The temporary import ban would take effect on December 10.
In September, Washington announced punitive charges against import quotas for Chinese textile goods, accusing China of using transshipments to avoid U.S. quota restrictions.
China said the action was taken without consultation and with no clear supporting evidence, adding it had no choice but to impose retaliatory sanctions.
"We are still seeking the views of Chinese enteprises about which products should be included under the ban," the Chinese official said.
"That will be determined in another 30 days."
The total of trade affected by Washington's action was estimated at $19 million -- only a fraction of Sino-U.S. trade, which is now heavily in China's favour. The United States says its trade deficit with China last year was more than $35 billion.
But China's threatened trade ban, made ahead of a planned visit to Beijing this month by U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher, meant yet another face-off in the frequently testy Sino-U.S. ties.
Relations have been strained over the last year by a range of issues from Taiwan to arms proliferation to trade and human rights.
China and the United States have said they saw an improvement in relations since they narrowly averted a trade war over copyright piracy and exchanged diplomatic fire over Beijing's political rival Taiwan earlier this year.
The two sides are preparing for high level exchanges next year, including a possible visit to China by U.S. Vice President Al Gore and a summit between Chinese President Jiang Zemin and U.S. President Bill Clinton.
Christopher's visit was expected to pave the way for these meetings.
European Commission Vice President Sir Leon Brittan suggested on Thursday that China might soon see progress on its plan to join the World Trade Organisation but Beijing played down chances of a breakthrough.
Brittan said he might press the United States to move forward on China's drive to join the WTO if Beijing would give an assurance that it supported the European position.
"I will certainly take up the matter with the Americans with extreme urgency ... urging them that the time has come to adopt the approach that Europe has pioneered," he told a business conference in the Chinese capital.
"I hope even before the end of this visit to be able to announce some specific action" in advancing the process, he said.
Europe has maintained that it would be flexible on requirements for China's full implementation of WTO rules. But Beijing had to make clear its commitment to full compliance and show progress on granting access to its domestic markets.
China's Minister of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation Wu Yi on Thursday appeared to be unconvinced that the United States, which has been a key hurdle to Beijing's drive to join the global trade organisation, was ready to change its stance.
"Their intentions are kind-hearted," said Wu in a reference to the European effort. "But the question of China's accession to the World Trade Organisation is not entirely decided by the European Union," she told reporters at the same business conference.
Beijing has been pushing to join the WTO under the more lenient terms of developing nation status but Washington has insisted that China's economy is too big for such treatment.
Brittan, who is leading a delegation of 30 European business leaders hoping to tap into the Chinese market, said he would meet senior Chinese officials, including Vice Premier Zhu Rongji and foreign trade minister Wu.
Brittan made it clear that a reaffirmation of Chinese acceptance of the European position would be enough for him to try to take his case to the United States.
"The U.S. was erecting very high hurdles to be surmounted," he said of the American position.
But he said the end of the U.S. presidential election campaign could be an opportunity for making progress in the negotiations.
"Recent stirrings in the media...suggest that the U.S. is perhaps readier now than over the past two years to heed European calls for decisive engagement on this negotiation," Brittan said.
Brittan praised China for making strides in strengthening intellectual property rights though he said more market access was needed.
He also warned that Europe would not be discriminated against in the Chinese market, and he singled out bilateral shipping agreements as an area of concern.
"Europe cannot accept unequal treatment and will not be discriminated against," he said.
On Wednesday, Chinese leaders denounced Beijing's exclusion from the WTO as unjust, saying the world's largest developing nation had made great strides in opening its markets to trade and investment.
Beijing also lashed out on Thursday at European Union investigations into Chinese textile exports, hinting at retaliatory measures if the probes led to anti-dumping measures.
China said on Sunday the United States was trying to contain it and that Washington needed to shift policies to improve ties.
In an attack aimed just days before the arrival of U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher, China also accused the United States of being "self-righteous" and "alientating" in its foreign policy.
"Only when the United States drops the idea of (containing China), removes ideological bias against China and stops basing its foreign policies purely on its own economic interests can we expect significant progress in bilateral ties," said the Business Weekly.
Contrary to Washington's stated policy of maintaining contact with China, the United States was employing a strategy of containment based on a security defence chain linking South Korea, Japan, the Philippines and Thailand, said the newspaper, published by the official China Daily.
The newspaper was quoting Chen Bingcai, an economist at a think-tank linked to the State Planning Commission.
The U.S. secretary of state is scheduled to arrive in China on Tuesay in the first senior-level contact between the two nations since the re-election of U.S. President Bill Clinton.
It is part of an effort aimed at repairing relations strained by a series of disputes ranging from Taiwan to human rights to trade and arms proliferation.
The most serious damage to ties was inflicted when China held war games and unarmed missile tests off Taiwan early this year, prompting the U.S. to send two aircraft carrier groups near the island in a show of force.
Beijing has accused the U.S. in the past of pursuing a goal of containment, often linking Washington's policies to what it sees as a revival of Japanese militarism.
The newspaper also made the same policy connection, saying that although there had been fewer conflicts with Japan of late, Tokyo still needed to abandon this path.
China and Japan have been at loggerheads most recently over disputed East China Sea islands known in Chinese as the Diaoyus and in Japanese as the Senkakus.
An expanded U.S.-Japan security pact signed this year was in fact a cover for a resurgence of Japanese militarism, according to the newspaper.
Diplomats in Beijing said this was a theme heard most frequently from China's armed forces.
The newspaper quoted Chen as saying the United States, relying on its economic and military might, was becoming increasingly high handed in international affairs -- "and its own foreign policy has become extremely self-righteous and alienating".
Without a policy shift, the United States could be expected to continue blocking China's long-stalled entry into the World Trade Organisation and further turbulence was likely in trade and economic relations.
The newspaper said the U.S. needed to take into account cultural diferences in handling a range of disputes from the World Trade Organisation to human rights.
China has sent mixed signals to the United States before the visit by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, combining toughness with conciliation on a range of issues that have tangled Sino-American ties.
But diplomats said on Monday the highest level visit by a U.S. official in two years is unlikely to stumble over any of the key hurdles in its path as the two sides focus on repairing past damage.
"Both sides seem to be eager to put the relationship back on track," said a Beijing-based diplomat. "The relationship is just too important."
China and the United States have seen ties strained by a series of disputes, including human rights, arms proliferation, Taiwan and trade.
Christopher's visit is likely to be the first in a series of top contacts in the months ahead aimed at keeping those conflicts from boiling over.
Clinton will confer with President Jiang Zemin in Manila on the sidelines of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit this month and plans are under discussion for an exchange of visits between the two leaders over 1997 and possibly 1998.
Vice-President Al Gore may also visit China in the first half of next year.
Both sides' eagerness to get their relationship moving forward again has still left plenty of room to manoeuvre.
"China has sent mixed signals to create an atmosphere of uncertainty," said another Beijing-based diplomat. "That should put some pressure on the U.S. for some concessions."
A key area of disagreement has been human rights where Beijing has publicly thumbed its nose at Washington by turning down the appeal of dissident Wang Dan and upholding his 11-year sentence for subversion.
But Beijing has also released dissident Chen Ziming, one of the so-called "black hands" behind the 1989 student movement for democracy. It made its move just as President Bill Clinton won re-election in what was widely seen as a gesture of goodwill.
Human rights marred Christopher's last visit in 1994. Leading dissident Wei Jingsheng was detained after meeting Assistant Secretary of State John Shattuck, the top U.S. policy maker on human rights.
Shattuck will accompany Christopher on this visit but there are no plans to meet pro-democracy activists this time.
China has tried to keep the United States off balance with other seemingly conflicting policy statements. It lashed out at Washington on Sunday, saying it was trying to contain Beijing by forming a defence chain linking other Asian states, notably Japan.
It also wagged a finger at the United States for blocking China's entry into the World Trade Organisation and called U.S. policy "self-righteous" and "alienating".
And on Monday, Beijing said it supported the candidacy of United Nations Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali for a second term, a move publicly opposed by Washington.
These followed largely upbeat statements after Clinton's re-election, suggesting that Beijing was willing to work with the U.S. administration.
Diplomats said that Taiwan would be raised in Christopher's discussions with Chinese leaders, although it would not be the burning issue it was earlier this year. In March, China conducted war games off the island's coast and Washington sent warships there in a show of force.
The United States was also expected to bring up the return of Hong Kong to Chinese rule in mid-1997, making its case that a smooth transfer of power in the British colony was in the interests of all parties concerned.
The United States would consider some form of peaceful nuclear cooperation with China even before a previously signed accord is fully implemented, U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher said on Wednesday.
"As we move forward on nuclear non-proliferation, the U.S. is prepared to consider, as consistent with U.S. laws, further steps in the area of peaceful nuclear cooperation even in advance of our full implementation of the 1985 agreement," Christopher told a news conference in Beijing.
Christopher did not specify what types of cooperation might go ahead before implementation of the agreement or give any timetable.
"If they (the Chinese) are making progress towards putting the 1985 agreement into effect, we are prepared to consider other things," Christopher said.
Christopher also said the two sides had agreed to establish a regular dialogue on arms control and non-proliferation issues.
"I made clear our strong concern about (China's) nuclear cooperation with Iran," Christopher said.
China pledged in May not to provide assistance to any unsafeguarded nuclear facilities.
The United States has held up the full implementation of the 1985 agreement on peaceful nuclear cooperation because of concerns over Beijing's nuclear sales, although the two sides have recently begun talks aimed at allowing the accord to proceed.
Before the 1985 agreement can be implemented, the U.S. president has to certify to Congress that China is not transferring nuclear technology to countries that have nuclear facilities without safeguards.
China is eager to buy billions of dollars worth of nuclear power reactors from U.S. firms.
Christopher arrived on Tuesday for a three-day visit that included meetings with Chinese President Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai later told reporters the Sino-U.S. agreement on peaceful use of nuclear technology was signed 11 years ago.
"We believe it is high time to put this agreement in practice," Cui told reporters.
He said if the U.S. moved ahead with providing nuclear technology to China, U.S. companies would benefit.
"The China market is very big," Cui said.
Asked to comment on the agreement on proliferation, Cui said: "All I can say is the two sides will meet every year and hold a dialogue... to discuss comprehensive issues about global security and non-proliferation."
China said on Thursday the highest-level U.S. visit in two years had produced results and the task now was to push Sino-American ties forward.
Beijing made the upbeat assessment as U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher wound up a three-day visit by urging China to seize an historic opportunity to build a new era of cooperation.
"We believe this visit has produced results," Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai told reporters.
"Both sides believe that Sino-U.S. relations have improved in the last few months," he said. "Both sides believe it is necessary to maintain and develop this improving trend."
Christopher met Chinese President Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng and held lengthy discussions with Foreign Minister Qian Qichen during the visit.
One significant gain for Beijing was Washington's willingness to consider cooperation in nuclear technology despite lingering concerns over possible re-exports.
The United States and China signed an accord in 1985 for cooperation on the peaceful use of nuclear technology. But before the accord can be fully implemented the U.S. president must certify to Congress that Beijing is not providing nuclear assistance to states with unsafeguarded facilities.
Concerns about assistance to countries such as Iran and Pakistan have long blocked China's access to the technology it wants to spur its nuclear power industry.
For its part, China agreed to regular meetings on arms proliferation, though Beijing made clear that as far as it was concerned, the main such issue is U.S. arms sales to Taiwan.
"This is the most important arms proliferation issue," Cui told reporters.
China views Taiwan as a renegade province and it used Christopher's visit to make the point it expects to see an eventual end to American arms sales to the island.
Washington insists these are two separate issues and it will continue to sell defensive weapons to Taiwan.
The foreign ministry spokesman also pointed to results on trade issues, particularly a broad agreement that China should join the World Trade Organisation as soon as possible.
But the two sides have different views over how that can be achieved. Beijing wants admission under the more favourable terms of a developing country while Washington insists the Chinese economy is too big for such treatment.
Cui played down other areas of disagreement -- such as human rights -- saying there were major differences between the two sides but these should not become obstacles to improving ties.
More high-level contacts were agreed on, though an announcement on summits was deferred, apparently until U.S. President Bill Clinton meets the Chinese president in Manila on Sunday.
Those talks could touch on possible dates for an exchange of visits by the two leaders.
China on Thursday tried to play down friction with the United States over a rising trade gap and called on the U.S. to end curbs on technology exports to put trade back in balance.
"The two sides should avoid taking actions that do not help the expansion of trade," said a spokesman of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation.
"These are two of the biggest markets in the world," he said. "They should be complementary."
The United States said on Wednesday its trade deficit with China climbed to nearly $29 billion in the first nine months of the year, from $25 billion in the same period last year.
The trade gap, already the second largest for the U.S. after its deficit with Japan, was seen reaching $40 billion by the end of the year, up from $34 billion in 1995.
American economists said the mounting deficit was likely to create new frictions between the two countries.
U.S. Commerce Secretary Mickey Kantor said the growth in the deficit with China had slowed, but he called on Beijing to live up to its international trade obligations.
A group of influential U.S. senators, in a letter to President Bill Clinton, questioned Beijing's trade practices and said China should not be allowed to join the World Trade Organisation on special terms because it would harm American economic interests.
Beijing has been seeking to join the global trade body on favourable terms given to developing nations, but Washington has insisted that China's economy was too big for this treatment.
The Chinese Trade Ministry spokesman said Washington's policy curbs on U.S. exports were part of the bilateral trade problem. "There are policy rulings that are holding back U.S. exports," he said. "Where there are limits on technology exports, this is a lost export opportunity for the United States."
The U.S. appeared to be moving to address this matter.
On Wednesday, U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher said Washington was considering allowing technical cooperation in peaceful uses of nuclear technology despite concerns about safeguards over re-exports.
Christopher, after meeting with Chinese leaders in Beijing, said the U.S. was looking at taking steps that eventually could allow American companies to sell their technology to China.
A Chinese economist suggested some of the criticism over trade was unfairly directed at China as U.S. imports were mainly labour intensive products that were not manufactured in the United States.
"If the U.S. does not buy these products from China it will buy them elsewhere," said Wang Jian, an economist with the State Planning Commission. "These are goods produced by developing countries."
But the economist conceded that bilateral trade problems could spill over into broader trade issues.
"The U.S. already is the main obstacle to China's plan to join the World Trade Organisation," he said, adding that renewed Sino-U.S. trade friction could further complicate the issue.
Russia will push to expand economic ties with China at a top level meeting in Moscow next month as old political hostilities fade in the background, a senior Russian diplomat said on Friday.
"The big task in bilateral relations is to boost economic cooperation to the level of political cooperation," said Russian Ambassador Igor Rogachev.
Chinese Premier Li Peng and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin will meet in Moscow to map out practical economic steps in a relationship described by the two sides as a strategic partnership.
The two former rivals for the leadership of the world communist movement have not seen such smooth relations since 1949 -- when the Chinese communists proclaimed the birth of the People's Republic of China, according to the Russian diplomat.
"Relations have never been on such a healthy and rational basis," said Rogachev, one of Russia's top China experts.
The two sides would now push to deliver oil, natural gas and electricity from Siberia to China while Russia wanted a role in China's nuclear power development, he told reporters.
Rogachev said Russia was hoping to see other neighbouring countries participate in the projects, though he gave no indication of how likely that was or what form it might take.
China and Russia have already proposed an oil and natural gas pipeline linking Siberia to China but financing is certain to be a key hurdle for the huge project.
"I don't expect an agreement on these issues at the (December) meeting but perhaps we'll be ready by the spring," he said.
That is when China's President Jiang Zemin travels to Moscow for a summit with Russian President Boris Yeltsin, a meeting arranged during the visit to China this week of Russian Foreign Minister Yevgeny Primakov.
China and Russia are expected to sign another accord soon, this one on troop reductions along their 4,300 km (2,580 mile) border, the official Xinhua news agency has said.
Rogachev said Russia was eager to reduce the high cost of stationing troops along the lengthy border, particularly when the strains of the 1960s Sino-Soviet split were so far behind them.
"We don't think that China creates a threat for our country and they (China's leaders) don't see Russia as an enemy," Rogachev said.
During Yeltsin's April visit to China the two nations -- along with the three former soviet states of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan -- signed a treaty agreeing to inform each other of military exercises along the border and not to attack each other.
However, China and Russia been unable to reach agreement on one area of cooperation -- further deliveries of Russia's Sukhoi Su-27 interceptors.
China's armed forces have already put into service a first group of the planes but talks for further sales have long been stalled over payment and technology transfer issues.
"Talks are going on," Rogachev told reporters. "There will be more talks in future."
China gave new hints on Monday that its three-year austerity programme was over, pronouncing its anti-inflation fight a success and saying the new task was ensuring stability as the nation prepared to recover Hong Kong.
China's top leaders, after winding up four days of meetings on the economy, also said a key goal next year was to speed reform of ailing state enterprises.
"After three years of strenuous efforts, our national economy has had sustained, rapid and healthy development. The main task of keeping inflation under control has been achieved," the official Economic Daily said in its report on the meeting.
"Next year is an important one in our history as it marks the recovery of Hong Kong and the year of the 15th Communist Party congress," the official People's Daily said in a commentary that also called for economic progress in the midst of stability.
China slapped tight controls on government spending in 1993 to keep mounting inflation in check.
The credit curbs are likely to bring inflation below 6.5 percent this year, compared with 14.8 percent last year and a Communist-era high of 21.7 percent in 1994.
The fall in inflation has allowed China to cut interest rates twice this year.
Many economists have been expecting a further easing of monetary policies in the coming months as China is expecting a smooth handover of Hong Kong and social stability ahead of the key policy meeting of the Communist Party.
The British colony reverts to Chinese rule on July 1, 1997 and political planners in Beijing have been eager to ensure that there are no social or economic dislocations in the territory or on the China mainland to mar the transfer of power.
The party congress, scheduled for the second half of next year, is widely expected to result in an infusion of cash into the economy to bolster the standing of the current leadership as party personnel matters come up for discussion.
Merchant bank Kleinwort Benson recently forecast credit expansion of 20 to 25 percent next year, compared with 17 percent this year.
"Naturally there will be some easing (of monetary policy) next year," said Cheng Xiusheng, an economist with the Development Research Centre under the State Council, or cabinet.
He added that the monetary easing would be limited, and would not trigger a new round of inflation.
"The focus is relatively quick economic development under the premise of stability," he said.
Other economists agreed there would not be a return to higher inflation.
"If we have an adjustment, it will be a small one," said Zhang Zhuoyuan, director of the economics institute of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
He added that reform of state-owned enterprises was still the key problem facing China's economic planners.
State-owned enterprises have been losing money and massive subsidies have been draining state resources.
Political leaders fear that cutting off these subsidies would lead to layoffs and social unrest though economists have said the strength of the economy gives planners a chance to tackle this problem now.
China has captured the big prize in its recognition battle with rival Taiwan after South Africa announced plans to switch formal ties to Beijing.
But the lengthy transition of more than one year signals that much bargaining remains on the shape of future relations between the three governments, diplomats in Beijing said on Thursday.
"We...welcome (South African) President Nelson Mandela's positive statement concerning normalisation of relations between China and South Africa," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai told a news briefing.
"If South Africa can recognise reality at an earlier date it is in its own interests to do so," he said.
"This is in keeping with the basic interests of the peoples of the two countries," Cui said.
Mandela told reporters in Johannesburg on Wednesday that Pretoria would switch diplomatic recognition from Taipei to Beijing by the end of 1997.
Cui declined to comment on Pretoria's decision to switch only by the end of next year.
"South Africa must recognise there is only one China, recognise that Taiwan is a part of China and sever so-called diplomatic relations with Taiwan," Cui said.
"Taiwan is an inseparable part of China. The People's Republic of China government is the sole, legitimate government of all China," he said.
"This has been our longstanding stand. It is very clear... Our stand has not changed," the spokesman said.
South Africa is the biggest of just 30 states that recognise Taiwan's exiled Republic of China rather than the communist People's Republic on the mainland.
Taiwan and China have been separated since a civil war ended in 1949. China sees Taiwan as a rebel province not entitled to foreign ties while Taiwan insists its 21 million people should have a voice in international affairs.
"The South Africans have been the big fish for China," said a Beijing-based diplomat. "The others are just minnows."
But in most diplomatic divorces, the break is swift, and diplomats said South Africa was still trying to work out its future relationship with both sides.
"They are trying to gain maximum concessions out of the two sides," said a diplomat.
South Africa is probably looking for a package deal that includes investment and trade guarantees under a formal legal framework with Taiwan.
It is also hoping to limit damage.
Mandela, announcing the break wtih Taiwan, pointedly thanked the island for its economic support during his nation's transition from minority, white rule to democracy.
The announcement well ahead of formal recognition would also help South Africa preserve its consulate in the British colony of Hong Kong - which returns to Chinese rule on July 1, 1997.
South Africa had been hoping to maintain official relations with both sides, a goal that proved unrealistic.
Taiwan had also been looking to duplicate a framework with the Pacific states of Fiji, Vanuatu and Papua New Guinea which have formal relations with Beijing but have signed a "mutual recognition pact" with Taipei, diplomats said.
"These smaller states may get away with a format such as this but South Africa apparently was not in the same category," said a diplomat.
China is preparing a lobbying campaign to join the World Trade Organisation (WTO) at the ministerial meeting in Singapore this month, officials said.
It will send a team led by Long Yongtu, assistant minister of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation and an experienced trade negotiator, to the meetings that begin next Monday, Chinese officials said.
China, which will be an observer at the meetings, has waged a lengthy battle to join the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and its successor body governing global trade, the WTO.
It has pushed to gain entry on the favourable terms of a developing nation but Western countries, particularly the United States, have insisted its economy was too big for such preferential treatment.
"We will be there as an observer," said a Chinese trade official of the Singapore meeting. "That is all we will be doing."
BEIJING TO PRESS CASE
But foreign diplomats said China would continue to press its case, mainly outside the official meetings in bilateral talks with member countries.
"The real work will be in the corridors around the meeting," said a diplomat who monitors international trade issues.
"China wants support from as many countries as possible to put pressure on the United States," said another diplomat.
China views gaining entry to the WTO as a symbol of its growing prestige but it also is eyeing the benefits of fixed mechanisms for settling trade disputes.
Beijing has had numerous trade spats with its major trading partners -- from annual review by the United States of its Most Favoured Nation status to copyright protection for textiles and shoes.
By joining the global trade body, China could ensure that any penalties imposed on it conformed with WTO dispute settlement procedures. Diplomats said that could be of considerable value to Beijing as mounting exports increase the prospect of trade disputes.
Western diplomats familiar with the trade issue described China's current position on WTO as "woefully inadequate".
MOVING TOWARD COMPROMISE
But diplomats said Beijing was aware that it must put more on the table and there appeared to be some movement toward a compromise.
China's Foreign Minister Qian Qichen said last month at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum in the Philippines that China expected to conclude talks with the United States on WTO in the first half of next year.
Chinese President Jiang Zemin has also offered to aim for an average 15 percent import duty by the year 2000 compared with 23 percent now.
More important to the United States is ensuring access to the big Chinese domestic market and the removal of a whole range of practices that are seen as discriminating against foreign firms.
Washington would like to see an end to unpublished restrictions on purchases of foreign made goods, changes in agricultural import practices and more relaxed requirements on producing components in China.
China says these restrictions are needed to protect infant domestic industries that are unable to compete with established foreign companies.
Asia gave a cautious welcome on Friday to U.S. President Bill Clinton's appointments for the key posts of secretaries of state and defence, mixing public praise with some private misgivings.
U.N. Ambassador Madeleine Albright, tapped to become the first woman secretary of state, and Senator William Cohen, who would take up the defence post, were seen as able appointees, though both were perceived as short on Asian expertise.
Analysts said Asian nations that had been targets of U.S. pressure on human rights might also have cause for new concerns, particularly with the outspoken Albright in the top foreign policy job.
Clinton named his United Nations envoy and the Republican senator from Maine on Thursday as his choices for the Cabinet posts to succeed Warren Christopher and William Perry. Senate confirmation for both nominees was widely expected.
Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto said he did not foresee any impact on U.S.-Japan relations.
"I do not expect any changes in U.S.-Japan ties and I hope we can work together to deepen our relations," he told reporters.
But government sources said both appointees were unfamilar with Japan and their counterparts in Tokyo would soon begin the task of getting acquainted with them.
China, which has seen an easing of its strains with the United States of late, said it welcomed Albright's appointment and looked forward to a continuation of improving ties.
"We congratulate Ms Albright on her nomination as secretary of state," a foreign ministry spokesman said.
"We hope that while she is secretary of state, China and the United States ... will grasp the opportunities and make mutual efforts to improve and develop Sino-U.S. ties."
Sino-U.S. relations had been buffeted over the past two years by disputes over Taiwan, arms proliferation, trade and human rights. Relations have improved markedly in recent months, most notably with a meeting between Clinton and Chinese President Jiang Zemin in the Philippines last month.
But Chinese specialists in U.S. policy issues said a lack of experience in Asian affairs would prove a handicap for the two new Cabinet members, though they expected this to be overcome.
They said that human rights issues, still a source of friction, had been put aside for the time being, and were unlikely to upset bilateral ties.
Burma could be one Asian state to have misgivings about the new post for Albright, particularly in the sphere of human rights, analysts said.
There was no official comment from the Burmese government but a Western diplomat in Rangoon said Albright's appointment would be viewed negatively as her past statements on human rights and women's issues have not been welcome.
The United States has also been critical on occasion of Indonesia's human rights record though Jakarta's reaction to Albright's appointment was upbeat. Indonesian Foreign Minister Ali Alatas described her as an able and experienced diplomat.
South Korea saw the new U.S. Cabinet appointees as likely to maintain pressure on rival North Korea as both are wary of the potential threat posed by Pyongyang.
"The U.S. policy of trying to guide North Korea to a soft landing and keeping the freeze on Pyongyang's nuclear programme will continue," a government official said.
"The new team is also likely to promote dialogue between South and North Korea," he added.
North Korea invaded the South in 1950 and the two sides remain technically at war. Hostilities ended in 1953 with an armistice, not a peace treaty.
Albright won an enthusiastic response from some quarters, such as in the Philippines where she was called an inspiration to women worldwide.
"I am glad that the United States showed the way," said Katrina Legarda, one of the country's prominent women lawyers.
"This development is so rare," she said.
China should take advantage of easing inflation and switch its fund raising efforts to longer term bonds, an official newspaper said on Tuesday.
The Financial News, published by the central bank, said that the reduced interest rates meant that Beijing could lock in long-term funds at cheaper rates.
"Now that we are in a period of lower inflation, this is the time to shift to longer term maturities for government funds," the newspaper said.
China's retail price inflation rate slipped to 6.9 percent for the first seven months of the year, well below a target of 10 percent for the year and down sharply from the 14.8 percent for all of 1995.
That persuaded the central bank to cut bank interest rates once this year, and many analysts expect another rate reduction by the end of the year.
China also felt confident enough to eliminate a hefty subsidy on new bank deposits and government debt of more than three years as of April.
The subsidy, paid on top of the normal interest rate, was aimed at attracting investors during a period of high inflation.
The subsidy hit a peak of 13.24 percent in December of last year, paid in addition to interest of 12.24 for three-year bank deposits.
In 1995, China issued 151 billion yuan ($18.18 billion) in domestic treasury debt, representing 2.6 pct of its gross domestic product, according to the daily.
"The government had to raise interest rates on bonds and to give a subsidy on top of this. As a result, this increased the the cost of raising funds and the burden of repayment," the newspaper said.
In July, Beijing issued its first tranche of 10-year bonds. They paid annual interest of 11.83 percent but with no subsidy, making them a far cheaper way for the central government to raise funds.
"The advantage to the state is that it is simpler to manage," said Xu Hongyuan, an economist at the State Information Centre.
"From the investor's standpoint, the bonds are also quite attractive," he told Reuters.
The newspaper said in addition that China also had too much of its debt concentrated in three to five-year maturities, bunching up repayments and straining government finances unnecessarily.
"If we can rely on a certain amount of 10-year treasury bonds that will ease the problems," the newspaper said.
China Tuesday announced a ban on poultry and poultry products from Missouri and Oklahoma, citing what it said was the outbreak of a deadly disease.
The ban, which took effect Monday, was aimed at preventing damage from the "very destructive" Newcastle disease, an official of the Ministry of Agriculture told Reuters.
Official news reports said the ban was slapped on poultry products from the two states because of five cases of the disease discovered between July and September.
The disease, known as viscerotropic velogenic Newcastle disease, or VVND, is deadly.
However, Phillip Holloway, representative in Hong Kong and China for the Oklahoma state agriculture department, said he had not heard of any recent cases of VVND in Oklahoma.
"It's a very, very dangerous disease -- the most feared of poultry diseases," he said. "The symptoms are like influenza, and once one bird gets the disease, all the poultry will die."
The poultry industries of Oklahoma and Missouri were far down on the list of top U.S. producers and exporters, Holloway said. "My estimate is that Oklahoma and Missouri account for less than 5 percent of U.S. poultry exports to China."
Arkansas is the country's biggest poultry producer and home of industry giant Tyson Foods Inc.
A source at Tyson's Hong Kong office said VVND was known to exist in China, but this could not be confirmed.
Beijing has also banned all U.S. poultry brought into the country either by mail or hand-carried by travelers, according to the Ministry of Agriculture official.
The last major outbreak of VVND in the United States occurred in California in the 1970s and led to the eradication of the state's entire poultry population, Holloway said.
The United States exports around $500 million of poultry and poultry products a year to China, its biggest market after Russia.
The Chinese quarantine official told Reuters that the action was unrelated to other trade disputes with the United States and there were no plans to delay implementation of the decision.
Beijing and Washington are at odds over textile imports, and that dispute has threatened to spill over into the farm sector. China had threatened to ban some U.S. farm goods -- as well as textiles and alcoholic drinks -- in retaliation for U.S. penalties on textiles purchased from China.
On Sunday, Beijing announced it was delaying for one month implementation of those curbs, which had been scheduled to take effect on Tuesday, because the two sides were planning to hold further talks on the issue.
In October, China announced a ban on imports of poultry from 10 U.S. states because of fears it carried a virus called highly pathogenic avian influenza. China and the United States held talks on the issue and the ban did not go into effect.
China on Tuesday announced a ban on poultry and poultry products from two U.S. states affected by what it said was the outbreak of a deadly disease.
The ban is already in effect and covers poultry from the states of Missouri and Oklahoma, an official of the Ministry of Agriculture told Reuters by telephone.
It was aimed at preventing damage from the "very destructive" Newcastle disease, the ministry official said.
Official news reports said the ban was slapped on poultry products from the two states because of five cases of the disease discovered between July and September.
A U.S. embassy official in Beijing said he could not immediately confirm that the disease had broken out in the United States this year.
"That is what we are trying to confirm," said the diplomat, who asked not to be identified by name.
Beijing has also banned all U.S. poultry brought into the country either by mail or hand-carried by travellers, according to the Ministry of Agriculture official.
"Travellers are barred from bringing in any poultry goods from the United States," he said. "These products also cannot be brought into China through the mail."
An official of the State Bureau of Animal Plant and Quarantine said the ban went into effect on Monday.
The disease, known as viscerotropic velogenic Newcastle disease, or VVND, is deadly, Phillip Holloway, representative for Hong Kong and China for the Oklahoma state agriculture department, told Reuters on Tuesday.
"It's a very, very dangerous disease -- the most feared of poultry diseases," he said. "The symptoms are like influenza, and once one bird gets the disease, all the poultry will die."
But Holloway also said he had not heard of any recent cases of VVND in Oklahoma.
The last major outbreak of VVND in the United States occurred in California in the 1970s and led to the eradication of the state's entire poultry population, he said.
The Chinese quarantine official told Reuters that the action was unrelated to other trade disputes with the United States and there were no plans to delay implementation of the decision.
Beijing and Washington are at odds over textile imports, and that dispute has threatened to spill over into the farm sector.
China had threatened to ban some U.S. farm goods -- as well as textiles and alcoholic drinks -- in retaliation for U.S. penalties on textiles purchased from China.
On Sunday, Beijing announced it was delaying for one month implementation of those curbs, which had been scheduled to take effect on Tuesday, because the two sides were planning to hold further talks on the issue.
In October, China announced a ban on imports of poultry from 10 U.S. states because of fears it carried a virus called highly pathogenic avian influenza.
China and the United States held talks on the issue and the ban did not go into effect.
China is the second-biggest market in the world, after Russia, for U.S. poultry products.
Some 330,000 tonnes of U.S. poultry products -- worth a total of $445 million -- were exported to China through Hong Kong last year, according to the U.S. Poultry and Egg Export Council.
Every day 700 tonnes of U.S. chicken feet are transported across the border from Hong Kong into China, the council said.
China on Tuesday announced a ban on poultry and poultry products from two U.S. states hit by an outbreak of a deadly disease.
The ban is already in effect and covers poultry from the states of Missouri and Oklahoma, an official of the Ministry of Agriculture told Reuters by telephone.
It was aimed at preventing damage from a "very destructive disease", the ministry official said.
The official said, however, that China had banned all U.S. poultry brought into the country either by mail or hand-carried by travellers.
"Travellers are barred from bringing in any poultry goods from the United States," he said. "These products also cannot be brought into China through the mail."
An official of the State Bureau of Animal Plant and Quarantine said the ban went into effect on Monday.
Official news reports said the ban was slapped on poultry products from the two states because of five cases of a deadly poultry flu discovered between July and September.
The quarantine official told Reuters that the action was unrelated to other trade disputes with the United States and there was no plan to delay implementation of the decision.
The virus in question, known as viscerotropic velogenic Newcastle disease, or VVND, is deadly, Phillip Holloway, representative in Hong Kong and China for the Oklahoma state agriculture department, told Reuters on Tuesday.
"It's a very, very dangerous disease -- the most feared of poultry diseases," he said. "The symptoms are like influenza, and once one bird gets the disease, all the poultry will die."
But Holloway said he had not heard of any recent cases of VVND in Oklahoma.
The last major outbreak of VVND in the United States occurred in California in the 1970s and led to the eradication of the state's entire poultry population, he said.
Beijing and Washington are also at odds over textile imports, and that dispute has threatened to spill over into the farm sector.
China had threatened to ban some U.S. farm goods -- as well as textiles and alcoholic drinks -- in retaliation for U.S. penalties on textiles purchased from China.
On Sunday, Beijing announced it was delaying for one month implementation of those restrictions, which had been scheduled to take effect on Tuesday, because the two sides were planning to hold further talks on the issue.
In October, China announced a ban on imports of poultry from 10 U.S. states because of fears the meat carried a virus called highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI).
China and the United States held talks averting the ban, worth nearly $500 million a year.
China is the second-biggest market in the world, after Russia, for U.S. poultry products.
U.S. poultry exports to China in 1995 totalled 330,000 tonnes transshipped through Hong Kong and were worth $445 million, according to the U.S. Poultry and Egg Export Council.
Every day 700 tonnes of U.S. chicken feet are transported across the border from Hong Kong into China, according to the council.
Two years ago, China's second telephone network set out to challenge the powerful Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications (MPT) and bring competition into the country's a fast-growing market.
But the fledgling network has found it hard to tackle a seasoned competitor -- one that is also the market regulator.
"Are they (the MPT) supposed to be the referee or one of the athletes on the playing field?" asks Li Huifen, president of China United Telecommunications Corp, also known as Unicom.
The arrival of Unicom and the end of the MPT monopoly was initially hailed as a boost for China's long-suffering telephone subscribers, who often had to wait up to a year for a telephone line and endure indifferent service afterwards.
But Unicom has captured only a tiny slice of the market as its entrenched competitor has kept a tight grip on the telecommunications sector, using its regulatory clout to slow the upstart network's advance.
"They have delayed interconnections and won't give us telephone numbers for our customers," Li said in an interview. "We need a telecommunications law to give us a legal framework."
Unicom has 16 shareholders, but the key backers of the project were the ministries of electronics industry (MEI), power and railways.
MANUFACTURING MUSCLE
The MEI has manufacturing muscle with a corps of factories producing telecommunications equipment. But it feared the MPT's equipment-making capacity would eventually squeeze it out of the market unless it had its own captive customers.
The other key partners had private telecommunications networks with spare capacity, while the MPT's public network was heavily overcrowded.
The feud between the rival Chinese government camps was often bitter, sometimes ensnaring foreign companies. Firms that did business with the new network were threatened with blacklisting by the MPT, according to Western industry sources.
Those frictions have eased somewhat in recent months, but it still took an order from the State Council, or cabinet, for promised network interconnections to emerge.
China expects to have more than 60 million telephone lines installed by the end of this year -- adding a breathtaking 10 million in 1996 alone. The total is likely to top 100 million by the turn of the century, still only a small segment of the nation's 1.2 billion people.
MPT says it should not be considered a competitor to Unicom because it has a separate operating arm called China Telecom.
"Since 1993, we have separated policy making from business operations by creating China Telecom," said an MPT spokesman. "The MPT is not both regulating and competing," he said, blaming Unicom's slow progress on its own technical problems.
STRUGGLE TO BE IMPARTIAL
But China Telecom officials concede it is hard to say where one entity ends and the other begins. And even if they can draw the line cleanly, the MPT must struggle to remain impartial.
"They always say they are being fair," said Unicom's Li. "But China Telecom is their own child, and parents are always partial to their own children."
Li took up the Unicom reins in August, becoming the third president in the company's brief history. She was tapped from her job as deputy mayor of the big industrial city of Tianjin to put political clout behind the second network.
The company started with mobile telephone services, first in the big cities of Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin and Guangzhou, and eventually expanded to 16 cities. It has made its greatest inroads in Shanghai where it has about 20,000 mobile phone customers, Li said.
"In 10 years we will have 10 percent of the fixed line market and 30 percent of the mobile phone market," Li said.
One clear success has been in bringing mobile telephone prices down. They now cost 7,000 to 10,000 yuan ($840 - $1,200) compared with 10,000 to 20,000 yuan before Unicom came along.
Li says Unicom is profitable on its operations, but that excludes heavy investments in building network infrastructure. Despite the cost of putting a network in place, Unicom has one advantage. Foreigners are not permitted to operate telecommunications networks in China, and many foreign firms give Unicom capital in return for a share of the income.
That will at least ease the growing pains for the infant network, analysts said.
China's once strained ties with the United States have improved dramatically in recent months with a series of top level visits healing some of the old wounds.
But as the two nations move closer, the United States is sidestepping one of China's most sensitive figures -- Premier Li Peng -- who is still too closely linked to the 1989 crushing of pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square, diplomats said on Sunday.
They said that Li is one Chinese leader who does not fit into the agenda for a visit to Washington.
"It may be a bit unfair but he is the one leader everyone remembers for his role in the (1989) crackdown," said a senior foreign diplomat.
Last month U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher made his first visit to China in two years, setting the stage for the series of meetings between other high ranking officials of the two countries.
During Christopher's visit, the two sides reached an understanding that their relationship should not be side-tracked by any one issue. That meant contacts would proceed despite continued disagreements over a range of issues from human rights, to trade and China's political rivalry with Taiwan.
Chinese Minister of Defence Chi Haotian is now in the United States after twice delaying a visit -- both times due to tension over Taiwan. He met President Bill Clinton on Monday last week.
Clinton and Chinese President Jiang Zemin held talks at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum in the Philippines last month, and an exchange of visits by the two leaders is planned over 1997 and 1998.
U.S. Vice President Al Gore is expected to visit China some time during the first half of next year.
But there is no talk yet of a return visit to the United States by Premier Li, Gore's counterpart in the Chinese government.
U.S. officials in Beijing played down the lack of an invitation, saying the timing of the Gore visit itself had not been set.
Other foreign analysts said an invitation would be made but there was little chance of a visit before a new premier takes office in 1998.
China is expected to sort out its leadership line-up at the Communist Party congress late next year and then formally install new government figures at the parliament meeting in March 1998.
"They (the Americans) seem to be waiting for the selection of the next premier," said another foreign diplomat.
Western leaders, including Americans, have been willing to meet Li in China. But for some of them, hosting him in their own country is another matter, diplomats said.
Li has been tarred with the decision to use military force to crush the pro-democracy protests in Beijing in 1989, though paramount leader Deng Xiaoping was the only man with sufficient clout to order in the army.
President Jiang was also elevated to his role as Communist Party chief because of his tough stance on dissent.
Li has not visited the United States, the United Kingdom or Australia since 1989. He has travelled to Germany, France and Canada since then, though he has been dogged by controversy on each trip.
China has taken its cue from U.S. Federal Reserve chief Alan Greenspan and tried to talk its raging stock markets lower but some investors said Beijing regulators did not need to shout.
China's official People's Daily ran a front-page commentary on Monday calling on investors to behave rationally in investing in the market, warning that what goes up must come down.
The commentary, carried prominently in major financial newspapers as well, also reminded the investing public that the safest place to put its money was in the bank.
Many Chinese officials and stock market brokers noted similarities to Federal Reserve Chairman Greenspan's now famous remarks this month about "irrational exuberance" of U.S. markets.
Greenspan's remarks, which did not specifically mention stocks, were clear enough to send share markets around the globe into a steep, if brief, fall. Since then many investors have remained cautious.
"There were definite similarities in approach," said a stock market policy official who declined to be identified.
"They (regulators) are looking at the same objectives -- the stock markets were too high and they hoped the markets would move lower," he said.
A spokeswoman for the China Securities Regulatory Commission chuckled over the suggestion that Greenspan might have inspired Beijing's action.
"Our objective was to bring some stability to the market," she said without elaborating.
Whatever the objective, many brokers and investors were not entirely sympathetic with the result.
"The phrasing (of the commentary) was much too tough," said an angry broker in Shenzhen, home of one of the nation's two officially approved stock markets.
"This was over the top," he said.
The commentary called up images of Wall Street's 1929 crash while it lashed out at big investors for manipulating the market and blamed brokers for improperly extending overdrafts to finance stock purchases.
The state media also came under criticism for helping to pump up the market by urging investors to buy shares.
Last week, the bourses in Shanghai and Shenzhen in southern China slapped curbs on share movements, limiting them to a daily 10 percent in either direction.
Shenzhen's A share market for domestic investors fell the 10 percent limit on Monday, sliding 46.34 points to 417.2 while Shanghai's A share market lost 9.92 percent, or 115.37 points, to 1,047.68.
The B share indices, which track shares supposedly reserved for foreign investors, closely mirrored the A share falls.
Both Shenzhen and Shanghai had seen huge run-ups in share prices this year, with most of the gains made in recent months. Shenzhen had surged 360 percent from a trough to the peak this month, while Shanghai had climbed about 150 percent.
Some brokers were sympathetic to the plight of regulators.
"The market was clearly very speculative," said a Beijing-based broker. "I disagree with some people over how far ahead of itself the market actually was but there was bound to be a considerable pyschological impact from any action by the regulators."
Brokers said that part of the reason behind the steep rise was the lack of alternative investments.
Two interest rate cuts this year had played a key role in luring money into the stock market.
The Stone Group, a Chinese high technology company, plans to inject assets into its Stone Electronic unit to boost trading in the Hong Kong-listed firm, a top group official said.
The asset injections could begin next year as the Hong Kong company recovers from its steep slide in profits in 1995, president Duan Yongji told Reuters.
"We want to expand our float," Duan said in an interview late on Tuesday.
"We don't have enough stock on the market. Many investors say 'you are not big enough'," he said, adding that more shares would be sold once the assets were injected into the listed vehicle.
The plan requires a sharp reduction in the price-to-earnings ratio of the company's stock -- now at about 23 -- to about 10.
Duan said a sharp rise in earnings expected this year and in 1997 would help to set the stage for the plan.
The Beijing-based Stone Group Corp listed shares in 1993 with a HK$300 million ($38 million) flotation for Stone Electronic Technology Ltd.
The group still has a controlling 57 percent stake in the Hong Kong company, which makes integrated word processors and printers and distributes a wide range of products, including computers as well as office and lighting equipment.
Stone Group now has 18 joint ventures and it plans to start placing some of those assets into the listed firm.
"We are preparing to inject some of the profitable companies into that vehicle," Duan said.
Stone Group probably will inject a large part of its 40 percent stake in a $60 million China-based joint venture with Matsushita of Japan to produce light fixtures. The plant has required heavy start-up costs but should be profitable next year, Duan said.
Stone Group also has a stake in a $1.6 billion semiconductor project with Mitsubishi Electric and Mitsui in China, although that will not begin production until late 1997 or early 1998.
Stone, one of the success stories of China's electronics industry, was started with a loan of 20,000 yuan ($2,400) in 1984.
"We used to compete with just the little guys," said Duan.
"That has changed dramatically in recent years," he said, adding that all major multi-nationals were now in the domestic market as China has relaxed its once-tight curbs on imports.
"Technology is also changing rapidly so we have to make use of our capital," the executive said. "We can't let it stand still."
Stone Electronic's profits slumped to HK$17 million in 1995 from HK$63.88 million in 1994. But earnings for the first half of this year were up 44 percent over the year-ago period to HK$10.22 million.
"I can't give a profit figure for all of this year but the full year growth will be better than first-half growth," Duan said, adding that 1997 should continue that trend.
Stone sees specialised electronic products for the banking system and tax collection as areas where it has major advantages over its competitors.
The parent company has also diversified into finance, setting up securities and futures trading operations and investing in a bank. Income from financial operations already has exceeded the company's electronics business. ($1= 8.3 yuan) ($1= 7.8 Hong Kong dollars)
China said on Thursday it strongly opposed a visit to Jordan by Taiwan's foreign minister and accused its island rival of trying to disrupt Beijing's ties with other friendly states.
It also accused Taipei's leaders of lacking sincerity towards improving relations with Beijing.
"We deeply regret and express our strong dissatisfaction with Jordan and other states for allowing a visit by (Taiwan Foreign Minister) John Chang," said Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang.
"We are resolutely opposed to the development of government links or any other form of official contacts with Taiwan by any states that have diplomatic ties with our country," he told a news briefing.
Taiwan's foreign minister arrived in Jordan on Wednesday in a visit shrouded in secrecy.
Jordan has diplomatic relations with China but has strong commercial ties with Taiwan.
Chang gave an economics lecture at a northern Jordanian university, sources at the university said. Jordanian government officials declined to comment on the visit.
China has viewed Taiwan as a rebel province since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949 and has not ruled out the use of force to recover the island.
It has tried to isolate Taiwan by insisting the island was not entitled to formal relations with foreign states.
Taiwanese media said Chang, who left Taiwan earlier this week, was travelling to Abu Dhabi and Jordan, en route to Italy.
The trip is one of four overseas damage-control missions planned by top Taiwan officials since South Africa, Taipei's largest ally, declared last month it would switch ties to Beijing by the end of next year.
"Taiwan authorities are trying to disrupt our friendly relations with other states," Shen said, repeating Beijing's frequent accusation that Taiwan was trying to create "two Chinas".
"Taiwan's leaders...lacked sincerity towards improving relations between the two sides," Shen said.
Taiwan's leaders had taken a negative attitude towards improving economic and trade ties with the mainland and this would not help improve relations, he said.
A top Chinese defence official has stepped down in a reshuffle linked to China's string of satellite failures, political sources said on Friday.
General Ding Henggao has been replaced as Minister of the Commission of Science, Technology and Industry for National Defence (COSTIND), a key body charged with overseeing high technology projects related to defence.
Ding, 65, was succeeded at the helm of the ministerial level COSTIND by 61-year-old Cao Gangchuan, a lieutenant-general and deputy chief of general staff of the People's Liberation Army.
"I can confirm that (Ding) stepped down and the change was made in late November or early December," said an official of the Defence Ministry.
"I do not know the reason," he said.
Sources with close ties to the defence industry told Reuters that Ding had been at the centre of controversy, largely over satellite issues.
"This is partly a matter of age and partly a dispute over satellites," said a source.
China successfully launched a satellite in October but that followed a series of failures, the most recent of them last August when a Long March 3 rocket put a U.S.-built satellite into the wrong orbit.
Last February, a Long March 3B rocket exploded shortly after liftoff, killing at least six people and injuring 57 on the ground.
In January 1995, a Long March 2E blew up, killing a family of six on the ground and destroying the Apstar 2 satellite it was carrying.
"There have been bitter disputes over where the responsibility for the failures lies," said a source.
COSTIND is responsible for launches while China Aerospace Corporation is in charge of rockets and satellites.
The Soviet-trained Ding, who has a background in missiles and precision engineering, coordinated research and production of strategic missiles as well as satellite launches, according to an official biography.
Ding's departure probably coincided with a reshuffle that replaced the nation's air force and naval commanders, both of whom were also 65 years old.
Ding is the son-in-law of the late Marshal Nie Rongzhen, one of the veteran military leaders of China's communist revolution.
Nie Li, Ding's wife and daughter of Marshal Nie, stepped down from a senior post at COSTIND two years ago.
China warned on Monday against reinforcing military alliances, saying Cold War ideology lived on.
In an apparent dig at the United States, it also hailed what it called a trend towards a multi-polar political and economic world order.
"The practice of reinforcing military alliances runs counter to the current tide of peace and development, and will have to arouse great concern among the people," Vice-Premier Qian Qichen was quoted by the official Xinhua news agency as saying.
"The Cold War has ended but confrontational 'Cold War thinking' still exists," said Qian, who is also foreign minister.
Qian did not name specific targets for Beijing's ire but the remarks closely followed a visit by Premier Li Peng to Russia, a trip that prompted China's official news media to trumpet the rise of a power centre to balance the United States.
Chinese political analysts have noted they shared Russian concerns over the planned expansion of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation to admit Moscow's former Cold War allies in eastern Europe.
China has also vented its anger at closer U.S. military ties with Japan stemming from an agreement this year that enhanced security ties between the two countries.
Beijing has tried to strengthen its own links with the United States and other Western countries, but it is keen to see some check on Washington's power, diplomats said.
Qian said a key trend of the past year was the movement towards economic and political "multi-polarisation".
Relations between the world's big powers were undergoing major readjustments, marked by mutual reliance and restraint, which have brought about a complicated and changeable situation, he said.
This was underscored by widespread opposition to the Helms-Burton and D'Amato legislation put into effect by the United States with the aim of tightening economic sanctions against Cuba and Iran, he said.
The two laws had been strongly condemned and extensively boycotted, Qian said.
China sees these laws as U.S. interference in the affairs of other states, a sensitive subject for a country that has come under sharp criticism for its human right policies at home.
Qian said that over the last year, Beijing had moved to counter practices that interfered in its internal affairs, safeguarding the state's sovereignty, territorial integrity and national dignity.
Beijing was willing to work with the United States to improve ties, adding that relations had stabilised after a "period of turbulence" earlier this year.
Sino-U.S. relations were badly strained by Beijing's war games and missile tests near Taiwan in March.
Relations between Washington and Beijing were also marred by tensions over trade, human rights and arms proliferation although a series of meetings between senior officials helped to ease strains in recent months.
China's central bank chief has said that inflation would be a modest seven percent this year and this showed the state's economic policies were working.
But Dai Xianglong, governor of the People's Bank of China, lashed out at companies that had taken advantage of tight money policies used to tackle inflation by lending money at excessively high rates.
"The appropriately tight monetary polices have achieved clear results which have been acknowledged both in China and abroad," Dai was quoted as saying in the Financial News on Monday.
"We can now control inflation to about seven percent for the full year," he said.
China's retail inflation stood at 6.9 percent year-on-year in the first seven months and at 5.9 percent in July alone.
Beijing has said it wanted to keep inflation within 10 percent for 1996, down from 14.8 percent last year and a communist-era high of 21.7 percent in 1994.
But the central bank chief had harsh words for companies that had taken advantage of the tough austerity programme put in place three years ago to deal with the worst days of inflation.
He did not name any of the offenders but he said that some "monopoly groups" and publicly listed companies were lending out money at excessively high rates.
Tsingtao Brewery, which has stock listed in Hong Kong as well as in Shanghai, has run afoul of regulatory authorities in the British colony in the past for lending out funds raised from its public offer.
A senior Chinese economist who asked not to be named said several big ministries were cash-rich and able to earn more than bank deposit rates by lending out their funds.
"The big offenders are some cash-rich ministries," said the economist. "They can earn 16-18 percent on their money."
That would compare with interest of 7.47 percent earned on one-year bank deposits.
Other economists have said that higher rates were available for even more speculative lending.
Dai gave no indication of whether any measures were being planned to address these problems, although he said that funds in the banking system were unevenly distributed.
He said that China had already taken steps to curb illegal money market trade and that it had taken steps to ensure that other unauthorised financial organisations did not act as commercial banks.
"There are many violations of financial regulations," Dai was quoted as saying. "There must be an expansion of supervision over the financial sector."
China ushered in 1997, a year it has hailed as one of the most significant of the communist era for the impending recovery of Hong Kong, with a paean to senior leader Deng Xiaoping, the man who made it all possible.
China Central Television broadcast on Wednesday the first episode of a documentary lauding the 92-year-old political patriarch, a man whose pragmatic policies turned a backward Stalinist state into an economic powerhouse and helped regain capitalist Hong Kong from Britain.
The primetime programme, to be shown over 12 days, would set the tone for a crucial Communist Party congress due later this year, largely by defining Deng's legacy to the current party leadership, Chinese and Western political analysts said.
"This is an extremely important year for the Communist Party with the recovery of Hong Kong and the holding of the 15th party congress," a Western diplomat said.
"China's leaders are reminding people that Deng was instrumental in regaining Hong Kong, and they are also using him to define their own policies at the congress and in the post-Deng era."
Deng has not been seen in public in nearly three years. At his last appearance he looked frail and unsteady.
The documentary showed a vigorous leader, larger than life and portrayed against a background of golden clouds radiating across the sky.
He was seen inspecting factories while donning a hard hat, shaking hands with children and receiving gifts of poppies in Paris in the 1970s.
The main theme of the one-hour show was clearly reform, underlining China's commitment to its course of market-oriented economic change charted by Deng and continued under his chosen successor President Jiang Zemin.
But its use of adulatory tones -- opposed by Deng who abhorred the personality cult of revolutionary leader Mao Zedong -- suggested that the ageing party veteran had little or no control over the documentary's contents.
Speculation about Deng's health surfaces periodically and an unconfirmed report described him as lapsing briefly into unconsciousness this week.
Some Hong Kong newspaper reports said he had been admitted to a top military hospital but there were no unusual movements this week at the Beijing medical centre where senior officials are usually treated.
Deng had vowed to visit Hong Kong to witness the historic transfer of power at midnight on June 30 this year but a Beijing official believed to be close to the Deng family said recently this was unlikely.
On Wednesday, the People's Daily, the Communist Party newspaper, called on China's 1.2 billion people to uphold Deng's credo of pragmatism known as "socialism with Chinese characteristics".
In an article published earlier this week the newspaper described the television series on the life of the nation's paramount leader as one that "showed in their entirety the glorious achievements and greatness of the theories of comrade Deng Xiaoping."
The documentary had taken four years to complete and included interviews with more than 100 senior officials, according to official media.
Previews from the series showed Deng giving words of encouragement to party officials and reviewing China's military might -- interspersed with glimpses of sleek skyscrapers and modern factories, symbols of the material progress inspired by the party patriarch.
"This is very much linked to the party congress," said a Chinese academic. "It is setting the tone for those taking part in the party congress."
President and Communist Party chief Jiang narrated parts of the episode seen on television and was shown giving his assessment that Deng had made an important contribution to the building of a modern, socialist China.
Jiang is widely seen as the man who has the most to gain from the adulation for the paramount leader.
"This shows he (Jiang) has the mantle of Deng," said another Western diplomat.
"He is building up himself by building up Deng."
China issued tough new rules on the handling of blood products on Sunday in a move that follows the sale of HIV-tainted blood serum.
The official Xinhua news agency said the rules covered the production and distribution of blood products and set strict supervisory standards throughout the health industry.
It also said the 5,000-word ruling set harsh punishments for violators, though it gave no details of the regulations themselves and made no mention of the discovery last April of tainted blood products manufactured and sold in China.
But the news agency underscored the importance of the order by noting that it had been issued by the State Council, or cabinet, and signed by Premier Li Peng.
In a highly unusual move, China's Foreign Ministry admitted in October last year that some samples of blood product serum albumin made under the "Wolongsong" brand name were contaminated with HIV, or Human Immunodeficiency Virus, which can lead to AIDS.
China's Ministry of Public Health began a national drive to test all blood products after the discovery of the contaminated product in the southern province of Guangdong in April last year.
Health officials banned the sale of at least some types of the product and ordered the destruction of stockpiles.
Officials in Guangdong, contacted at the time of the Foreign Ministry announcement, declined to give any information on the manufacturer, explain how the product became tainted or say how much of it was on the market when the action was taken.
The number of reported HIV cases in China stood at 5,157 by the end of October last year.
But Chinese officials have quoted health experts as saying they believe the actual number was anywhere from 50,000 to 100,000 as many cases go unreported.
A total of 133 people have been infected with AIDS in China, according to the official media.
China has been grappling with growing drug abuse and prostitution, and experts warn these two problems could increase the number of AIDS cases.
China will avoid bold moves in tackling its ailing state enterprises as it focuses on stability ahead of this year's crucial Communist Party congress, analysts said on Monday.
They said policy makers would err on the side of caution in a year billed by Beijing as one of the most significant of the communist era.
"Reform of state enterprises is the nation's biggest economic problem but it is an extremely difficult one to solve," said economist Cheng Xiusheng of the Development Research Centre of the State Council, or cabinet.
"I would not expect any major breakthroughs this year."
As China sheds the vestiges of a centrally planned economy, it wants state-owned companies, which have grown fat under government nurturing, to be leaner and better able to compete in the marketplace.
About 75 percent of state firms are losing money. Losses surged to about 69 billion yuan ($8.3 billion) in the first 10 months of last year, a rise of 45 percent over the same period of 1995, officials have said.
Halting those losses would mean shedding much of the workforce and in some cases making use of bankruptcy laws to dissolve companies.
China's rulers have vowed to push ahead with reforms of the state sector but analysts are betting that the scale of any changes will be limited.
Analysts note that China has set a target of keeping urban unemployment around three percent this year, little changed from the official figure issued in the recent past.
"The problem is there is no social safety net," said a Western diplomat.
China has no real unemployment insurance system and retirement schemes cover only a fraction of the working public.
As most social welfare benefits stem from the employer, the loss of a job could have a huge impact on the individual.
On a wider scale it could mean social unrest.
"The Chinese realise where the problem lies," said the diplomat. "The trick is being able to make tough political decisions."
That is unlikely this year as China's leaders prepare for the party congress that will set policies over the medium term.
"No one wants to go into that meeting with the threat of social unrest," said another diplomat.
Beijing is also loath to take risks as it awaits the recovery of Hong Kong on July 1 after more than 150 years of British rule. It wants a smooth handover.
Some economists had hoped communist leaders would turn their attention to the deep-rooted problems of the state sector this year after Beijing effectively declared victory in its other major campaign -- the battle against inflation.
China wrestled inflation down to six percent last year from 14.8 percent in 1995 and a communist-era high of more than 21 percent in 1994, according to official data.
Economic leaders were confident enough inflation had been licked to allow state-set prices for postal rates and local telephone calls -- long held at subsidised levels -- to rise sharply last month.
But economists said that this year at least, Beijing would prefer to continue with some of its subsidies rather than pay the social cost of putting ailing companies out of business.
Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin has put his personal stamp on the legacy of China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping with a television paean aimed at portraying him as the 92-year-old patriarch's rightful heir, analysts said.
The primetime television series was also carefully crafted to limit the role of those who might challenge Jiang's claim to the Deng mantle or who might disagree with his version of the patriarch's role, they said on Monday.
"This was building up Deng to build up Jiang," said a Western diplomat who has long experience with China.
That view was widely shared by China analysts.
"Jiang wants to use the Deng legacy to build up his own public image," said another diplomat.
China Central Television spent four years on the series that traced Deng's personal long march from his birthplace in southwestern Sichuan province to the pinnacle of power.
In a breathless tone, it heaped praise on the veteran leader for his pragmatic policies that made his countrymen both proud and prosperous.
State television estimated 224 million people -- 28 percent of the 800 million people who have access to television -- watched the programme broadcast over 12 successive evenings.
Jiang, who is officially referred to as the "core" of the third generation of China's leadership, introduced the series and entered the final judgment on Deng's contribution to building a modern Chinese state.
"He is a worthy outstanding Marxist and a stalwart communist," Jiang said of the man whose reforms turned a backward Stalinist state into an economic powerhouse.
Deng has not been seen in public in nearly three years and his last appearance showed him looking frail and faltering.
The final episode of the television series showed Deng announcing his retirement from his last official post in 1989 when he stepped down from the party's powerful central military commission.
Seen strolling with Jiang at his side, Deng called on the party to rally round his anointed successor.
Analysts said much of the drama from an otherwise predictable series stemmed from what was omitted.
The series made no mention of Deng's previous anointed successor Zhao Ziyang, the man most closely linked with guiding China's reforms until he was dismissed in the power struggle that accompanied the crackdown on the pro-democracy movement in Beijing in 1989.
Viewers received only a brief glimpse of Zhao, who has been under house arrest since 1989, as he was shown signing the historic Sino-British accord of 1984 that returns Hong Kong to China this year.
The late Hu Yaobang, Deng's other heir apparent who fell from grace, was given a perfunctory mention while former President Yang Shangkun, who was dropped in 1993 amid fears he was building up his own faction to mount a leadership challenge, made only a brief appearance.
Deng's children were shown alongside the elderly leader, holding him steady as he walked on uncertain feet, speaking into his one good ear or buttoning his tunic. They had no opportunity to give their own assessment of the man who is patriarch of their family as well as the Communist Party.
While the series paid homage to Deng's 1992 tour of southern China's special economic zones, which he used to kick-start stalled reforms, viewers saw a sanitised version.
"A key part of the southern tour was Deng's anti-leftist theme," said a Chinese academic. "This made no mention of that."
Analysts said Jiang was placating the Communist Party's left wing as he prepares for the party congress scheduled for later this year, a pivotal meeting that will set the nation's political and economic course for the next five years.
"By holding tightly to the Deng legacy he is trying to demonstrate that he is the one to interpret Deng," said a China analyst. "And he is the one who will set the tone for the congress."
